Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as the "Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan, 1998," and is herein referred to
as the "Revision" or the "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1972 Code § 1-4; New]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the definitions contained in this section shall apply:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Manasquan in the County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — Shall mean the Borough Council of the Borough of
Manasquan.
CLERK or BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean County of Monmouth.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Borough
government established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Borough
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Borough Council.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Manasquan.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Borough of Manasquan, County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey.
AO:1
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OFFICER or OFFICIAL (and the title of an officer or official) — Shall be
construed as if the words "of the Borough of Manasquan" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation hereto-fore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Revision, so long as it shall have
been adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance
and so long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law and all
amendments thereto.
OWNER — Shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or
of a part of a building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association, corporation or any other legal entity. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as
applied to partnerships or associations, corporation or any other legal entity
the word includes officers, managers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violations of this section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Shall mean goods and chattels, rights and
credits, monies and effects, evidences of debt, and all written instruments
by which any right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrances upon, property
or any debt or financial obligation as created, acknowledged, evidenced,
transferred, discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing,
except real property as herein defined, which may be the subject of
ownership.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public parks, other public place or bodies of water
within the Borough.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
RESOLUTION — Shall mean and include any act or regulation of the
Borough Council required to be reduced to writing, but which may be finally
passed at the meeting at which it is introduced.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean that portion of a street between the curb line
and the adjacent property line which has been paved with concrete or other
approved material and is in-tended for the use of pedestrians.
§ 1-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 1-2
AO:2
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT or OCCUPANT (applied to a building or land) — Shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The feminine gender includes the masculine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible hand-writing.
"And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and," if the sense
requires and indicates such meaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in this citation.
§ 1-4. DIVISIONS OF THE CODE. [1972 Code § 1-4; New]
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Revision, identified
by an Arabic numeral, and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
§ 1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4
AO:3
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
"State" shall mean the State of New Jersey.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1972 Code § 1-14; New; Ord. No.
1873-02 § 1; Ord. 2053-09 § 2]
For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the Borough
of Manasquan, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection
with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the
violation shall be by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the
County jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or by a fine not exceeding
$2,000; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Whenever a fine is to be imposed in an amount greater than $1,250 for
violations of housing or zoning codes the owner shall be provided a thirtyday
period during which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure
or abate the condition and shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing
before the Court for an independent determination concerning the violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than
$1,250 may be imposed if the Court has determined that the abatement has
not been substantially completed. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5).
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Borough Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding $100. The Court before which any person is
convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision shall have power to
impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community service not
less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision taken from N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. In Chapter 6, Alcoholic
Beverages, the penalty contained in subsection 6-8.8 for persons under the legal age is
pursuant to N.J. Statute. In Chapter 7, the penalty for parking in a space reserved for
Handicapped Persons is a minimum penalty established by New Jersey Statutes.
§ 1-4 MANASQUAN CODE § 1-5.3
AO:4
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the Borough Council or Municipal Court chooses not to impose an
additional fine upon a person for a repeated violation of any municipal
ordinance, in its discretion, the Council or Court does not have to impose
the additional fine.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County jail or place of detention provided by the Borough, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [1972 Code § 1-14]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. SEVERABILITY. [1972 Code § 1-10]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-7. REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE BOROUGH OF
MANASQUAN TO BE MAINTAINED BY MUNICIPAL CLERK. [1972
Code § 8]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Municipal Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing "The Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of
§ 1-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7
AO:5
Manasquan, 1998" required to be filed in the Office of the Clerk for the
use of the public. All changes in the Revision and all ordinances adopted
by the Borough Council subsequent to the adoption of the Revision, which
the Borough Council shall adopt specifically as a part of the Revision, shall,
when finally adopted, be included herein by reference until such change
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF
EXISTING CODE OR ORDINANCES. [1972 Code § 1-2]
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same in substance
as those of the former Code or heretofore existing ordinances, shall be
considered continuations of such Code or ordinances and not new
enactments.
§ 1-9. ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [1972 Code § 1-7]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey, when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the
intention of the Borough Council for them to be a part thereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into such Code, so that reference to the "Revised
General Ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan, County of Monmouth,
State of New Jersey," shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code of the Borough of Manasquan, County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey, shall be adopted, they shall thereafter
be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing the Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-10. SALE OF CODE BOOK; SUPPLEMENTS PROVIDED. [1972
Code § 1-9]
Copies of the Code book containing the "Revised General Ordinances of the
Borough of Manasquan, 1998", may be purchased from the Municipal Clerk
upon the payment of a fee, to be set by resolution of the Borough Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. TAMPERING WITH CODE PROVISIONS. [1972 Code § 1-15;
Ord. No. 1304]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change, amend or alter this
Code, without authorization as provided by law, for the purpose of causing
the law of the Borough of Manasquan to be misrepresented by such action.
Anyone violating this provision shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 1-12. OFFICIAL MAP.
§ 1-7 MANASQUAN CODE § 1-12.1
AO:6
§ 1-12.1. Map Established. [1972 Code § 18A-1; Ord. No. 1104]
There is hereby established an Official Map of the Borough of Manasquan
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., which map
is entitled "Official Map, Borough of Manasquan, Monmouth County, New
Jersey," prepared by Candeub, Fleissig & Associates, Planning Consultants,
dated July 1978.2
§ 1-12.2. Reservation of Public Areas. [1972 Code § 18A-2; Ord. No.
1104]
The Planning Board of the Borough of Manasquan is hereby authorized to
reserve public areas in accordance with the standards established under the
Land Subdivision Regulations of the Code of the Borough of Manasquan and
the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey (Chapter 291 of the
Laws of New Jersey 1975), as same may be amended and supplemented.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: Manasquan is governed under the Borough form of
government outlined in Chapter 60 of Title 40A of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated. The administrative chapter has been drafted in
conformity with the Borough law and in many instances provisions
have been restated. Other enabling laws relevant to this chapter are
N.J.S.A. 2A:9-7, et seq., Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning
Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A.
26:3-1, Board of Health; and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-3, Police Department
and Fire Department.
For statutes requiring the taking of oaths of office and requiring
bond of certain officers and employees, see Local Fiscal Affairs Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-33 et seq.
For salary grades and ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all
officers and employees of the Borough, see annual Salary Ordinances
of the Borough. Such ordinances are not included in these Revised
Ordinances, but are saved from repeal in the Adopting Ordinance.
Mayor and Borough Council
§ 2-1. BOROUGH COUNCIL.
§ 2-1.1. Organization of Borough Council. [New]
The Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Councilmembers elected at
large in the Borough, all of whom shall be elected and take office in the
2. Editor's Note: The Official Map of the Borough of Manasquan can be found in the Office of
the Municipal Clerk.
§ 1-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.1
AO:7
manner provided by law. The term of office shall commence January 1 next
following their election.
§ 2-1.2. Rules of Council.3 [New]
The Council shall by ordinance adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent
with this chapter. The rules shall provide for standing committees of the
Council.
§ 2-1.3. Ordinances and Resolutions. [New]
Council shall take appropriate action to insure that ordinances and
resolutions of the preceding year are compiled or codified.
§ 2-1.4. Vacancies. [New]
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Borough Council for
any reason other than the expiration of term of office, the vacancy shall be
filled pursuant to State statutes.
§ 2-1.5. Qualifications. [New]
Every person appointed by the Mayor, the Borough Council or by the
Governor to fill a vacancy, either for the unexpired term or temporarily, shall
have the qualifications required by statute to permit the appointee to qualify
for election to the office, and if the previous incumbent had been elected to
office as the nominee of a political party, the person so appointed shall be of
the same political party.
§ 2-2. MEETINGS.4 [New]
The Council shall meet for organization on the first day of January, or during
the first seven days in January in any year at such time and place as the
Council may direct. Thereafter, the Council shall meet regularly within the
Borough at such times and places as provided by the Rules of Council. The
Mayor shall when necessary call special meetings of the Council. In case
of his neglect or refusal, any four members of the Council may call such
meetings at such time and place in the Borough as they may designate.
In all cases of special meetings, 48 hours' written notice (or actual voice
contact) shall be given to all members of the Council. Written notice may be
by leaving such notice at their places of residence.
§ 2-3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.5 [New]
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council but shall not
vote except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie. Except as otherwise
3. Editor's Note: See Bylaws of the Council, Section 2-5.
4. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-5, Bylaws of the Council and Article IV, Meetings.
5. Editor's Note: For regulations stating the authority of the Mayor to act in a State of
Emergency, see Section 3-11.
§ 2-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-3
AO:8
provided by statute or specific ordinance, the Mayor shall nominate and,
with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint all officers in the
Borough. No appointments requiring Council confirmation shall be made
except by a majority vote of the Council members present at the meeting,
provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such
purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same
manner for the unexpired term only. The Mayor shall make such nomination
to fill a vacancy within 30 days after the appointive office becomes vacant.
If the Mayor fails to nominate within 30 days or the Council fails to confirm
any nomination made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of 30 days,
the Council shall appoint the officer.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the State and the ordinances of the
Borough are faithfully executed, and shall recommend to the Council such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Borough. He shall maintain peace and good order and have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct and acts of all officers in the Borough
and shall execute all contracts made on behalf of the Council.
§ 2-3.1. Order and Decorum. [1972 Code § 2-3]
The Mayor shall on all occasions preserve order and decorum, and he shall
cause the removal of all persons who interrupt the orderly proceedings of
the Council.
§ 2-4. PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.6 [New]
At the organizational meeting the Council, by a majority vote, shall elect
from their number a President of the Council, who shall preside at all
of its meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President of the
Council shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting.
The President of the Council shall have the right to debate the vote on all
questions before the Council. If the Council at its annual meeting fails to
elect a President, the Mayor shall appoint the President from the Council
and in that case no confirmation by the Council shall be necessary. If the
Mayor is absent from the Borough for a period of three consecutive days or
for any reason is unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform
all the duties of the Mayor during his absence or inability. In case of the
Mayor's intended absence from the Borough for more than three days at any
one time, the Mayor shall notify the President in writing of such intended
absence, whereupon the President shall become Acting Mayor upon the
receipt of such notice and continue to act until the Mayor's return. In case
of the temporary inability of the President to so act, the Councilmember
having the longest term of service as such may act temporarily for the
President.
6. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-5, Bylaws of the Council, subsection 2-5.7 Absence of
Mayor and subsection 2-5.11 Election of Council President.
§ 2-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5
AO:9
§ 2-5. BYLAWS OF THE COUNCIL.
Rules of Order
§ 2-5.1. Deliberation of Council. [1972 Code § 2-1; Ord. No. 1247]
The deliberations of the Council shall be governed by "Roberts Rules of
Order," except when the same are in conflict with the laws of the State of
New Jersey or these bylaws, in which event the "Roberts Rules of Order"
shall be inapplicable.
Mayor
§ 2-5.2. Presiding Over and Conducting Meetings. [1972 Code § 2-2;
Ord. No. 1247]
The Mayor shall preside over the deliberation of the Council and shall
conduct the meetings thereof. He shall also participate in the determination
of Borough affairs to the extent permitted by statute.
§ 2-5.3. Order and Decorum. [1972 Code § 2-3; Ord. No. 1247]
The Mayor shall on all occasions preserve order and decorum, and he shall
cause the removal of all persons who interrupt the orderly proceedings of
the Council.
§ 2-5.4. Recognition of Floor. [1972 Code § 2-4; Ord. No. 1247]
When two or more members of Council shall request recognition at the
same time, the Mayor shall name the one entitled to the floor.
§ 2-5.5. Decisions on All Questions of Order. [1972 Code § 2-5; Ord.
No. 1247]
The Mayor shall decide all questions of order without debate subject to an
appeal to the Council, and he may call upon the Council for the opinion of
the Council upon any question of order.
§ 2-5.6. Council President to Serve as Liaison. [1972 Code § 2-6;
Ord. No. 1247]
The Council President shall serve as the liaison between the Council and all
boards, committees, agencies or organizations except as herein assigned to
a specific Council Committee for liaison purposes.
§ 2-5.7. Absence of Mayor.7 [1972 Code § 2-7; Ord. No. 1247]
In the absence of the Mayor, or if he is unable to perform his duties, the
Council President (or, in his inability to act, the Councilmember having the
longest term of service) shall act as Mayor, as provided by statute.
7. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-4, President of the Council.
§ 2-5 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-5.7
AO:10
Municipal Clerk
§ 2-5.8. Duties.
§ 2-5.9. Annual Meetings. [1972 Code § 2-9; Ord. No. 1247]
The Council shall hold an annual meeting during the first seven days of
January of any year, which meeting will be held within the Borough and at
such time and place as Council may by resolution direct.
§ 2-5.10. Regular Meetings. [1972 Code § 2-10; Ord. No. 1247]
That at the aforesaid meeting the Council shall fix the time and place for
holding regular meetings during the ensuing year which time and place
shall not be changed except by resolution adopted at a regular meeting.
§ 2-5.11. Election of Council President.9 [1972 Code § 2-11; Ord. No.
1247]
At the annual meeting, the Council will elect one of its members as Council
President to serve for one year and until the next annual meeting.
§ 2-5.12. Special Meetings. [1972 Code § 2-12; Ord. No. 1247; New]
The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the Council; in
case of his neglect or refusal, any four members of the Council may call
such meeting at such time and place in the Borough as they may designate,
and in all cases of special meetings reasonable advance notice, considered
to be of 48 hours, except in case of emergency, shall be given in person or
by telephone, or written memorandum to all members of the Council.
a. The Clerk shall perform the duties enjoined upon that office by the New
Jersey Statutes and these bylaws.
b. The Clerk shall keep the minutes and ordinance books properly and
fully indexed and shall perform all the duties usually devolving upon
such officer, and in addition, such other duties or services as Council
may require or direct.
c. Upon the introduction of an ordinance, the same shall be properly
numbered and recorded at length by the Municipal Clerk in the
ordinance book. The assigned number shall appear in the
advertisement of such ordinance. [1972 Code § 2-8; Ord. No. 1247]
Meetings8
8. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-2, Meetings.
9. Editor's Note: See Section 2-4, President of the Council.
§ 2-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.13
AO:11
§ 2-5.13. Quorum. [1972 Code § 2-13; Ord. No. 1247]
Three Councilmembers and the Mayor, and in the absence of the Mayor,
four Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-5.14. Absence of Quorum. [1972 Code § 2-14; Ord. No. 1247]
If no quorum be present at any meeting, those assembled shall have power
and are hereby authorized to set a new meeting date, and then adjourn.
§ 2-5.15. Order of Business. [1972 Code § 2-15; Ord. No. 1247; Ord.
No. 1623-94; Ord. No. 1740-98 § 1]
The following order of business for a regular public meeting shall be
observed:
§ 2-5.16. Change of Order of Business. [1972 Code § 2-16; Ord. No.
1247]
The aforesaid order of business at any meeting may be changed by a
majority vote of the members of the Council present at such meeting or by
the Mayor with consent of the Council.
a. Call to Order;
b. Mayor's Welcoming Statement;
c. Silent Prayer and Salute to the Flag;
d. Roll Call;
e. Mayor's Statement Re: Open Public Meetings Act of 1975;
f. Mayor's Proclamations;
g. Mayor's Appointments;
h. Consent Agenda — Resolutions;
i. Ordinances for First Reading;
j. Ordinances for Second and Final Reading and Public Hearing;
k. Correspondence;
l. Committee Reports;
m. Audience Participation;
n. Adjournment.
§ 2-5.13 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-5.17
AO:12
§ 2-5.17. Majority Vote of Council. [1972 Code § 2-17; Ord. No.
1247]
Except as otherwise required by the statutes, or specifically provided in
these Bylaws, all action of the Council shall be by a majority vote of those
present.
§ 2-5.18. Roll Call Vote. [1972 Code § 2-18; Ord. No. 1247]
Upon demand of one member of the Council or when ordered by the Mayor,
or when directed by statute or upon demand of one member of the Council,
a roll call vote shall be taken and the yeas and nays entered in the minutes
of the meeting.
Appointment of Standing Committees of Council
§ 2-5.19. Appointment. [1972 Code § 2-19; Ord. No. 1247; Ord. No.
1740-98 § 2; Ord. No. 1801-99]
The Council shall, by a vote of a majority of its Members, appoint all
Committee Members.
§ 2-5.20. Standing Committees Designated. [1972 Code § 2-20; Ord.
No. 1247; Ord. No. 1623-94; Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No. 2199-15 § 1;
Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 1; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The following standing committees of the Council, consisting of three
council members each shall be appointed at the annual meeting:
§ 2-5.21. Chairman. [1972 Code § 2-21; Ord. No. 1247]
Each Councilperson shall be Chairman of at least one of the Standing
Committees named in subsections 2-5.19 through 2-5.25, and a member of
not less than two others.
§ 2-5.22. Authority of Standing Committees. [1972 Code § 2-22;
Ord. No. 1247]
The Standing Committees are appointed to expedite and facilitate the work
of the Council, but only within statutory limits as the entire Council is held
responsible for any or all of its acts performed within the scope of authority.
a. Administration;
b. Finance;
c. Recreation;
d. Code;
e. Public Safety;
f. Public Works.
§ 2-5.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.22
AO:13
§ 2-5.23. Advisory Committees. [1972 Code § 2-23; Ord. No. 1247;
Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No. 2199-15 § 3]
Advisory Committees may be appointed by the Council for purposes other
than those included in the duties of the Standing Committees and shall
include, but not limited to, the following:
§ 2-5.24. Naming of Successor Chairman. [1972 Code § 2-24; Ord.
No. 1247; New]
In case of death, resignation, removal from office, or incapacity of any
Committee Chairperson, the Council shall, by a vote of a majority of its
members, shall appoint the successor Chairperson. The Council may, by
vote of a majority of its members, change existing Committee assignments
and/or Chairpersons when it is in the best interest of the Borough to do so.
§ 2-5.25. Report of Chairman. [1972 Code § 2-25; Ord. No. 1247]
The Chairman of each Standing or Special Committee shall be prepared
to report to the Mayor and Council at each regular meeting on principal
activities and achievements of his committee.
a. A Standing Committee shall:
1. Meet when requested by the Chairman, or a majority of the
committee, and all members thereof shall participate actively in the
committee deliberations, performance of duties and the
formulation of its recommendations to the Council.
2. Plan, study, direct, and carry on the routine activities for which it
has primary responsibility.
3. Perform such acts as may be assigned to it by the Council.
4. Report and make recommendations to the Council regarding its
responsibilities and activities.
b. Except as provided above, a Standing Committee shall not:
1. Exceed its budgetary appropriations without prior approval of the
Council.
2. Make promises or commitments to anyone which directly, or by
inference, bind the Council.
a. Personnel.
b. Shared Services.
A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be named by the Council for
the selected Advisory Committee(s) and a third member shall be the
Chairman of the affected Standing Committee as determined by
Council.
§ 2-5.22 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-5.25
AO:14
Duties of Standing Committees of the Council10
§ 2-5.26. Administration Committee. [Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No.
2199-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The Administration Committee shall have primary responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
§ 2-5.27. Finance Committee. [Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No. 2199-15
§ 2; Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The Finance Committee shall have primary responsibility for the following
described activities and matters:
a. Office of the Administrator.
1. Personnel and Contract Negotiations.
2. Shared services not covered by other committees.
3. Affordable housing.
b. Office of the Borough Clerk.
1. Municipal Docks and Dock Operations.
2. Buildings not used for Recreational Purposes.
3. Utilities.
4. Borough Communications.
c. Chairperson of Committee or their designee shall be the Council liaison
to the:
1. Cable TV Advisory Committee.
a. Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
b. Department of Finance.
c. Office of the Tax Collector.
d. Office of the Tax Assessor.
e. Grants not covered by other Committees.
f. Chairperson of Committee or their designee shall be the Council liaison
to the:
1. Manasquan Board of Education.
2. Manasquan Library.
10.Editor's Note: Prior source history includes 1972 Code § 2-26 through 2-31.1; Ord. No.
1247; Ord. No. 1623-94.
§ 2-5.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.28
AO:15
§ 2-5.28. Recreation Committee. [Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No.
2199-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The Recreation Committee shall have primary responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
§ 2-5.29. Code Committee. [Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No. 2199-15 § 2;
Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The Code Committee shall have primary responsibility for the following
described activities and matters:
§ 2-5.30. Public Safety Committee. [Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No.
2199-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord. No. 2249-18]
The Public Safety Committee shall have primary responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
a. Recreation Department.
b. Beach Utility.
c. Grounds Used for Recreational Purposes as determined by the Council.
d. Beach Property including Parking Lots.
e. Buildings Used for Recreational Purposes.
f. Chairperson of Committee or their designee shall be the Council liaison
to the:
1. Tourism Commission.
2. Recreation Commission.
a. Code Enforcement Department.
b. Zoning Office.
c. Construction Office.
d. Chairperson of Committee or their designee shall be the Council liaison
to the:
1. Construction Board of Appeals.
a. Municipal Court.
b. Police Department.
c. Office of Emergency Management.
d. Public Health and Drug Awareness and Prevention.
e. Chairperson of Committee or his designee shall be the liaison to the:
§ 2-5.28 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-5.30
AO:16
§ 2-5.31. Public Works Committee. [Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 2; Ord.
No. 2249-18]
The Public Works Committee shall have primary responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
§ 2-5.32. Liaisons Not Assigned to Committees. [Ord. No. 2170-14;
Ord. No. 2219-2016 § 3]
Council shall appoint liaisons to the following:
§ 2-5.33. Borough Seal. [1972 Code § 2-32; Ord. No. 1247]
The Seal of the Borough shall be as hereinafter impressed.
1. Fire District.
2. First Aid Squad.
3. Office of Emergency management.
4. Shore Community Alliance.
a. Department of Public Works.
b. Water and Sewer Department and Utility.
c. Buildings and Grounds Maintenance.
d. Sanitation and Recycling.
e. Street Lighting.
f. Chairperson of Committee or his designee shall be the liaison to the:
1. Sea Lavender Garden Club.
2. Shade Tree Commission.
a. Open Space Committee.
b. Construction Board of Appeals.
c. Environmental Commission.
d. Manasquan Library.
e. Board of Education.
f. Chamber of Commerce.
g. Cable TV Advisory Committee.
h. Planning Board.
Seal
§ 2-5.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.34
AO:17
§ 2-5.34. Custody of Seal. [1972 Code § 2-33; Ord. No. 1247]
The seal shall be in the custody of the Clerk and shall be impressed on all
appropriate documents or papers.
§ 2-6. through § 2-7. (RESERVED)
Officers and Employees
§ 2-8. MUNICIPAL CLERK.
§ 2-8.1. Appointment; Term. [New]
There shall be a Municipal Clerk appointed by the Mayor and Borough
Council. The term of Office of the Clerk shall be three years.
§ 2-8.2. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed as Municipal Clerk unless he shall have a
registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133
et seq.
§ 2-8.3. Compensation. [New]
The Clerk's salary shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-8.4. Powers and Duties.11 [New; Ord. No. 2035-08 § 2]
The Municipal Clerk shall:
a. Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the municipal corporation. The Borough Council
may, however, provide by ordinance that any other specific officer shall
have custody of any specific other class of record;
b. Act as secretary to the Borough Council, prepare meeting agendas at
the discretion of the Council, be present at all meetings of the Council,
retain the original copies of all ordinances and resolutions, and record
the minutes of every meeting;
c. Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
Borough, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated;
d. Serve as chief registrar of voters in the Borough, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated;
e. Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses and
11.Editor's Note: See also Section 2-5, Bylaws of the Council, and subsection 2-5.8, Duties of
the Municipal Clerk.
§ 2-5.34 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-8.4
AO:18
§ 2-8.5. through § 2-8.10. (Reserved)
§ 2-8.11. Deputy Municipal Clerk. [New]
§ 2-9. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-9.1. Statutory Reference. [New]
By virtue of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1, the New Jersey Legislature mandated that
the Governing Body of each municipality must, by ordinance, create the
position of Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-9.2. Position Created; Appointment. [New]
There is hereby created the position of Certified Municipal Financial Officer
of the Borough of Manasquan in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1. The
permits, except where Statute or ordinance has delegated that
responsibility to some other Borough officer;
1. The Borough Council designates the Municipal Clerk of the
Borough of Manasquan as the person having authority to approve
the granting of raffle and bingo licenses pursuant to the terms of
N.J.S.A. 13:47-1.1.
f. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated;
g. Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by ordinance or regulation.
a. Office Created. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:46-2.1 the off-ice of Deputy
Municipal Clerk is hereby created in the Borough.
b. Appointment and Confirmation. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council in accordance
with the laws relating to appointive officers.
c. Terms of Office. The term of office of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall
be for one year and shall continue until the successor to the office shall
have been appointed and confirmed or until the office shall have been
abolished.
d. Powers and Duties. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall assist and be
under the direction of the Municipal Clerk in the performance of his
duties and shall perform such other duties as the Borough Council may
prescribe. In the absence or temporary disability of the Municipal
Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall perform the duties of the Municipal Clerk.
e. Compensation. The compensation of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall
be as provided in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.2
AO:19
Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Borough Council for a four-year term commencing January 1 of the
year in which he/she is appointed. The Governing Body may appoint such
Assistant or Deputy Municipal Financial Officers as it sees fit.
§ 2-9.3. Duties. [New]
The Chief Financial Officer shall:
§ 2-9.4. Compensation. [New]
The Chief Financial Officer and any Assistants or Deputies shall receive
such compensation as shall be prescribed in the Salary Ordinance of the
Borough.
§ 2-9.5. Tenure of Office; Qualifications; Removal. [New]
§ 2-10. PURCHASING AGENT.
a. Receive funds entrusted, received or under the control of any
department and deposit all funds received by him/her in depositories
authorized by the Governing Body by resolution.
b. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Borough or in
possession of the Borough in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise
provided by law, and keep such funds and all moneys of the Borough not
required for current operations safely invested or deposited in interest
bearing accounts.
c. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Borough and the
receipt and delivery of the Borough bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
d. Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements of the
Borough and at least once each month, or more often if the Governing
Body requires, furnish the Governing Body with a statement of all
moneys received and expended by him/her.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, any
person who has served as the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough for
four consecutive years and who is reappointed as the Borough's Chief
Financial Officer shall be granted tenure of office upon filing with the
Municipal Clerk and with the Division of Local Government Services in
the Department of Community Affairs a notification evidencing his
compliance with this section.
b. Thereafter, the person shall continue to hold office during good
behavior and efficiency, and shall not be removed therefrom except for
just cause and then only after a public hearing upon a written complaint
setting forth the charge or charges against him pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.9 or upon expiration or revocation of certification by the
Director pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.12.
§ 2-9.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-10.1
AO:20
§ 2-10.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 2086-11 § 1]
There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the Borough of
Manasquan.
§ 2-10.2. Appointment. [Ord. No. 2086-11 § 2]
The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Governing Body.
§ 2-10.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2086-11 § 3]
The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid Qualified Purchasing
Agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of Local Government
Services, Department of Community Affairs.
§ 2-10.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2086-11 § 4]
The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Governing Body of the
Borough of Manasquan, the authority, responsibility and accountability for
the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.); to prepare public advertising for and to receive bids and
requests for proposals for the provision or performance of goods, services
and construction contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law
in accordance with the regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by
State regulatory agencies; and conduct any activities as may be necessary
or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 2-11. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-11.1. Appointment. [New]
The Mayor and Borough Council shall provide for the appointment of a Tax
Assessor.
§ 2-11.2. Qualifications. [New]
The Tax Assessor shall hold the Tax Assessor's Certificate provided for in
N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. and shall have the duty of assessing property
for the purpose of general taxation. Nothing in this section shall affect
adversely the salary or tenure rights acquired pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:1-35.31 or any other law.
§ 2-11.3. Duties. [New]
The Tax Assessor shall perform the duties required of the holder of such
office pursuant to Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes and such regulations
as may be promulgated by the New Jersey Division of Taxation and the
Monmouth County Board of Taxation.
a. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a Municipal Assessor.
§ 2-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11.3
AO:21
§ 2-11.4. Salary. [New]
The Mayor and Borough Council shall determine the amount of
compensation for the Tax Assessor in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-11.5. Terms of Office. [New]
The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years. Vacancies
other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term.
§ 2-12. TAX COLLECTOR.
§ 2-12.1. Appointment; Duties. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq., the Mayor and Borough Council shall
appoint the Tax Collector who shall be charged with the duty of collecting
taxes upon real property in the Borough.
§ 2-12.2. Term of Office; Vacancies. [New]
The Tax Collector shall hold office for a term of four years from January
1 next following his appointment. Vacancies other than those due to
expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 2-13. BOROUGH ATTORNEY.
§ 2-13.1. Position Created; Statutory Authority. [New]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139 there is hereby created by the
Borough of Manasquan the position of Borough Attorney.
§ 2-13.2. Qualification. [New]
The Borough Attorney shall be a duly licensed Attorney-at-Law of the State
of New Jersey.
b. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
c. Maintain a current tax map of the Township as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of
the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of
other Departments as provided by the Code.
d. Report to the Township Committee as to equalization proceedings and
other matters involving the County Tax Board and make
recommendations as to action to be in that regard.
§ 2-11.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-13.3
AO:22
§ 2-13.3. Appointment. [New]
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of the Borough Council, and shall hold such position for a term
of one year from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
§ 2-13.4. Duties. [New]
§ 2-14. PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-14.1. Position Established. [1972 Code § 22-1; Ord. No. 964]
The position of Prosecutor is hereby established in the Borough of
Manasquan.
§ 2-14.2. Qualifications. [1972 Code § 22-2]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be a duly licensed Attorney-at-Law of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-14.3. Appointment; Term. [1972 Code § 22-2]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Borough Council for a term of one year effective January
1 of each year and until December 31 of the same year and until the
appointment and qualification of his successor.
§ 2-14.4. (Reserved)
Former subsection 2-14.4, Compensation, previously codified herein, was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 2079-11.
§ 2-14.5. Duties. [1972 Code § 22-3; New]
The Prosecutor shall, under the direction of the Mayor and Council,
represent the Borough in the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Manasquan.
a. The Borough Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the Governing
Body and to the Borough Officers and employees on matters pertaining
to their duties, to represent the Borough in litigations except where the
Borough Council directs otherwise, to draft all contracts, ordinances or
other documents needed by the Borough and to render such other legal
services as may be required by the Borough Council.
b. It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all
judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the Borough and
of all similar interlocutory orders.
c. It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
§ 2-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14.5
AO:23
The Prosecutor shall exercise such powers and duties as are assigned to
such office by the Statutes of New Jersey and such other authority as may
be assigned by the Borough Council.
§ 2-15. MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-15.1. Position Established; Appointment. [Ord. No. 1738-98 § 2]
There is hereby established the position of Municipal Public Defender. This
position shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council.
§ 2-15.2. Term. [Ord. No. 1738-98 § 3]
The term of office of the Municipal Public Defender shall be one year,
commencing January 1 of the calendar year of appointment and concluding
December 31 of that same year; provided however, the Municipal Public
Defender may continue to serve in office pending reappointment or
appointment of a successor.
§ 2-15.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 1738-98 § 4]
The Municipal Public Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 2-15.4. Removal from Office. [Ord. No. 1738-98 § 5]
In addition to any other means provided by law for the removal from office
of a public official, the Municipal Public Defender may be removed by the
Governing Body for good cause shown and after a public hearing, and upon
due notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 2-15.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 1738-98 §§ 6, 7]
§ 2-15.6. Vacancy in Term of Office. [Ord. No. 1738-98 § 8]
If a vacancy in the position of Municipal Public Defender shall occur other
than by expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled by an appointment
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council for the
unexpired term.
a. The Municipal Public Defender shall represent persons as directed by
the Municipal Court Judge.
b. The Municipal Public Defender shall have the powers, duties and
obligations provided in P.L. 1997, c. 256.
§ 2-14.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-15.7
AO:24
§ 2-15.7. (Reserved)
Former subsection 2-15.7, Compensation, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 1738-98, was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 2079-11.
§ 2-15.8. Request for Representation by the Municipal Public
Defender; Fee. [Ord. No. 1738-98 §§ 10-13; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. Application for Service. In order to obtain the services of the Municipal
Public Defender, an application must be filed in the Municipal Court.
The Municipal Court Judge shall make a decision regarding entitlement
of a defendant to representation by the Municipal Public Defender in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 256.
b. Application Fee.
1. A defendant seeking to obtain the services of the Municipal Public
Defender shall be required to pay an application fee as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees. This application fee shall be paid by each
defendant making application for the services of the Municipal
Public Defender regardless of whether such defendant is found to
be eligible for these services by the Municipal Court Judge.
2. In accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court,
the Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in
whole or in part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion,
upon a clear and convincing showing by the defendant that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden. The Municipal
Court may permit a defendant to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time not to exceed four months.
c. Application Fees to be Deposited in Dedicated Fund; Purpose.
Application fees collected by the Municipal Court shall be deposited in a
dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the
Municipality. These funds shall be used exclusively to meet the costs
incurred in providing the services of the Municipal Public Defender,
including, where required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
d. Reimbursement of Costs of Services Rendered.
1. If a defendant has or reasonably expects to have means to meet
some part, though not all, of the cost of services rendered, the
defendant shall be required to reimburse the Municipality, either
by a single payment or in installments in such amounts as that
person can reasonably be expected to pay; provided however, no
default or failure in making payment shall affect or reduce the
rendering of services by the Municipal Public Defender.
2. The Municipality shall have a lien on any property which the
defendant receiving services of the Municipal Public Defender shall
have or subsequently acquire in an amount equal to the reasonable
§ 2-15.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.8
AO:25
§ 2-16. through § 2-18. (RESERVED)
§ 2-19. ADDITIONAL POSITIONS CREATED.
§ 2-19.1. Local Historian. [1972 Code § 18-21; Ord. No. 1142]
§ 2-19.2. Emergency Management Coordinator. [1972 Code § 18-38;
Ord. No. 1366]
§ 2-19.3. Hazard Mitigation Program Coordinator. [Ord. No.
2143-13; Ord. No. 2266-18]
value of the services rendered to that defendant by the Municipal
Public Defender. The value of services shall be calculated at the
same rate as the Office of the Public Defender bills clients at that
time.
3. The Municipal Attorney shall have the power and authority to
effectuate a lien for the Municipality in accordance with the
provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 256.
a. There is hereby established the position of Local Historian in the
Borough, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.
b. The Local Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of one
year, commencing on January 1st in the year in which the appointment
is made. A vacancy in the term of the Local Historian shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
c. The Local Historian shall serve without compensation.
d. The Local Historian shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities
as shall be authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.
a. The position of Emergency Management Coordinator is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall be responsible for the
development, coordination and activation of a municipal mutual aid and
emergency management plan; shall request, when needed, emergency
management facilities and services available from the County and State
governments, and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council
may direct.
a. The position of Hazard Mitigation Program Coordinator is hereby
created.
b. The Coordinator shall be responsible for implementation of the
municipal hazard mitigation program, which includes developing and
maintaining the municipal Hazard and Flood Mitigation Plan,
acquisition and maintenance of public warning and emergency
response equipment, assisting the municipal CRS Coordinator with
maintenance and development of the CRS Program, including Activity
§ 2-15.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-19.3
AO:26
§ 2-19.4. Superintendent of Recreation. [Ord. No. 2222-2017;
amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2275-19]
330 - Outreach; Activity 350 - Flood Protection Information; Activity
440 - Flood Data Maintenance; Activity 510 - Floodplain Management
Planning and Activity 610 - Flood warning Program, and all emergency
protective measures as defined by FEMA Category B.
c. The Coordinator shall provide technical review and analysis of
conceptual plans, cost estimates, engineering plans and specifications,
grant applications, bidding and contract documents including change
orders on assigned projects as required.
d. The Coordinator shall provide regular project updates, including the
status of construction, grant awards, budgets, design changes,
schedule impacts, etc. to the Municipal Administrator.
e. The Coordinator shall attend meetings and field visits with the Borough
Engineer, contractors, municipal officials, regulatory agencies, etc. in
order to ensure municipal representation and coordination.
f. The Coordinator shall attend Borough Council and committee meetings
as required to provide updates to the governing body and general
public as required.
g. The Coordinator will require specialized training, attendance at
meetings, preparing submittals and budgets, project management and
program administration in order to achieve the objectives of the
position.
h. The salary for the position of Hazard Mitigation Program Coordinator
shall be paid at the rate of $50 per hour.
a. The position of Superintendent of Recreation is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall be responsible for directing
annual budget preparations and policy recommendations for the
recreation, open space, and beach budgets. Included in the
responsibilities are budget preparation, direct acquisition, design,
construction, and operation of recreation and beach facilities, and
arranges for the maintenance of recreation on beach facilities,
administers the policies of the Mayor and Council for the Beach and
Recreation Department.
c. Studies community beach and recreation needs and develops
immediate and long-range plans to meet these needs.
d. Reviews effectiveness of recreation and beach services.
e. Prepares reports for Mayor and Council on a quarterly and annual
basis.
§ 2-19.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-19.4
AO:27
§ 2-20. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-20.1. Creation. [1972 Code § 21-1; Ord. No. 1630-94]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Manasquan a Police
Department which shall consist of a Chief of Police and such members
and officers as shall be deemed necessary by the Borough Council which
shall determine the number of persons, including temporary officers and
members in an emergency, to be appointed to these positions together with
their compensation. Officers and members of the Police Department shall
be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 2-20.2. Duties. [1972 Code § 21-2; Ord. No. 1630-94]
The Police Department shall: Preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 2-20.3. Chief of Police. [1972 Code § 21-4; Ord. No. 1630-94; Ord.
No. 2170-14]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the Public Safety Committee for its efficiency and
day-to-day operation. Pursuant to policies established by the Public Safety
Committee, the Chief of Police shall:
f. Prepares budget estimates and maintains records of expenses in
accordance with the Borough of Manasquan Department of Finance
Policies and Procedures.
g. The salary for the position of Superintendent of Recreation shall be
determined by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Manasquan.
a. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers;
b. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department;
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
d. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control; and
e. Report at least monthly to the Public Safety Committee in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during
§ 2-19.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-20.3
AO:28
§ 2-20.4. Qualifications for Department Members. [1972 Code
§ 21-5; Ord. No. 1630-94; Ord. No. 2170-14]
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The Public Safety Committee may
also require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department
shall successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological
examination.
§ 2-20.5. Suspension, Removal, Reduction in Rank. [1972 Code
§ 21-6; Ord. No. 1630-94]
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the
Police Department's Rules and Regulations.
§ 2-20.6. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [1972 Code § 21-7; Ord.
No. 1630-94; Ord. No. 2210-2016]
The Borough Council may appoint Special Law Enforcement Officers in
accordance with New Jersey Statutes for terms not exceeding one year.
They shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties provided by the
statutes during their term in office, but shall not be continued as regular
members of the Police Department and shall not be entitled to tenure. The
Chief of Police may authorize Special Law Enforcement Officers when on
duty to exercise the same powers and authority as regular members of
the Police Department including the carrying of firearms and the power of
arrest.
The number of Special Law Enforcement Officers designated as Class One
members shall not exceed 50 persons. The number of Special Law
Enforcement Officers designated as Class Two members shall not exceed 50
persons.
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the Public Safety Committee.
a. Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. If authorized by
ordinance, Class One officers shall have the power to issue summonses
for disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations
of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be strictly
prohibited and no Class One officer shall be assigned any duties which
may require the carrying or use of a firearm.
§ 2-20.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.7
AO:29
§ 2-20.7. Report of All Charges Against Any Member. [1972 Code
§ 21-8; Ord. No. 1630-94; Ord. No. 2170-14]
The Chief of Police shall report to the Chairmember of the Public Safety
Committee all charges preferred against any member of the Police
Department, and the Chief of Police may for adequate cause suspend any
member of the Police Department pending trial.
§ 2-20.8. Hearing. [1972 Code § 21-9; Ord. No. 1630-94]
The Mayor and Borough Council shall try all cases or charges against any
member of the Police Department and its decision by a majority vote shall
be final.
§ 2-20.9. Absence of Chief of Police; Appointment of Designee.
[1972 Code § 21-10; Ord. No. 1630-94; Ord. No. 2170-14]
During the illness or absence of the Chief of Police, the Chairmember of the
Public Safety Committee shall designate a Police Officer who shall execute
and discharge the duties of the Office of the Chief of Police pro tem and who
shall, at all times, discharge such duties as may be prescribed by the Chief
of Police with the approval of the Public Safety Committee.
§ 2-20.10. Rules and Regulations Adopted. [1972 Code § 21-55; Ord.
No. 1630-94; Ord. No. 1820-2000 § 2; Ord. No. 2170-14]
There is hereby adopted, upon recommendation of the Public Safety
Committee, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
operation and government of the Manasquan Police Department a manual
entitled "Manasquan Police Department Rules and Regulations." The
aforesaid manual is incorporated by reference in this ordinance, and three
copies of the manual are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk.
The rules and regulations for the operation of the government of the
Manasquan Police Department as contained in the "Manasquan Police
Department Rules and Regulations" may be changed, altered,
supplemented and amended by resolution duly adopted by the Borough
Council upon recommendation of the Public Safety Committee.
§ 2-20.11. Standards of Appearance. [1972 Code § 21-61; Ord. No.
996]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set standards of appearance
for Police Officers of the Borough of Manasquan.
b. Application of Provisions. This section shall be binding on all Police
Officers while on duty, except when their assignments or duties permit
a departure from these requirements. Any departure from these
requirements shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
c. Personal Appearance; Equipment.
§ 2-20.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-20.11
AO:30
1. Every Police Officer while on duty shall, at all times, be neat and
clean in person, his clothes clean and pressed and his uniform in
conformity with standards established by the Chief of Police.
2. As often as necessary, every Police Officer shall examine and clean
his equipment and keep it in good serviceable condition.
d. Hair Standards for Male Officers. The standards for hairstyles and
facial hair growth for male Police Officers shall be as follows:
1. Hair.
(a) The style of hair shall be neat, clean and trimmed and shall
present a groomed appearance.
(b) Bushy or shaggy hair protruding from the sides or back of the
head when a hat is worn is prohibited.
(c) A neat pattern on the rear of the neck shall be maintained. The
growth must be neatly trimmed near the collar line and shall
not extend over a shirt or coat collar.
(d) Hair shall not cover any part of the ears.
(e) In no case will the bulk or length of the hair interfere with the
proper fit or use of any authorized headgear.
2. Sideburns.
(a) The length shall not extend beyond the tip of the ear lobe.
(b) The width shall not exceed 1 1/4 inches at the broadest point.
(c) The growth shall not be more than 1/4 inch in depth.
(d) Flared sideburns or sideburns known as "porkchops" are
prohibited.
3. Mustaches.
(a) The pattern shall be neatly trimmed.
(b) The growth shall not extend beyond the corner of the mouth.
(c) The thickness shall not exceed 1/2 inch in depth and shall not
appear bushy or shaggy.
(d) The ends may not be waxed or twisted.
4. Beards and Goatees.
(a) Full beards, goatees or other growths of hair below the lower
lip, on the chin, or lower jawbones are prohibited.
(b) Personnel with a medical condition which precludes shaving
shall be required to present a written statement, signed by a
§ 2-20.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.11
AO:31
§ 2-20.12. Public Safety Committee.12 [Ord. No. 1820-2000 § 1; Ord.
No. 2170-14]
The Public Safety Committee shall consist of three members of the Borough
Council to be appointed pursuant to Chapter II of the Borough Code, and
is designated as the appropriate authority relating to police functions for
the adoption and promulgation of rules and regulations for the government
of the police force and for the discipline of its members. The Public Safety
Committee shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police
Department. Upon recommendation of the Public Safety Committee, the
Borough Council shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its members.
§ 2-21. through § 2-23. (RESERVED)
§ 2-24. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-24.1. Created. [1972 Code § 22A-1; Ord. No. 1308]
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works of the Borough of
Manasquan. The Department shall consist of the Superintendent of Public
Works, who shall be the head of the Department of all officers and
employees assigned thereto. All such officers and employees shall perform
their duties subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 2-24.2. Functions. [1972 Code § 22A-2; Ord. No. 1308]
The Department of Public Works shall have charge of and supervision of the
care, maintenance and construction of the following:
medical doctor, verifying such condition. In the event that a
beard must be maintained due to a medical condition, it must
be kept trimmed symmetrically and all beard hairs shall be
kept trimmed so that they do not protrude more than 1/2 inch
from the skin surface of the face.
5. Clean Shaven. Except for the areas of facial growth permitted
herein, all members shall be clean shaven at all times while on duty.
a. Water supply and distribution facilities;
b. Sanitary sewer facilities;
c. Public streets and other public ways;
d. Storm water and drainage facilities;
12.Editor's Note: See also subsection 2-5.27 for additional duties of the Public Safety and
Recycling Committee.
§ 2-20.11 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-24.2
AO:32
§ 2-24.3. Appointment of Officers and Employees. [1972 Code
§ 22A-3; Ord. No. 1308]
All officers and employees of the Public Works Department shall be
appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 2-24.4. Superintendent of Public Works. [1972 Code § 18-18; Ord.
No. 1068; Ord. No. 2199-15]
e. Municipally owned properties, parks, playgrounds and other
recreational facilities, which are not assigned to some other
department or officer of the Borough; and
f. Solid waste disposal other than such services as contracted for by the
Borough.
a. Position Established. The position of Superintendent of Public Works is
hereby established.
b. Duties. The duties of the person employed in this position shall be as
follows:
1. To assume full and complete responsibility of all functions of the
Water and Sewer Department, including the supervision and
deployment of all personnel therein. The Public Works
Superintendent shall establish all policy procedures with respect to
the Water and Sewer Department subject to the approval of the
Public Works and Property Committee and/or Council and shall also
prepare performance and evaluation reports to be submitted to the
Public Works and Property Committee on a quarter-annual basis.
2. To assume full and complete responsibility of all functions of the
Street Department, including the supervision and deployment of all
personnel therein. The Public Works Superintendent shall establish
all policy procedures with respect to the Street Department subject
to the approval of the Public Works and Property Committee and/or
Council and shall also prepare performance and evaluation reports
to be submitted to the Public Works and Property Committee on a
quarter-annual basis.
3. To assume full and complete responsibility of all functions of the
Parks Department, including the supervision and deployment of all
personnel therein. The Public Works Superintendent shall establish
all policy procedures with respect to the Parks Department subject
to the approval of the Public Works and Property Committee and/or
Council and shall also prepare performance and evaluation reports
to be submitted to the Public Works and Property Committee on a
quarter-annual basis.
4. The Public Works Superintendent shall have the authority to
transfer or assign personnel to the Departments set forth above in
§ 2-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.4
AO:33
§ 2-25. BEACH DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-25.1. Department Established; Territory Governed. [1972 Code
§ 6-1]
The major public beach, Stockton Beach Park and all walkways and
accessories thereto, all buildings, recreational facilities, parking lots and
equipment located thereon or operated in connection therewith shall
hereafter be operated under a separate department of the Borough to be
known as the Beach Department.13
§ 2-25.2. Operation as Separate Utility. [1972 Code § 6-2]
The Beach Department hereby established shall be operated as a separate
utility of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 2-25.3. Revenue. [1972 Code § 6-3]
All revenue received from the operation of the beach utility shall hereafter
be kept in separate accounts so designated as to distinguish same from
the general revenue of the Borough and kept in the same manner as all
municipal utility funds are kept.
§ 2-26. through § 2-29. (RESERVED)
Municipal Court
§ 2-30. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.14
§ 2-30.1. Establishment. [1972 Code §§ 8-1, 8-2]
There is hereby established in the Borough of Manasquan, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, a Municipal Court
which shall be entitled the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Manasquan."
order to promote the efficient deployment of personnel to the
Departments.
13.Editor's Note: All of the lands on the Manasquan beachfront between the monumented
beachfront line on the west and the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Manasquan Inlet on the
south and the Borough of Sea Girt on the north, being known and designated on the
Municipal Tax Map as Block 165, Lot 33 and Block 180, Lot 1, with the exception of the
lands formerly known as the Manasquan Fisheries (Sea Watch), Block 165, Lot 32, lands
known as Stockton Beach Park, Block 163, Lot 1, bounded on the north by the Borough of
Sea Girt, on the east by Second Avenue on the south and west by Stockton Lake and Outlet
Creek, and lands known as Block 169.03, Lot 11, Block 169.02, Lot 30, and Block 173,
Lots 1.01 and 1.04.
14.Editor's Note: The Municipal Court was originally established by Ord. No. 622 and codified
in the 1972 Code as Chapter 8.
§ 2-24.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-30.2
AO:34
§ 2-30.2. Seal of the Court. [1972 Code § 8-3]
The Municipal Court of the Borough of Manasquan shall have a seal which
shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 2-30.3. Judge of the Municipal Court. [1972 Code § 8-4]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment and until
his successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill a vacancy
caused other than by expiration of term shall be made for the unexpired
term only.
§ 2-30.4. Functions, Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction. [1972 Code
§ 8-5; New]
The Municipal Court shall have, possess and exercise all the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction, both territorial and subject matter, in such
matters as conferred upon the Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2BA:12-1 et seq.,
as amended and supplemented, and by any other Acts of the State
Legislature.
§ 2-30.5. Compensation. [New]
The salary of the Municipal Court Judge shall be an annual salary as
established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-30.6. Municipal Court Administrator and Personnel. [New]
The Mayor and Council shall provide for a Municipal Court Administrator,
Deputy Court Administrator and any other necessary clerical and other
assistants as may be required for the Municipal Court. Compensation for
the Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy Court Administrator and other
Court personnel shall be established in Salary Ordinance.
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-31. BOARD OF HEALTH.15
§ 2-31.1. Creation. [1972 Code § 15-1]
There shall be in and for this Borough a Board of Health in accordance with
an act to establish in this Borough a Board of Health and Bureau of Vital
Statistics and to define their respective powers and duties, approved March
31, 1887, and the several supplements thereto, and more particularly as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., but not limited thereby.
15.Editor's Note: Enforcement of the Board of Health regulations is provided by contract with
the Monmouth County Health Department.
§ 2-30.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.2
AO:35
§ 2-31.2. Composition; Appointment. [1972 Code §§ 15-2, 15-6; Ord.
No. 874; Ord. No. 1043]
The Board of Health shall consist of five members. All members of the Board
shall hold office for the term of four years. The members of the Board of
Health shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 2-31.3. Rules and Regulations; Officers. [1972 Code § 15-3]
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President from its own members.
§ 2-31.4. Appointments. [1972 Code § 15-4]
The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, Clerk
and Sanitary Inspector, and it may also appoint such other officers or
assistants as the Board of Health may deem necessary. All appointees shall
be governed by the rules of the Board, and they may be removed for cause
by the Board.
§ 2-31.5. Debts. [1972 Code § 15-5]
The Board of Health shall not contract any debts of any kind beyond the
amount of the appropriations made for its use by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-32. RECREATION COMMITTEE. [1972 Code §§ 23-1 to 23-5;
Ord. No. 1091; Ord. No. 1753 § 1; Ord. No. 2060-09 §§ 1, 2; amended
2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2274-19]
§ 2-32.1. Creation of Committee.
There is hereby established a Recreation Committee in the Borough.
§ 2-32.2. Membership.
The Board shall consist of seven members who shall be citizens and
residents of the Borough.
§ 2-32.3. Term of Office; Vacancies; Compensation.
a. Term. The initial appointments to the Committee shall be for a term of
five years for four members and four years for three members.
Thereafter all terms of appointment shall be for five years.
b. Vacancies. Vacancies in the term of any Committee member shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
c. Compensation. The Committee members shall receive no compensation
for their services.
§ 2-31.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-32.4
AO:36
§ 2-32.4. Appointment.
The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor.
§ 2-32.5. Alternate members.
§ 2-32.6. Manasquan Senior Citizens Organization.
§ 2-33. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-33.1. Duties of the Shade Tree Commission. [1972 Code § 28-1;
Ord. No. 1085; Ord. No. 2088-11 § 1]
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade trees and ornamental
trees and shrubbery upon or in public highways, parks or parkways of the
Borough shall be exercised by and under the authority of a Commission
consisting of seven residents, five of whom shall be regular members and
two of whom shall be alternate members designated as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2," and shall all be residents of the Borough of
Manasquan, which shall have the power and authority conferred by law.
The terms of the alternate members shall commence on January 1st of the
year of the appointment and shall be for a term of five years with the
exception of the initial term of Alternate No. 2 which shall be for four years.
§ 2-33.2. Appointment by Mayor; Service Without Compensation.
[1972 Code § 28-2; Ord. No. 1085]
The Commission shall be known as the "Shade Tree Commission of the
Borough of Manasquan," shall be appointed by the Mayor within the time
provided by law and shall serve without compensation, except as is provided
by law. All appointments, except appointments for unexpired terms in the
event of vacancy, shall be for terms of five years, to commence on January
a. There are hereby established two alternate members to the Committee.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The initial term of Alternate
No. 1 shall be five years and the initial term of Alternate No. 2 shall be
four years. Thereafter, the alternate members to the Committee shall be
appointed for a term of five years.
b. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
by the governing body for the unexpired term only.
a. The Manasquan Senior Citizen Organization is officially merged into
and shall become a part of the Manasquan Recreation Committee.
b. One member of the Recreation Committee shall be designated by the
Recreation Committee as liaison to the Manasquan Senior Citizen
Organization, which shall continue to exist as a group under the
authority of the Recreation Committee.
§ 2-32.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.2
AO:37
1. The members of the Commission shall annually elect a Chairman from
among their number.
§ 2-34. TOURISM COMMISSION.
§ 2-34.1. Established. [1972 Code § 30-1; Ord. No. 1553-91]
There is hereby established a Tourism Commission in the Borough of
Manasquan.
§ 2-34.2. Membership. [1972 Code § 30-2; Ord. No. 1553-91; Ord.
No. 1752-98 § 1]
The Commission shall consist of 14 members; provided however, not more
than three members of the Governing Body shall serve as Commissioners.
§ 2-34.3. Term; Vacancies; Compensation. [1972 Code § 30-3; Ord.
No. 1553-91; Ord. No. 1752-98 § 2]
§ 2-34.4. Appointments. [1972 Code § 30-4; Ord. No. 1553-91]
The Commissioners of the Tourism Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
§ 2-34.5. Duties. [1972 Code § 30-5; Ord. No. 1553-91]
The Tourism Commission shall through its programs and resources provide
an optimum of satisfaction and high-quality service to residents and visitors
of the community, protect the natural beauty of Manasquan, and promote
the economic health of the municipal tourist industry.
§ 2-35. LOCAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL.
§ 2-35.1. Established. [1972 Code § 9-1; Ord. No. 165-95]
There is hereby established a Local Emergency Management Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41.
a. The Commissioners first appointed shall hold office for the respective
terms: five Commissioners for one year, five Commissioners for two;
and four Commissioners for three years.
Thereafter, all appointments to the Commission shall be for a term of
three years.
b. Vacancies in the term of any Commissioner shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
c. A Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her services.
§ 2-33.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-35.2
AO:38
§ 2-35.2. Composition; Appointment. [1972 Code § 9-2; Ord. No.
1656-95]
The Local Emergency Management Council shall be composed of 15
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and hold office at the will
and pleasure of the appointing authority.
§ 2-35.3. Emergency Management Coordinator. [1972 Code § 9-3;
Ord. No. 1656-95]
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member and serve as
Chairman of the Local Emergency Management Council.16
§ 2-35.4. Establish Local Volunteer Organization. [1972 Code § 9-4;
Ord. No. 1656-95]
The Local Emergency Management Council shall assist the municipality
in establishing the various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the
requirements of all Local Emergency Management activities in accordance
with the rules and regulations established by the Governor of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 2-35.5. Emergency Management Activities Supervision. [1972
Code § 9-5; Ord. No. 1656-95]
The Local Emergency Management Council is authorized, within the limits
of appropriations, to establish an adequate organization to assist in
supervising and coordinating the emergency management activities of the
municipality.
§ 2-35.6. Membership in Other Agencies. [1972 Code § 96-6; Ord.
No. 1656-95]
It shall be lawful for members of the Local Emergency Management Council
also to be members of other agencies created because of any emergency.
§ 2-35.7. Powers. [1972 Code § 9-7; Ord. No. 1656-95]
The Local Emergency Management Council shall have all powers as shall be
authorized by N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41 et seq.
§ 2-36. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-36.1. Commission Established. [1972 Code § 7-1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, an Environmental Commission is hereby
established for the protection, development or use of natural resources
within this Borough, including water resources.
16.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-19.2 for the creation and duties of the Emergency
Management Coordinator.
§ 2-35.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.2
AO:39
§ 2-36.2. Membership. [1972 Code § 7-2; Ord. No. 1286; Ord. No.
2088-11 § 2]
The Commission shall consist of nine members, seven of whom shall serve
as regular members and two of whom shall serve as alternate members,
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" to be appointed by
the Mayor, and all of whom shall be residents of the Borough of Manasquan.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except as
hereafter provided. The Mayor shall appoint one member of the Commission
to act as Chairman and presiding officer thereof.
The terms of the alternate members shall commence on January 1st of the
year of the appointment and shall be for a term of two years with the
exception of the initial term of Alternate No. 2 which shall be one year.
§ 2-36.3. Terms of Office. [1972 Code § 7-3; Ord. No. 1286]
The terms of office of the first Commissioners, and in the event the
Commission is expanded of any additional Commissioner, shall be for one,
two, or three years to be designated by the Mayor, who shall make the
appointments so that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will
expire in each year. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of
three years and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
The Mayor or Borough Council may remove any member of the Commission
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the members shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 2-36.4. Powers and Duties. [1972 Code § 7-4]
The Environmental Commission shall have the power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of the open land areas of the municipality
and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time
to time recommend to the Planning Board, or if none, to the Mayor and
Governing Body of the municipality plans and programs for inclusion in a
Municipal Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-36.5. Acquisition of Land. [1972 Code § 7-5]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
Governing Body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the municipality by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes, and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
§ 2-36.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-36.5
AO:40
the fee or any lesser interest, development, right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the municipality.
§ 2-36.6. Records; Annual Report. [1972 Code § 7-6]
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Governing Body.
§ 2-37. CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-37.1. Established. [1972 Code § 6C-1; Ord. No. 1608-93]
There is hereby established a Cable Television Advisory Committee in the
Borough.
§ 2-37.2. Members; Appointment. [1972 Code §§ 6C-2, 6C-6; Ord.
No. 1608-93]
The Advisory Committee shall consist of five members, who shall be
appointed by the Borough Council.
§ 2-37.3. Term. [1972 Code § 6C-3; Ord. No. 1608-93]
All appointments to the Advisory Committee shall be for a term of three
years.
§ 2-37.4. Vacancies. [1972 Code § 6C-4; Ord. No. 1608-93]
Vacancies in the term of any member of the Advisory Committee shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-37.5. Compensation. [1972 Code § 63-5; Ord. No. 1608-93]
Advisory Committee members shall receive no compensation for their
services.
§ 2-37.6. Powers and Duties. [1972 Code § 6C-7; Ord. No. 1608-93]
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall:
a. Monitor and evaluate the operations and services of any cable
television franchisee servicing the municipality to determine
compliance with applicable municipal ordinances and franchising
agreements.
b. Monitor and evaluate the community's level of satisfaction with the
services of the cable television franchisee.
§ 2-36.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-37.6
AO:41
§ 2-37.7. Director of Television Services. [Ord. No. 2072-10]
The Borough Council shall appoint one member of the Cable Television
Advisory Committee to the unpaid position of Director of Television
Services. This position shall be for a term of one year. The duties of the
Director of Television Services shall be as follows:
§ 2-38. LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD.
§ 2-38.1. Established; Statutory Reference. [Ord. No. 1780-99 § 1]
A Local Assistance Board is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
44:8-115 et seq.
§ 2-38.2. Members; Appointment; Expenses. [Ord. No. 1780-99 § 2]
The Local Assistance Board shall be composed of three persons and at least
one of them shall be a woman. Members of the Local Assistance Board shall
c. Identify the community's cable television related goals and needs.
d. Monitor and evaluate legislative, regulatory and technological
developments in the field of cable television.
e. Oversee the operation of any municipal access channel which may be
established.
f. Advise the Office of Cable Television of any complaints or problems
relating to a cable television franchise in the municipality, and with the
consent of the Borough Council, appear at any official hearings
conducted by the Office of Cable Television.
g. Coordinate efforts amount various municipal organizations, groups and
governmental agencies to recommend local program content on cable
television and promote coverage of public affairs, educational and
sports events.
h. Establish relations with other communities being served by the cable
television franchisee and any Statewide organizations to assure input
and programming and services beneficial to subscribers and the
municipality.
i. Evaluate all issues related to franchise renewal.
j. Periodically report on its activities to Borough Council.
a. Oversee the daily operation of the Manasquan Access Channel
Television Station and Studio.
b. Coordinate the Borough and High School television programs.
c. Act as representative of the Manasquan Access Television station and
the Cable Television Advisory Committee.
§ 2-37.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-38.2
AO:42
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council. The members of the Local Assistance Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be allowed their necessary and actual expenses.
§ 2-38.3. Term of Members; Vacancies. [Ord. No. 1780-99 § 3]
The term of one member of the Local Assistance Board shall be for one
year and such member only may be appointed from among the membership
of the Governing Body. The terms of the two other members of the Local
Assistance Board shall be for two years each, expiring in alternate years.
The term of each member of the Local Assistance Board shall begin on the
first day of January, and each member shall continue in office until his or
her successor shall be appointed and shall qualify. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-38.4. Organization of the Board; Appointment of Director of
Welfare. [Ord. No. 1780-99 § 4]
§ 2-38.5. Duties of the Director of Welfare. [Ord. No. 1780-99 § 5]
The Director of Welfare shall:
a. The Local Assistance Board shall organize and select a Chairman and a
Secretary, and shall appoint a Director of Welfare who shall be the first
executive and administrative officer of the Board.
b. The Director of Welfare shall hold office for a term of five years from the
date of his or her appointment, and shall be paid a salary to be fixed by
the Local Assistance Board subject to the approval of the Governing
Body.
c. In case of vacancy in the office of Director of Welfare, a temporary or
acting director may be appointed to serve for not more than 90 days.
d. Other employees, including assistants, clerks, investigators and nurses,
in such number as may be necessary to properly administer public
assistance, shall be appointed in the same manner as other employees
of the municipality.
No employee of the Local Assistance Board whose compensation is
paid from funds received or appropriated for public assistance or the
administration thereof in any manner shall hold any office in any
political party.
a. Supervise by periodic investigation each person receiving public
assistance, such investigation to be made by visitation at least once a
month;
b. Reconsider from month to month the amount and nature of public
assistance given and alter, amend or suspend same when the
circumstances so require;
§ 2-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-38.5
AO:43
§ 2-39. OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE.
§ 2-39.1. Establishment of an Open Space Committee. [Ord. No.
1883-02 § 1]
There is hereby established an Open Space Committee which shall consist
of seven regular members and five alternate members.
§ 2-39.2. Membership of the Open Space Committee. [Ord. No.
1883-02 § 2]
c. Devise ways and means for bringing persons unable to maintain
themselves to self-support or to the support of any other person or
agency able and willing so to do;
d. Keep full and complete records of such investigation, supervision,
assistance and rehabilitation, and of all certifications of persons for
employment or benefits and cancellations thereof, in such manner and
form as required by the Commissioner of the Department of Human
Services;
e. Bring about appropriate action for commitment to any State or County
institution when the best interests of the needy persons would be so
served; and
f. Carry out all duties and responsibilities established under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 44:8-118 et seq.
a. The seven regular members of the Open Space Committee shall be:
1. One member of the Environmental Commission to be appointed by
the Environmental Commission.
2. One member of the Planning Board to be appointed by the Planning
Board.
3. One member of the Recreation Commission to be appointed by the
Recreation Commission.
4. One member of the Borough Council to be appointed by the
Borough Council.
5. Three residents of the Municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment in the municipal
government, to be appointed by the Mayor.
b. The five alternate members of the Open Space Committee shall be:
1. One member of the Environmental Commission to be appointed by
the Environmental Commission, who shall serve in the absence of
the regular member appointed by the Environmental Commission.
§ 2-38.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-39.2
AO:44
§ 2-39.3. Terms of Office. [Ord. No. 1883-02 § 3]
§ 2-39.4. Powers and Functions of the Open Space Committee. [Ord.
No. 1883-02 § 4]
2. One member of the Planning Board to be appointed by the Planning
Board, who shall serve in the absence of the regular member
appointed by the Planning Board.
3. One member of the Recreation Commission to be appointed by the
Recreation Commission, who shall serve in the absence of the
regular member appointed by the Recreation Commission.
4. One member of the Borough Council to be appointed by the
Borough Council, who shall serve in the absence of the regular
member appointed by the Borough Council.
5. One resident of the Municipality who shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment in the municipal government, to be
appointed by the Mayor, who shall serve in the absence of one of
the three residents who are regular members of the Open Space
Committee.
a. The regular member and alternate member appointed from the
Environmental Commission shall have a term of one year.
b. The regular member and the alternate member appointed from the
Planning Board shall have a term of one year.
c. The regular member and the alternate member appointed from the
Recreation Commission shall have a term of one year.
d. The regular member and the alternate member appointed by the
Borough Council shall have a term which shall correspond with the
member's term of elected office.
e. The three regular members and one alternate member appointed by the
Mayor shall have a term of three years.
f. The initial term of office of the three regular members and one
alternate member appointed by the Mayor shall terminate on December
31, 2004. The initial term of office of the member of the Borough
Council shall terminate on December 31st of the final year of that
member's term of elected office. The term of office of all other members
shall terminate on December 31, 2002. Thereafter, appointments shall
be made with a termination date of December 31st.
a. The Open Space Committee shall prepare a report annually making
recommendations for the acquisition, development, maintenance and/
or preservation of lands, easements and development rights for
recreation, conservation or historic purposes.
§ 2-39.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-39.4
AO:45
§ 2-39.5. Public Meetings. [Ord. No. 1883-02 § 5]
The Open Space Committee shall hold public meetings and provide the
general public with notice of such meetings in accordance with the Open
Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4.6 et seq.).
§ 2-39.6. Officers. [Ord. No. 1883-02 § 6]
The Open Space Committee shall select from among its regular members
a Chairman to act as presiding officer and a Vice Chairman to serve as
presiding officer in the absence of the Chairman. The Committee shall also
designate from among its regular members a secretary who shall maintain
minutes of all meetings as required by the Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-40. through § 2-50. (RESERVED)
Contracts and Agreements
§ 2-51. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
§ 2-51.1. Adoption of Agreement; Copies on File. [1972 Code § 16-1;
Ord. No. 1586-92]
This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6) and 40A:14-1561,
and is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all municipalities
participating in a County-wide mutual aid compact. Pursuant to this
Agreement, the Borough of Manasquan shall render assistance to any
participating municipality by providing members of the Manasquan Police
Department, upon request, to help preserve the public peace and order.
In the event that a member of the Manasquan Police Department is injured
while rendering assistance to a participating municipality, the municipality
providing assistance shall be primarily responsible for any costs as a result
of the injury; provided however, nothing in this section shall serve as a bar
to the municipality providing assistance from seeking indemnification from
the municipality receiving assistance.
"The Monmouth County Mutual Aid Agreement" is incorporated by
reference in this section, and three copies of the Agreement shall be
maintained on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk.
b. The Open Space Committee shall submit a report annually to the
Governing Body on or before November 1st of each year. The Governing
Body shall review the annual report of the Open Space Committee and
make a determination as to the properties, easements or development
rights, if any, to be acquired.
c. After the selection process as set forth in paragraph b above, the
Governing Body may proceed to acquire the properties, easements or
development rights by gift, purchase or eminent domain proceedings.
§ 2-39.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-51.2
AO:46
§ 2-51.2. Authorization to Sign. [1972 Code § 16-2; Ord. No.
1586-92]
The Mayor and Municipal Clerk are authorized to sign "The Monmouth
County Mutual Aid Agreement" upon final passage and publication of this
section.17
§ 2-52. COOPERATIVE PRICING SYSTEM.
§ 2-52.1. Title. [1972 Code § 6B-1; Ord. No. 1557-91]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Agreement of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 2-52.2. Authority. [1972 Code § 6B-2; Ord. No. 1557-91]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Borough of
Manasquan, as a participating contracting unit, is hereby authorized to
enter into a Cooperative Pricing Agreement with the County of Monmouth,
as the lead agency, and other participating contracting units within the
County of Monmouth for the purchase of selected work, materials and/or
supplies.
§ 2-52.3. Contracting Unit Responsibilities. [1972 Code § 6B-3; Ord.
No. 1557-91]
The lead agency shall be responsible for complying with the Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the
New Jersey Statutes, as to the bidding, award and execution of master
contracts on behalf of itself and any participating contracting units, as
well as for purchases made by the lead agency for its own needs under
the master contract. Each respective participating contracting unit which
chooses to purchase under a master contract shall be responsible to enter
into a separate contract with the vendor, to certify the availability of funds,
to issue purchase orders, to accept delivery and to make payment for those
items purchased by that participating contracting unit for its own needs.
§ 2-53. through § 2-60. (RESERVED)
Policies and Procedures
§ 2-61. CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
§ 2-61.1. Presentation of Claims. [1972 Code § 6A-1; Ord. No. 948]
All claims or bills presented to the Borough shall be presented in the
manner prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16.
17.Editor's Note: This section was adopted on October 26, 1992.
§ 2-51.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-61.2
AO:47
§ 2-61.2. Approval. [1972 Code § 6A-2; Ord. No. 948]
All bills or claims presented shall be approved for payment by a majority
of the Councilmen present at a regular meeting of the Borough Council;
provided, however, that at least three members of the Council vote in favor
of such approval. If a majority of the Councilmen present shall vote against
the approval of any bill or claim or if less than three affirmative votes are
cast for such approval, the bill or claim shall be deemed to be disapproved
and no payment shall be made on account thereof.
§ 2-61.3. Manner of Payment. [1972 Code § 6A-3; Ord. No. 948]
All bills or claims shall be paid by a check drawn by the Treasurer and
signed by the Mayor or, in his absence, by the Acting Mayor, by the
Municipal Clerk and countersigned by the Borough Treasurer.
§ 2-62. DEFENSE OR INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS OR
EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-62.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 17A-1; Ord. No. 1233]
As used in this section:
ACTION or SUIT — Shall mean any proceeding, whether judicial, quasijudicial
or administrative, including cross-claims, counterclaims or other
forms of cross-action.
OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person now or formerly elected
or appointed to any public office or agency or body of the Borough or
employed or retained by the Borough, or any office, agency, or body thereof,
whether such person serves in a paid or unpaid capacity. The term shall not
include however, any person performing acts or services for the Borough,
its offices, agencies or bodies as an independent contractor. Any member
of the regular professional staff of the Borough, its offices, agencies or
bodies, including, but not limited to the Municipal, Board of Adjustment and
Planning Board Attorneys; the Municipal and Planning Board Engineers;
and the Municipal Auditor shall not be deemed independent contractors for
the purposes of this definition.
§ 2-62.2. Defense of Officials or Employees in Civil Actions. [1972
Code § 17A-2; Ord. No. 1233]
The Borough shall provide for the defense of any civil action brought against
an official or employee of the Borough arising from any act or omission, or
alleged act or omission, by such official or employee in the performance of
his official duties, except:
a. If the act or omission complained of was not within the scope of
authority or employment of such official or employee; or
b. The act or omission was the result of, or constituted, fraud, malice or
willful misconduct of such official or employee; or
§ 2-61.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-62.2
AO:48
§ 2-62.3. Defense of Officials or Employees in Criminal Actions.
[1972 Code § 17A-3; Ord. No. 1233]
c. The defense of the action would create a clear conflict of interest
between the Borough and the official or employee; or
d. The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance
policy or policies, whether obtained by the Borough or by any other
person; or
e. The official or employee shall have failed to deliver to Mayor and
Council, or the Municipal Clerk, a copy of the Summons and Complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading within 10 calendar days after
having been served with the same, except that such period may be
extended for good cause by majority vote of the full membership of the
Governing Body; or
f. The official or employee fails to cooperate with the Borough, or any
attorneys appointed by the Borough to defend the action, in the defense
of such action; or
g. The action was instituted against the official or employee by the
Borough; or
h. The official or employee fails to request that the Borough provide a
defense; or
i. The official or employee fails to cooperate with the insurance company
providing a defense of the action or proceeding and the company
disclaims responsibility for non-cooperation.
a. The Borough shall defray the costs of defending any criminal action
against any official or employee of the Borough, providing:
1. It is not prohibited by any State law; and
2. The action shall have been dismissed or shall have resulted in an
acquittal of the official or employee; and
3. The Borough Council determines that there is no good cause to
dismiss the official or employee, in instances where the Borough
Council has the power to dismiss, arising from or related to the
circumstances which were the basis of the criminal action.
b. The Borough shall provide for the defense of any criminal action against
any official or employee where such defense is required by law.
c. It is the intention of this section that the Borough shall reimburse an
official or employee for the costs of his legal defense (provided the
conditions specified in paragraphs a1 through a3 of this subsection
have been met) only upon successful conclusion of the criminal action.
Where applicable law requires that the Borough provide a defense,
paragraph b shall apply, and the Borough shall provide such defense by
§ 2-62.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-62.3
AO:49
§ 2-62.4. Method to Provide for Defense of Actions. [1972 Code
§ 17A-4; Ord. No. 1233]
If the Borough Council determines to provide a defense as authorized in this
section, it may do so by any of the following methods, at its sole option:
§ 2-62.5. Indemnification. [1972 Code § 17A-5; Ord. No. 1233]
one of the methods set forth in subsection 2- 62.4; unless the
controlling law specifies a method for providing such defense.
a. By authorizing the Municipal Attorney to undertake the defense of the
action; or
b. By hiring special counsel selected by the Borough Council upon such
terms as the Council shall agree; or
c. By authorizing the official or employee to retain an attorney of his own
selection who shall be paid by the Borough, provided:
1. Such attorney shall submit to the Borough Council a letter
indicating his representation of the official or employee; and
2. Such letter shall set forth the hourly rate based upon which the
attorney shall set his fee, together with any other relevant
information regarding the manner in which such fee shall be
determined; and
3. That the attorney shall submit an itemized bill, setting forth all
services and expenditures incurred by the attorney in connection
with the defense of the action at the conclusion of his
representation of the official or employee; and
4. That no portion of the attorney's fee or any disbursements shall be
paid or reimbursed by the Borough until conclusion of the action,
unless otherwise authorized by resolution; and
5. That the Borough shall not pay for representation in the event that
any judgment for punitive damages is rendered against the official
or employee, in which event the payment of all legal fees and
disbursements shall be the responsibility of such official or
employee.
a. In any civil action in which the Borough shall be required as set forth in
this chapter, to provide for, or defray the cost of, the defense of an
official or employee, the Borough in addition to paying the cost of such
defense where applicable, shall pay or reimburse the official or
employee for each of the following:
1. Any bona fide settlement agreement when approved by the Mayor
and Council.
§ 2-62.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-62.5
AO:50
§ 2-62.6. Control of Litigation by the Borough. [1972 Code § 17A-6;
Ord. No. 1233]
Whenever the Borough shall provide for any defense pursuant to this
section, the Borough, through the Municipal Attorney, or through special
counsel appointed by the Borough for that purpose, shall assume full control
of the defense and the official or employee shall cooperate fully with the
Borough in such defense. Where defense is provided by an insurer, the
attorney appointed by the insurer to provide the defense for the official
or employee shall assume full control of the defense and the official or
employee shall cooperate fully with such attorney.
§ 2-63. PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT PROPERTY TAXES OR
ASSESSMENTS REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSES OR
PERMITS.
§ 2-63.1. Legislative Findings. [1972 Code § 57-1; Ord. No. 1458]
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2 permits a municipality to require, by adoption of an
ordinance, that an applicant for certain licenses or permits pay any property
taxes and assessments due on the property if the applicant is the owner of
the property whereon the licensed or permitted business or activity is to
be conducted and also to provide for the revocation or suspension of those
licenses or permits upon the owner failing to pay taxes due on the property
for at least three consecutive quarters. Further, the Statute requires that
the license or permit shall be restored upon payment of the overdue taxes
or assessments to the municipality.
§ 2-63.2. Payment of Taxes or Assessments as a Condition for the
Issuance of a Municipal License or Permit; Exceptions. [1972 Code
§ 57-2; Ord. No. 1458]
An applicant for a municipal license or permit shall be required to pay
any delinquent property taxes, assessments or municipal charges on the
property wherein the business or activity for which the license or permit
is sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted if the
applicant is the owner of such real property. A license or permit issued
by the municipality shall be automatically suspended when any licensee,
2. Any judgment entered against the official or employee, except that
in the event any judgment shall contain an award for punitive
damages, the Mayor and Council shall not pay or reimburse any
portion of such judgment, including compensatory damages.
b. In the event that the defense of any action, or any portion thereof, is
provided for the official or employee pursuant to policies of insurance,
then the Borough shall pay or reimburse the official or employee only to
the extent that any settlement or judgment is not covered by insurance,
and further subject to the limitations contained in this section
regarding approval of settlements and judgments for punitive damages.
§ 2-62.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-63.2
AO:51
who is an owner of the property upon which the licensed business or
activity is conducted, has failed to pay real property taxes, assessments or
other municipal charges due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. Upon the applicant paying the delinquent taxes, assessments or
municipal charges, the license or permit shall be automatically restored.
This provision shall not apply to any alcoholic beverage license or permit
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. known as the "Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act."
§ 2-64. PAYMENT OF TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND MUNICIPAL
CHARGES REQUIRED PRIOR TO PAYMENT OF FIRE INSURANCE
CLAIMS.
§ 2-64.1. Conditions for the Payment of Fire Insurance Proceeds.
[1972 Code § 65-6; Ord. No. 1239; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. The Borough does hereby prohibit the payment to a claimant, by an
insurance company, of any claim in excess of the amount stated in
Chapter 16, Fees, dollars for fire damage on any real property located
within this Borough, pursuant to any fire insurance issued or renewed
after the adoption of this section, except as provided hereunder.18
b. Prior to the payment of any fire insurance claims in excess of the
amount stated in Chapter 16, Fees, the insurance company shall
request from the Borough an official certificate of search to be executed
by the appropriate bonded municipal official responsible for preparing
such certificates, to determine whether or not all taxes, assessments,
municipal charges or other municipal liens are presently due and
payable to the Borough. In the event there are outstanding sums due
and payable to the Borough, all sums so payable shall be paid by the
insurance company prior to the payment of any fire damages to the
owner in excess of $2,500.
c. If, however an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property, the
insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of the lien or
charge being contested, pending termination of all proceedings at
which time such monies and all interest accruing thereon, at a rate paid
on interest- bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and
loan associations in the State, shall be disbursed in accordance with the
final order or judgment of the Court.
d. The Borough Council may enter into an agreement with the owner of
any fire- damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other liens by installments, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19,
or for the redemption of a tax sale lien by installment payments,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq., provided, however, that the
Borough Council shall first be satisfied that the claim for fire damages
18.Editor's Note: This section was adopted on May 17,1982 by Ord. No. 1239.
§ 2-63.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-64.1
AO:52
§ 2-64.2. Violations and Penalties. [1972 Code §§ 65-7, 65-8; Ord.
No. 1304]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, other remedies
will include:
§ 2-65. FEES CHARGED FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICES.
§ 2-65.1. Fees Charged by the Municipal Clerk's Office.
(Reserved) (See 2-65.2)
shall be used to restore or improve the fire damaged property. In
the event of such an agreement, a certified copy of the resolution
of agreement shall be forwarded to the insurance company and the
resolution of agreement shall act as their authorization to make full
payment on the claim to the insured person.
e. The municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this act
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire
insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire
damaged property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the
loss listed the mortgagee as named insured, in which vent the claim of
the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien
under this act, but only to the extent of the amount due and payable to
the mortgagee under the mortgage obligation.
f. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed:
1. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in the excess of
the value of the fire insurance policy on the property, or the amount
of liability of the insurance company thereunder.
2. Except as provided in the case of appeals under paragraph c of this
subsection, to obligate the insurance company for any liens not
appearing on the official certificate or any certified changes
submitted by the bonded official; or
3. To affect the authority of a municipality to enforce a municipal lien
under law of this State.
g. This section shall be filed with the State Commissioner of Insurance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
h. Section 2-64 shall take effect upon passage, publication and approval
by the State Commissioner of Insurance, as required by law.
a. Any remedy available pursuant to this chapter shall be considered
separate and not exclusive of any other remedy available hereunder.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any cause of action,
or legal remedy therefor, or of any person for injury or damage arising
from any violation of this section.
§ 2-64.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-65.2
AO:53
§ 2-65.2. Fees for Photocopying of Public Records; Designation of
Custodian and Deputy Custodian of Government Records. [Ord. No.
2005-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2074-10 § 1, 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 2-65.3. Payments by Check by Phone; Returned Check Service
Charge. [Ord. No. 2148-14; Ord. No. 2180-15]
Payment of municipal taxes, special assessments, water and sewer bills.
§ 2-65.4. Application Fee and Security Deposit for Use of Municipal
Beachfront Facilities. [Ord. No. 2005-07 § 3; Ord. No. 2175-15; Ord.
No. 2180-15]
a. The fees charged for copies of government records shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
b. The following persons are appointed as custodian or deputy custodian
of public records:
Custodian of public records — Municipal Clerk;
Deputy Custodian of police records — Senior Police Records Clerk;
Deputy Custodian of Municipal Court records — Municipal Court
Administrator;
Deputy Custodian of financial records — Chief Financial Officer;
Deputy Custodian of Building and Code Department records — Code
Enforcement Official;
Deputy Custodian of Department of Public Works records —
Superintendent of Public Works.
a. Charge for Payment by Check by Phone. The service charge for utilizing
the Borough of Manasquan pay by check by phone service through the
tax and finance office for payment of municipal taxes, water and sewer
bills shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
b. Returned Check Service Charge. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, the
Borough of Manasquan shall impose a service charge as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees for the return of all checks or other written
instruments due to insufficient funds. The service charge shall be
collected from the account for which the check or other instrument was
tendered. The Borough of Manasquan may require all future payments
to be tendered in cash or by certified or cashier's check whenever a
check or other written instrument is returned for insufficient funds.
a. In order to offset the cost to Manasquan for processing requests and
providing municipal services, it is required that any person or entity
applying to utilize the beachfront facilities for a special event pay a
nonrefundable application fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
Additionally, the person or entity shall deposit the sum as stated in
§ 2-65.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-65.4
AO:54
§ 2-65.5. Fee for Manufacturing Park Benches by the Department of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2005-07 § 4; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The fee for each bench manufactured by the Department of Public Works
shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 2-65.6. Fee for the Temporary Storage for Parking of Commercial
Trailers, Trailers Carrying Modular Homes or Similar Vehicles in
Municipal Parking Lots. [Ord. No. 2005-07 § 5]
§ 2-65.7. Free Season Beach Badge and Parking Permit for Certain
Members of the Manasquan First Aid Squad and Manasquan
Volunteer Fire Companies. [Ord. No. 2005-07 § 6]
Chapter 16, Fees as a security deposit for costs incurred by Manasquan
for services provided by the Police Department, Beach Department
and Department of Public Works, and to cover the cost of damage
sustained to municipal property. The security deposit, less any costs
incurred by Manasquan, shall be returned to the person or entity
holding the event within 15 business days following such activity. In
the event the costs incurred by Manasquan and/or the costs of damage
sustained to municipal property exceed the security deposit, the person
or entity holding the event shall be responsible for such excess costs.
Manasquan, shall in its sole discretion, determine the costs incurred in
accommodating a special event. Special events shall include: athletic
events, fundraising events and similar activities.
b. The Manasquan Recreation Commission, Shade Tree Commission,
Tourism Commission and Fire Departments and First Aid Companies
providing services to the municipality, and other organizations
providing in-kind services to the municipality, shall be exempt from
paying the application fee and posting a security deposit in recognition
of in-kind services provided to Manasquan.
c. Any person receiving approval to hold a wedding or civil union at the
beachfront shall pay a nonrefundable fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
No security deposit shall be required for this type of event.
a. The fee for temporary storage or parking for commercial trailers,
trailers carrying modular homes or similar vehicles in municipal
parking lots shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, per day. A cash bond
in the amount stated in Chapter 16, Fees, per day. A $500 cash bond
shall be posted as a security deposit prior to any vehicle being parked in
a municipal parking lot. The security deposit, less the amount of any
damages incurred by Manasquan shall be returned to the person or
entity posting the security deposit within 15 business days following the
vehicle being removed from the parking lot.
a. Members of the Volunteer First Aid Squad who respond to 20% or more
of the calls of the unit and members of the Volunteer Fire Companies
who respond to 30% or more of the calls of the unit shall be awarded
§ 2-65.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-65.7
AO:55
§ 2-65.8. Exemption from the Payment of Permit Fees for Certain
Members of the Manasquan First Aid Squad and Manasquan Fire
Companies. [Ord. No. 2005-07 § 7; Ord. No. 2182-15; Ord. No.
2180-15]
§ 2-65.9. Charging Electric Vehicles at Borough-Owned Charging
Stations. [Ord. No. 2206-2016]
The fee for charging an electric vehicle at a Borough-owned or operated
electric vehicle charging station shall be set as stated in Chapter 16.
§ 2-66. OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND.
§ 2-66.1. Legislative Findings. [Ord. No. 1867-02 § 1]
one season badge and season parking permit in recognition of their
efforts to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
b. A copy of this subsection shall be sent to the Captain of the First Aid
Squad and the Chief of each Fire Company in order to obtain a list of
members eligible to receive this benefit. The Borough Council requests
that the Captain and Chiefs of the volunteer units present a list to the
Governing Body on or before May 22nd of each year so that badges and
parking permits may be distributed to eligible members of the
volunteer units.
a. Members of the Volunteer First Aid Squad who respond to 20% or more
of the calls of the unit and all life members and members of the
Volunteer Fire Companies who respond to 30% or more of the calls of
the unit and all life members shall be exempt from payment of the
following fees for permits issued by the municipality; provided,
however, the exemptions shall apply only to the municipal portion of
any fee and the total of all exemptions in any calendar year shall not
exceed the amount stated in Chapter 16, Fees:
Subsection 14-1.2 (Fees) of Chapter 14 (Building and Housing)
Subsection 14-5.4 (License Fees) of Chapter 14 (Building and Housing)
Subsection 14-10.2 (Permit Required; Application; Fees) of Chapter 14
(Building and Housing)
Section 14-11.4 (Fees) of Chapter 14 (Building and Housing)
b. A copy of this subsection shall be sent to the Captain of the First Aid
Squad and the Chief of each Fire Company in order to obtain a list of
members eligible to receive this benefit. The Borough Council requests
that the Captain and Chiefs of the Volunteer Units present a list of
eligible members to the Governing Body on or before February 1st of
each year.
§ 2-65.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-66.1
AO:56
§ 2-66.2. Open Space Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 1867-02 § 2]
a. The voters of the Borough of Manasquan, County of Monmouth, New
Jersey on November 6, 2001 expressed their support to the Borough
Council to establish an Open Space Trust Fund and to create a
mechanism for collection of a dedicated $0.005 on each $100 of
assessed value of real property in the Municipality.
b. The Borough Council determines that the establishment and collection
of funds for the Open Space Trust Fund, and the acquisition of open
spaces for perpetual preservation are in the best interest of the citizens
of the Borough of Manasquan.
c. The Borough Council deems it appropriate to establish an Open Space
Trust Fund, and begin collection for the Trust Fund during the 2002
calendar year.
a. There is hereby authorized and established a specific and dedicated tax
assessment of $0.005 per $100 of assessed value of real property, to be
assessed and paid on all taxable property in the Municipality
commencing during the 2002 calendar year, and continuing each
following year. The monies collected pursuant to this specific and
dedicated tax will be used to provide for the acquisition, development,
maintenance, and/or preservation of lands, easements and development
rights for recreation, conservation or historic purposes, and permit the
payment of debt service on indebtedness incurred by the Municipality
for any of these purposes.
b. There is hereby established an Open Space Trust Fund to be
administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the Municipality subject
to the provisions of this section, which Trust Fund shall have deposited
in it the special tax assessment of $0.005 per $100 of assessed value of
real property.
c. The Chief Financial Officer shall maintain this Trust Fund separate and
apart from all other municipal accounts.
d. The Chief Financial Officer, Tax Assessor and Tax Collector shall
cooperate as necessary for the administration of this Trust Fund, and
shall establish a separate line item on each municipal tax bill for this
purpose. This item shall be identified as the "Municipal Open Space
Tax" and be a separate line item to be collected for the Trust Fund in
the amount of $0.005 per $100 of assessed value of all taxable real
property in the Municipality.
e. In the event the Municipality shall become the beneficiary, by way of
gift, Federal or State grant or other funding sources of any lands or
monetary funds, the lands shall be placed upon the Trust Fund's
register of open space lands and the monetary funds shall be deposited
in the Trust Fund.
§ 2-66.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-66.2
AO:57
§ 2-67. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP). [Ord.
No. 1893-02 §§ 1-8]
f. This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7
et seq., and shall be administered in accordance with those provisions.
g. It is the intention of this section to comply with all applicable State and
Federal programs governing the acquisition of open space for
recreation, conservation or historic purposes.
h. All lands acquired through the Open Space Trust Fund shall be set
aside and dedicated for recreation, conservation or historic purposes.
i. All policies and decisions relating to the Open Space Trust Fund shall
be made by the Borough Council, subject to applicable State and
Federal regulations.
a. The Borough Council deems it appropriate and necessary to act to
ensure retention of existing volunteer members and to provide
incentives for recruiting new volunteer members for the Manasquan
First Aid Squad, Inc.
b. The Borough Council has determined that the creation of a Length of
Service Awards Program will enhance the ability of the Manasquan
First Aid Squad, Inc. to retain and recruit volunteer members of the
First Aid Squad.
c. A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is created in accordance
with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of the
Manasquan First Aid Squad, Inc. for their loyal, diligent, and devoted
services to the residents of the Borough of Manasquan.
d. The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred
income account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria in
this section. The contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan
established by the Borough Council pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388. The
plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey, the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of America
and the terms of this section.
e. The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each active
volunteer member who accumulates 50 or more points according to the
LOSAP Point System.
f. The estimated cost of the program for regular annual services has been
calculated at $24,500 per year.
g. The LOSAP program shall also provide contributions for five years of
prior service for each eligible volunteer member. The contribution
amount for each year of past service shall be $100. The estimated cost
of this provision of the LOSAP program shall be based on 15 members
for a total cost of $7,500.
§ 2-66.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-67
AO:58
h. Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for
volunteer services provided to the Manasquan First Aid Squad, Inc. in
accordance with the attached schedule entitled "LOSAP Point System".
SCHEDULE FOR LOSAP POINT SYSTEM
A year of service shall be credited under the service award program
for each calendar year after establishment of the program in which an
active volunteer in Manasquan First Aid Squad, Inc. accumulates at
least 50 points. Points shall be granted in accordance with the system
set forth in this document.
I. Training Courses - 25 point maximum.
1. Courses under 20 hours duration - one point per hour, with a
maximum of five points.
2. Courses of 20 to 45 hours duration - one point per hour for
each hour over the initial 20 hours, with a maximum of 10
points.
3. Courses over forty-five-hour duration - 15 points per course.
II. Drills - 20 point maximum.
1. Drill (minimum two hours) - one point.
III. Sleep-In or Standby - 20 point maximum.
1. Sleep-In: one point each full night.
2. Standby: one point each - a standby is defined as line of duty
activity of the volunteer first aid squad lasting for four hours,
not falling under one of the other categories.
IV. Elected or Appointed Positions - 25 point maximum.
Elected or appointed position means line officers, department
or company officers and president, vice president, treasurer and
secretary of the volunteer first aid squad.
1. Completion of one year term in an elected or appointed
position.
2. An active volunteer first aid squad member elected to serve
as a delegate to a State convention shall also be eligible to
receive one point per meeting.
V. Attendance at Meetings - 20 point maximum.
1. Attendance at any official meeting of the volunteer first aid
squad - one point per meeting.
VI. Participation in Department Responses - 25 points for responding
on the minimum number of calls, as outlined below:
§ 2-67 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-67
AO:59
§ 2-68. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-68.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 2038-08 Preamble]
The State Legislature recently adopted Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007
(N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) to create the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program to provide retirement benefits to various County and municipal
officials.
N.J.S. 43:15C-2 requires the Governing Body of each County, municipality,
and other local entity to adopt, as appropriate, either a resolution or
ordinance to determine the positions that are substantially similar in nature
to the advice and consent of the Senate for appointments by the Governor
of the State, pursuant to guidelines or policy that shall be established by
the Local Finance Board in the Department of Community Affairs, and for
which officials appointed to such positions shall be eligible for and shall
participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program, subject to the
provisions of law.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Manasquan has considered the
guidelines issued by the Local Finance Board.
§ 2-68.2. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 2038-08 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 2-68.3. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 2038-08 § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
Total number of first aid calls the first aid
squad responds to annually
0 5 1, 1,
Minimum number of calls a volunteer
squad member must respond to annually in
order to receive 25 points credit
1 7 5 2.
VII. Miscellaneous activities - 15 point maximum.
1. Participation in inspections and other activities not otherwise
listed - one point per activity.
a. Municipal Administrator;
b. Public Safety Director;
c. Municipal Court Judge.
a. Certified Health Officer;
§ 2-67 MANASQUAN CODE § 2-68.3
AO:60
§ 2-68.4. Additional Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2038-08 § 3]
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in subsection
2-68.2 and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
subsection 2-68.3 above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual: a) was an active
participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on July 1, 2007 and
continuously since that time; or b) has been appointed pursuant to a valid
promotional process; or c) is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting"
basis to a position requiring State Certification as set forth in subsection
2-68.3 herein, and is in pursuit of the required certification; or d) meets
such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local Finance Board or
the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-68.5. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 2038-08 § 4]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-69. ENERGY AND NATURAL GAS AGGREGATION PROGRAM.
§ 2-69.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2186-15]
The State of New Jersey has been engaged in a process to establish a
competitive market place through deregulation and restructuring the
electric utility market and natural gas market.
The establishment of a government aggregator and an energy aggregation
program to purchase electric generation service and natural gas pursuant
to N.J.S. 48:3-93.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:4-6.1 et seq. will increase
competition for the provision of electric power and natural gas to residential
and nonresidential users, thereby increasing the likelihood of lower electric
b. Tax Collector;
c. Chief Financial Officer;
d. Construction Code Official;
e. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
f. Tax Assessor;
g. Municipal Planner;
h. Registered Municipal Clerk;
i. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
j. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 2-68.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-69.1
AO:61
rates and natural gas rates for these users without causing any interruption
in service.
Under the aggregation process the residential and nonresidential
ratepayers may likely receive a direct reduction in their electric bills and
gas bills.
The realization of energy costs savings is in the interests of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Manasquan (the
"Borough").
The Borough hereby finds that it is in the best interests of residential and
nonresidential electric and gas ratepayers for the Borough to create the
opportunity for them to enter into an aggregation agreement in order to
seek substantial savings on electric and gas rates.
§ 2-69.2. Intent. [Ord. No. 2186-15]
The Borough publicly declares its intent to become an aggregator of electric
power and natural gas on behalf of its residential and nonresidential users
of electricity and natural gas pursuant to the Government Energy Act of
2003, N.J.S. 48:3-91.3 to -98, and implementing regulations.
§ 2-69.3. Use of Reverse Energy Auction. [Ord. No. 2186-15; Ord.
No. 2265-18]
The Borough will utilize approved vendors, Concord Engineering's d/b/
a Concord Energy Services and Commercial Utility Consultants, Reverse
Energy Auction Platform pursuant to the NJ E-PROCUREMENT Pilot
program (P.L. 2001, c. 30) under the NJ Department of Community Affairs.
The Reverse Energy auction will seek bids from licensed and appropriate
third party suppliers. If such winning bid is selected and agreement
executed, individual residential consumers would retain the option not to
participate and to choose any alternatives they desire.
§ 2-69.4. Authorization to Execute Program. [Ord. No. 2186-15]
The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute any documents necessary to carry out the purpose of the section.
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. (RESERVED)19
19.Editor’s Note: Former Section 3-1, Noise, previously codified herein and containing
portions of 1972 Code §§ 76-1 — 76-18, 76-19 and Ordinance Nos. 1424, 1493, 1514-90,
1520-90 and 2022-08, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2051-09. See Section
3-28 for noise restrictions.
§ 2-69.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-2
AO:62
§ 3-2. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PRIVATE
AND PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-2.1. Consumption in Certain Places. [1972 Code § 38-33; Ord.
No. 1048; Ord. No. 1701-96 § 1; Ord. No. 2111-12 § 1; Ord. No.
2181-15; Ord. No. 2185-15]
It shall be unlawful for any person, including but not limited to an occupant
of a motor vehicle, to consume or pretend to consume any alcoholic
beverage or to possess any open or unsealed container containing an
alcoholic beverage in or upon any public sidewalk, public highway, public
park, public recreation area, public parking lot, public boardwalk, public
beach, public conveyance or any quasi-public place unless a permit for
that purpose shall have been issued by the Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control with the consent of the Governing Body. Quasi-public place shall
mean any sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, alley, walkway or other open area
adjacent to any nonresidential building or nonresidential use. Any person
who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a minimum fine in the amount of $450.
§ 3-2.2. Consumption of Wine or Malt Alcoholic Beverages May Be
Permitted in Restaurants or Dining Rooms. [Ord. No. 1697-96]
a. Legislative Findings. The Borough Council makes the following
legislative findings:
1. N.J.S.A. 2A:170-25.21 permits a person owning or operating a
restaurant, dining room or other public place where food or liquid
refreshments are sold or served to the general public to permit or
allow the consumption of wine or a malt alcoholic beverage in a
portion of the premises which is open to the public.
2. N.J.S.A. 2A:170-25.22 permits a municipality to restrict the right of
an owner or operator of a restaurant, dining room or other public
place where food or liquid refreshments are sold or served to the
general public from permitting the consumption of wine or a malt
alcoholic beverage in a portion of the premises which is open to the
public.
b. Restrictions Relating to the Consumption of Wine or a Malt Alcoholic
Beverage in Premises Not Licensed Under the Provisions of Title 33.
The consumption of wine or a malt alcoholic beverage is permitted or
allowed, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:170-25.21, in a portion of premises
which is open to the public provided that the area is within the interior
of a building, unless the exterior portion of the premises has been
authorized to be utilized as a restaurant, dining area or other public
place where food or liquid refreshments are sold or served to the
general public pursuant to a site plan approved by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 35 Zoning
of the Municipal Code.
§ 3-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.3
AO:63
§ 3-2.3. Prohibition Against Serving, Offering to Serve or Permitting
the Consumption of an Alcoholic Beverage by a Person Under Legal
Age.20 [1972 Code § 38-30; Ord. No. 1307; Ord. No. 1831-00 § 1]
No person shall offer or serve any alcoholic beverage to a person under
legal age in any public or quasi-public place within the Borough of
Manasquan. No person who has ownership or control of any premises,
whether public or quasi-public, or supervision of any event, shall permit,
suffer or allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a person under
legal age in or upon any such premises or at any such event within the
Borough of Manasquan.
§ 3-2.4. Persons Under the Legal Age. [1972 Code § 38-32A; Ord.
No. 1523-90]
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Borough of Manasquan under legal
age to be under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or exhibit signs of
intoxication from an alcoholic beverage.
§ 3-3. DRESSING OR UNDRESSING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-3.1. Dressing in Automobiles Unlawful. [1972 Code § 80-27]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to change, disrobe, dress,
undress or otherwise remove his or her clothing in any automobile in any of
the public streets or places in the Borough.
§ 3-3.2. Dressing in Public Streets. [1972 Code § 80-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to change, disrobe, dress or
undress or otherwise remove his or her clothing in any of the public streets
or places of the Borough.
§ 3-4. LITTERING; DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
§ 3-4.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 73A-1; Ord. No. 1178]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or
thing; or
a.
20.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 6, Section 6-9, Possession or Consumption by Underage
Person on Private Property.
§ 3-2.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-4.1
AO:64
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — Shall mean any putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean any nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-4.2. Prohibitions. [1972 Code § 73A-2; Ord. No. 1178]
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
b.
a. No person shall sweep, throw or deposit litter in or upon any occupied,
open or vacant property, whether owned by such person or not, or in or
upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place, or any pond, lake,
stream or any other body of water within the Borough, except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official
municipal dumps. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
b. No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of
business, shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, private
parking lot or any other place within the Borough the accumulation of
litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying private property shall be
responsible for maintaining all of the property free of litter.
c. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the Borough
or upon any private property.
d. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Borough unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move
any vehicle or truck within the Borough the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 3-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.2
AO:65
§ 3-4.3. Maintenance of Private Property. [1972 Code § 73A-3; Ord.
No. 1178]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this subsection
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for
collection.
§ 3-4.4. Distribution of Handbills. [1972 Code § 73A-4; Ord. No.
1178]
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to so do or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words NO
TRESPASSING, NO PEDDLERS OR AGENTS, NO ADVERTISEMENT or any
similar notice indicating in any matter that the occupants of the premises
do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 3-5. (RESERVED)
§ 3-6. (RESERVED)21
§ 3-7. (RESERVED)
§ 3-8. INTERFERENCE WITH OR RESISTANCE TO POLICE
OFFICERS AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES.
§ 3-8.1. Resistance, Hindering or Abusing Police Officers or
Municipal Employee. [1972 Code § 80-30; Ord. No. 932]
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any
Police Officer, municipal employee or lifeguard while engaged in the lawful
performance of his official duties in the Borough.
§ 3-8.2. Fleeing from Police Officers and Lifeguards. [1972 Code
§ 80-31; Ord. No. 932]
It shall be unlawful for any person to flee from any Police Officer or
lifeguard after being directed by any such Police Officer or lifeguard, in the
e. No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside this municipality or into this Borough for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof unless authorized by the Mayor and the
Borough Council.
21.Editor’s Note: Former Section 3-6, Loitering previously codified herein and containing
portions of 1972 Code §§ 80-1 — 80-4 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2025-08.
§ 3-4.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-8.2
AO:66
exercise of his official duties, to halt; or to flee from any such Police Officer
or lifeguard for the purpose of avoiding arrest.
§ 3-9. RESTRICTIONS ON CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES.
§ 3-9.1. Legislative Findings. [1972 Code § 54B-1; Ord. No. 1689-96]
The Borough Council makes the following legislative findings:
§ 3-9.2. Vending Machines Restricted. [1972 Code § 54B-2; Ord. No.
1689-96]
a. The Surgeon General of the United States has called for a ban on the
sale of cigarettes by vending machines.
b. The United States Department of Health and Human Services, in a
publication dated August 10, 1995, reviewed facts concerning the
plague of cigarette smoking by children and called for the elimination of
cigarette vending machines.
c. The State of New Jersey has prohibited the sale or furnishing of
cigarettes or tobacco in any form to minors under N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.
d. The municipality is unable to prevent the sale of cigarettes to minors by
vending machines and no penalty has been imposed by the State statute
upon minors for the purchase of cigarettes.
e. There exists within the municipality numerous cigarette vending
machines which provide an uncontrolled opportunity for the purchase
of cigarettes by minors.
f. The municipality is authorized to enact ordinances under its police
powers which are not contrary to the laws of the State of New Jersey or
the United States of America for the necessary and proper protection of
persons and for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare of
the municipality and its inhabitants.
a. Cigarette vending machines are prohibited in the municipality, except
in places licensed to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages under the
Statutes, rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey (from now on
called "licensed premises"). Cigarette vending machines may be located
in a licensed premises subject to compliance with all of the following
conditions:
1. The machine is located within the immediate vicinity of, or in plain
view, and under the control of an employee 18 years of age or older.
2. The machine is not located in a coat room, restroom, waiting area
or similar unmonitored area, and is inaccessible to the public when
the place of business is closed.
3. The machine is equipped with a locking device that has all of the
following characteristics:
§ 3-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.2
AO:67
§ 3-9.3. Tampering or Removal of Locking Device Prohibited. [1972
Code § 54B-3; Ord. No. 1689-96]
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, disconnect or otherwise
disable the locking device on the cigarette vending machine.
§ 3-10. HALLOWEEN CURFEW.
(a) The machine is inoperative and not capable of accepting
money unless activated by an employee of the licensed
premises.
(b) The machine contains a warning label to minors and a label
indicating activation procedures.
(c) Once activated, the machine automatically is deactivated after
three minutes or the purchase of one pack of cigarettes,
whichever occurs first.
(d) Any malfunction of the locking device renders the machine
inoperable.
(e) The locking device cannot be bypassed to leave the machine in
an operating mode for an unlimited period of time.
4. Keys permitting entry to the machine or locking device shall not be
kept or retained at the licensed premises.
5. No employee of the licensed premises shall activate the machine
until making a reasonable determination that the person wishing to
use the machine is 18 years of age or older.
6. The machine must be registered with the Municipal Code
Enforcement Official. The registration form shall be issued, without
the payment of any fee, if it contains all of the following
information:
(a) The name, address and business telephone number of the
owner of the licensed premises.
(b) The name, address and business telephone number of the
owner of the machine.
(c) A description of the proposed location of the machine at the
licensed premises.
(d) A certification by the owner of the licensed premises that the
machine complies with all of the requirements of this section.
§ 3-9.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-10.1
AO:68
§ 3-10.1. Curfew Established; Exceptions. [1972 Code § 56-1; Ord.
No. 925; Ord. No. 1774-98]
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on any public
place, public street or public property in the Municipality between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time, on October 28, October 29,
October 30 and November 1 of each year or between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time, on October 31 each year unless such person
is in attendance at a program or function sponsored by the Municipality,
a church or school or by any other organization which has obtained the
permission of the Chief of Police to conduct a program or function during
this time. This subsection shall not apply to persons under the age of 18
years while they are returning home from a place of employment, school,
fraternal or religious meeting or going to and from a doctor's or dentist's
office where treatment has been rendered or is to be rendered or to persons
under the age of 18 years who are accompanied by a parent or guardian
over the age of 21 years.
§ 3-10.2. Wearing of Disguise. [1972 Code § 56-2; Ord. No. 925]
During the hours and dates mentioned in subsection 3-10.1, no person
shall wear any apparel or device which covers any part of his face for the
purpose of disguise in any public place, public street or public property in
the Borough.
§ 3-10.3. Parental Responsibility. [1972 Code § 56-3; Ord. No. 925]
Any person who is a parent, guardian or standing in loco parentis of any
such person under the age of 18 years who permits, consents to or approves
or allows any person under the age of 18 years to violate the provisions of
this section or any portion thereof shall likewise be guilty of a violation of
this section.
§ 3-11. (RESERVED)
§ 3-12. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-12.1. Adoption of Map. [1972 Code § 60-1; Ord. No. 1465]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the Drug-Free School Zone
Map produced on or about January 19, 1988 by T & M Associates, Inc., the
Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the municipality of property
which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 3-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12.2
AO:69
§ 3-12.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [1972 Code
§ 60-2; Ord. No. 1465]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-12.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that
this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free
School Zones.
§ 3-12.3. Notification of Changes in Location and Boundaries. [1972
Code § 60-3; Ord. No. 1465]
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-12.4. Copies of Map on File. [1972 Code § 60-4; Ord. No. 1465]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-12.1,
and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or Court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this subsection shall be provided without cost to
the County Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 3-12.5. Map to Be Used as Evidence. [1972 Code § 60-5; Ord. No.
1465]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-12.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence to
the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
§ 3-12.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-12.5
AO:70
§ 3-13. FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.
§ 3-13.1. Prohibited Use. [1972 Code § 64-1; Ord. No. 1304; Ord.
No. 1639-94]
No person shall use, shoot, fire, discharge or otherwise employ any firearm
as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, or any weapon or device in the nature of an
air or spring gun or pistol, carbon dioxide or compressed air gun or pistol,
or any other device which employs as a propelling force a spring elastic
band carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas, vapor or compressed air, and
which is capable of ejecting any bullet, pellet or missile whatsoever with
sufficient force to injure a person.
§ 3-13.2. Possession, Storage, Sales of Firearms Restricted. [1972
Code § 64-2; Ord. No. 1304; Ord. No. 1639-94]
No person shall possess, carry, sell, exchange, store or retain any firearm
or other device as defined in subsection 3-13.1 hereof, except in accordance
with the provisions of Title 2C of N.J.S.A.
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of L. 1987, C. 101 (C. 2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, C. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-12.1. The failure of the map approved
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, C. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 3-12.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.3
AO:71
§ 3-13.3. Possession, Sales, Discharging of Fireworks Restricted.
[1972 Code § 64-3; Ord. No. 1304; Ord. No. 1639-94]
No person shall possess, carry, sell, exchange, store, retain, ignite or
discharge any explosive or fireworks as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, 21:2-2
and 21:2-3.
§ 3-13.4. Special Permits for the Display of Fireworks. [1972 Code
§ 64-4; Ord. No. 1304; Ord. No. 1639-94]
The Governing Body may, in its sole discretion, issue a special permit for
the display of fireworks. An applicant shall make written application for
this special permit on forms to be made available through the Office of the
Municipal Clerk. The Governing Body shall act upon the application within
45 days of the date of its filing with the Municipal Clerk.
§ 3-14. POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING.
§ 3-14.1. Findings and Purpose. [1972 Code § 80B-1; Ord. No.
1491-89]
The Borough Council finds and declares as follows:
a. Polystyrene packaging which is discarded into the waterways
surrounding Manasquan constitutes a significant source of litter
spoiling our beaches and waterways and is, therefore, a necessary
focus of any effort to improve the aesthetic quality of our environment.
b. Discarded non-degradable polystyrene remains persistent in the
environment and endangers life and wildlife.
c. Chemical composition and ability of a substance to degrade are
meaningful and useful criteria to focus upon when establishing public
policy that is intended to reduce the cumulative impact of litter and
encourage composting.
d. No viable outlets exist for the recycling of polystyrene which would
serve to encourage recycling of the material.
e. Certain retail establishments within Manasquan are points of origin for
polystyrene waste and, therefore, are necessary targets for actions
which have the potential for reducing the entry of polystyrene into the
environment.
f. There are readily available paper product substitutes for polystyrene
products now being used in Manasquan, the use of which alternatives
would be environmentally advantageous to the public of Manasquan.
g. It is understood that polystyrene comprises a small volume of the total
waste generated within the Borough; however, the elimination of
polystyrene from Manasquan's solid waste stream will simplify
additional recycling efforts within the municipality.
§ 3-13.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-14.1
AO:72
§ 3-14.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 80B-2; Ord. No. 1491-89]
DEGRADABLE PACKAGING — Shall mean packaging made of cellulosebased
or other substances that are capable of being readily attacked,
decomposed, assimilated, and otherwise completely oxidized or broken
down by bacteria or other natural biological organisms into carbonaceous
soil material or water and carbon dioxide; or in the alternate capable of
otherwise degrading within 12 months of manufacture, into fragments that
are small relative to the original size, or into particles of a molecular weight
that is low when compared to that of the original material.
PACKAGING — Shall mean all food-related wrappings, adhesives, cords,
binding, bags, boxes, containers and disposable or nonreusable plates,
cups, or drinking utensils intended for use within the Borough of
Manasquan.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean all sales outlets, stores,
shops or other places of business located within Manasquan, which operate
primarily to sell or convey foods directly to the ultimate consumer which
foods are predominantly contained, wrapped, or held in or on packaging.
"Retail food establishment" shall include, but not be limited to, any place
where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled,
packaged, handled, stored, manufactured, and sold or offered for sale,
including, but not limited to, any fixed or mobile restaurant; drive-in; coffee
shop; cafeteria; short order cafe; fast-food outlet; delicatessen;
luncheonette; grill; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail
lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; take-out prepared food place; industrial
feeding establishment; catering kitchen; grocery store; public food market;
food stand; or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale
or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other establishment
or operation, including homes, where food is processed, prepared, stored,
serviced or provided for the public for charge.
§ 3-14.3. Sale, Distribution and Service Prohibited by Retail Food
Establishments. [1972 Code § 80B-3; Ord. No. 1491-89; Ord. No.
1500]
h. It is also recognized that the volume of polystyrene sold in Manasquan
is small compared to the overall sales of the material in the Monmouth/
Ocean County area; however, it is hoped that this action will encourage
similar actions in surrounding communities and/or accelerate efforts to
develop recycling outlets. Therefore, the purpose of this section is to
the maximum extent practicable, eliminate the use of polystyrene
originating at retail establishments within Manasquan in order to
protect the land and waters of Manasquan from environmental
contamination.
a. No retail food establishment located or doing business within
Manasquan shall sell, distribute or serve any prepared, cooked or
immediately consumable food product or any liquid or beverage to a
§ 3-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-14.3
AO:73
§ 3-14.4. Purchase by the Borough Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80B-4;
Ord. No. 1491-89]
The Borough shall not purchase any food packaging which contains
polystyrene nor shall it sponsor any event which utilizes such packaging. All
food packaging utilized or purchased by the Borough shall be biodegradable
and/or photodegradable.
§ 3-14.5. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 80B-5; Ord. No. 1491-89]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, the Code
Enforcement Official and such other persons as may be designated by the
Borough Council.
§ 3-14.6. Penalties. [1972 Code § 80B-6; Ord. No. 1491-89; New]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, a minimum
penalty of a $100 fine shall be imposed when such violation involves a
commercial source or trade waste.
§ 3-14.7. Ordinance Voided by Superseding Federal and/or State
Laws and Regulations. [1972 Code § 80B-7; Ord. No. 1491-89]
This section shall be void upon the enactment or adoption of any Federal
and/or State law or regulation restricting the use of polystyrene.
§ 3-15. ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
§ 3-15.1. Storage Restricted. [1972 Code § 103-1; Ord. No. 1928-04
§ 1; Ord. No. 1938-04 § 2]
No person shall store, permit or suffer to be stored upon any lands located
in the B-1 (Business), B-2 (Marine Business), B-3 (General Business), O
(Office), or I (Industrial) zones, as defined in Chapter 35 of the Municipal
Code, any automobile or motor vehicle which is not capable of being used
or operated, or any part or parts of an automobile or motor vehicle, unless
the same are contained within a fully enclosed structure or enclosed within
a solid fence having a minimum height of six feet. In the case where
an inoperable automobile or motor vehicle or any part or parts of an
automobile or motor vehicle are stored within an area enclosed by a solid
fence having a minimum height of six feet, the fence must be set back from
the front property line a distance equal to or greater than the existing front
consumer within the Borough of Manasquan in a package or container
made of polystyrene.
b. No retail food establishment located or doing business within
Manasquan shall sell, distribute, give or provide any eating utensil, food
container or beverage container to a consumer within Manasquan if
such eating utensil, food container or beverage container is made of
polystyrene.
§ 3-14.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-15.1
AO:74
yard setback of the building on the site. Automobiles, motor vehicles or
any part or parts of automobiles or motor vehicles stored within a fence
pursuant to this provision may be stored in such area for a maximum period
of 60 days.
Owners and operators of new and used car agencies, and repair or service
garages may store an automobile or motor vehicle which is not capable
of being used or operated or any part or parts of an automobile or motor
vehicle which are not stored within a fully enclosed structure or enclosed
within a fence having a minimum height of six feet for a period not to exceed
60 days subject to the following conditions:
§ 3-15.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 103-2]
As used in this section:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Shall mean any automobile which is not capable
of being used or operated and shall be deemed to be an automobile which
cannot be moved under its own power from place to place upon the public
streets.
STORE or STORED — Shall mean the keeping of any automobile or other
motor vehicle upon any lands for a period of more than 30 days.
§ 3-16. VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING WARRANTS;
IMPOUNDMENT.
§ 3-16.1. Authority and Enforcement. [1972 Code § 103A-1; Ord. No.
1341]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.2, the Borough has the authority to make,
amend, repeal and enforce an ordinance authorizing the impoundment or
immobilization of motor vehicles found within the Borough if there are any
outstanding warrants against such vehicles. The Borough Council hereby
exercises this authority and delegates to the Police Department and/or its
a. If an automobile or motor vehicle is being stored for the purpose of
making repairs subject to the delivery of parts, the owner or operator
shall file a written certification with the Code Enforcement Officer
stating all pertinent facts, and shall advise the Code Enforcement
Officer weekly, by written certification, of the status of such repair.
b. If the automobile or motor vehicle is being stored for the purpose of
obtaining title to a junk vehicle pursuant to the provisions of State law,
the owner or operator shall file a written certification with the Code
Enforcement Officer stating all pertinent facts, and shall advise the
Code Enforcement Officer weekly, by written certification, of the status
of obtaining title pursuant to State law.
c. Upon completion of making repairs or obtaining title, the automobile or
motor vehicle shall be removed from the property within three days.
§ 3-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.1
AO:75
agents the authority to impound or immobilize motor vehicles found within
the Borough if there are any outstanding warrants against such vehicles.
§ 3-16.2. Failure to Pay Outstanding Warrant; Public Auction of
Vehicle. [1972 Code § 103A-2; Ord. No. 1341]
Except for vehicles owned by lessors who have complied with the provisions
of the act respecting lessors, if any outstanding warrants are not paid
by midnight of the 30th day following the day on which the vehicle was
impounded or immobilized, the vehicle may be sold at public auction. The
Borough shall give notice of the sale by certified mail to the owner, if his or
her name and address is known, and to the holder of any security interest
noted on the files of the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles. Public
notice of the sale shall be in a form prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles by publication of public notice at least five days
in advance of the date of sale. Publication shall be in one or more of the
official newspapers of the Borough, which newspapers are established by
annual resolution of the Governing Body.
§ 3-16.3. Reclamation; Payment of Fees. [1972 Code § 103A-3; Ord.
No. 1341; Ord. No. 2180-15]
At any time prior to the sale, the owner of the motor vehicle or other
person entitled to the motor vehicle may reclaim possession of it upon
payment of the reasonable costs of removal and storage of the motor vehicle
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, and any fine or penalty and Court costs
assessed against the owner of the vehicle for a violation(s) which gave
rise to the impoundment or immobilization of the vehicle, including any
outstanding warrants against such vehicle; provided however, the ownerlessor
of a motor vehicle who has complied with the provisions of "The
Parking Offenses Adjudication Act" respecting lessors shall be entitled to
reclaim possession without payment and the lessee shall be liable for any
fine, penalty, Court costs and outstanding warrants against the vehicle.
§ 3-16.4. Proceeds from Auction. [1972 Code § 103A-4; Ord. No.
1341]
Any proceeds obtained from the sale of the vehicle at public auction in
excess of the amount owed to the Borough for the reasonable costs of
removal and storage of the motor vehicle, and any fines or penalties and
Court costs assessed against the vehicle for the violation which gave rise
to the impoundment or immobilization of the motor vehicle, including any
outstanding warrants against such vehicle, shall be returned to the owner
of the vehicle, if his or her name and address are known.
§ 3-17. MOTOR VEHICLES EXCLUDED CERTAIN AREAS.
§ 3-16.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-17.1
AO:76
§ 3-17.1. Use Restricted. [1972 Code § 102-1]
It shall be unlawful to operate any type of motor driven vehicle or
conveyance, or to bring the same, upon any of the following areas within
the Borough:
§ 3-17.2. Exceptions. [1972 Code § 102-2]
This section shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles.
§ 3-18. WASHLINES AND WASH ON FRONT LAWNS AND FRONT
PORCHES.
§ 3-18.1. Use of Front Yards and Porches Restricted. [1972 Code
§ 80-25]
No person shall hang, place or exhibit wet bathing suits, wet linens or
washed articles in the front yard, on the front roof or on the front porch of
any premises or house in the Borough.
§ 3-19. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
§ 3-19.1. Houses of Ill Fame. [1972 Code § 80-10]
No person shall keep or maintain a disorderly house or a house of ill
fame, or allow or permit any house, shop, store or other building owned or
occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house or house of ill fame,
to be frequented or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, prostitutes,
gamblers or vagrants.
§ 3-19.2. License Required by Premises for Sale of Intoxicating
Liquors or Beverages. [1972 Code § 80-11]
a. On any sidewalk or sidewalk area, except for driveways; provided,
nevertheless, that small vehicles, commonly known as minibikes, may
be pushed by hand upon sidewalks abutting improved streets.
b. Upon the bicycle path over the former Freehold Jamesburg Agricultural
Railroad between the western line of North Main Street and the
western boundary line of the Borough of Manasquan.
c. Upon the walkway along the monumented beachfront line and along the
Manasquan Inlet.22
d. Within any public park and upon any of the pedestrian walks abutting
same.
a. No person shall keep or maintain any house, shop, store or other
building, nor allow or permit any person to keep any house, shop, store
or other building owned or occupied by him or her, to be used as a
22.Editor's Note: See also subsection 12-4.19, Mopeds and Motorcycles Prohibited.
§ 3-17.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19.2
AO:77
§ 3-19.3. Gambling Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80-12]
No person shall deal, play or engage in faro, roulette, bookmaking, lottery
or other game of chance, either as banker, player, dealer or otherwise, for
the purpose of gaming.
§ 3-19.4. Offensive Language in Public Places Prohibited. [1972
Code § 80-13]
Any person or persons who shall loiter or assemble on the streets, at the
corners of the streets or in the public places of the Borough, shall indulge
in and utter loud and offensive or indecent language, shall be deemed and
adjudged to be a disorderly person.
§ 3-19.5. Offensive Language in Quasi-Public or Private Places.
[1972 Code § 80-14]
Any person who shall loiter in any quasi-public place or in or upon any
private property not his own within this Borough, or who shall indulge
in and utter loud and offensive or indecent language shall be adjudged a
disorderly person.
§ 3-19.6. Nudity, Indecent Exposure and Urinating in Public
Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80-15; Ord. No. 1383; Ord. No. 2111-12
§ 2; Ord. No. 2181-15; Ord. No. 2185-15]
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or travel on any street, avenue,
highway, road, beach, waterway, alleyway, driveway or any area on private
property open to public view in the Borough, or appear in any other such
place in the Borough in a state of nudity; in an indecent or lewd dress or
garment; or make any indecent exposure of his or her person; or urinate in
any of the above described places except in public restrooms provided for
that purpose. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be subject to a minimum fine
of $450 and a maximum fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 3-19.7. Disturbing the Peace Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80-16]
house for the sale of beer, wines, ales or intoxicating liquor of any kind
or nature, unless the premises are duly licensed in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. No person shall permit any house, shop, store or other building owned
by him or her to be frequented or resorted to by any person or persons
for the buying or selling of any intoxicating liquors or beverages, unless
such premises are duly licensed in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
a. No person shall make, aid or assist in making any loud and disturbing
noise or noises by use of any device, contraption or machine in the
public streets or elsewhere in this Borough.
§ 3-19.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-19.7
AO:78
§ 3-19.8. Disturbing Religious Assemblies Prohibited. [1972 Code
§ 80-17]
No person shall disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious
worship in any church or other building, by making a noise or by rude or
indecent behavior or profane discourse within such place of worship.
§ 3-19.9. Damaging Property Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80-18; Ord.
No. 1526-90]
Any person who shall maliciously destroy, damage, injure, break or deface
property shall be adjudged a disorderly person.
§ 3-19.10. Dumping Refuse on Borough Property Prohibited. [1972
Code § 80-19]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall dump any garbage, ashes, trash
or other refuse on any property owned or controlled by the Borough,
without first obtaining permission of the Borough Council, shall be adjudged
a disorderly person.
§ 3-19.11. Use of Litter Receptacles on Public Property Restricted.
[1972 Code § 80-19.1; Ord. No. 1065]
No person shall use an open mesh basket or enclosed litter receptacle
placed on public property by the Borough for deposit of household or
commercial refuse.
§ 3-19.12. Trespassing or Defacing School Property Prohibited.
[1972 Code § 80-20]
Any person who shall enter any school building or go upon the grounds or
lands belonging to any public school used and occupied for school purposes,
and shall break, injure or deface such building or any part thereof, shall be
adjudged a disorderly person.
§ 3-19.13. (Reserved)23
§ 3-19.14. Trespassing on Private Property; Invasion of Privacy.
[1972 Code § 80-24.1; Ord. No. 1453]
Any person who trespasses on private property and surreptitiously or
sneakingly invades the privacy of another by peering into the windows or
b. No person shall make, aid or assist in making any disturbance, riot or
breach of the peace in the streets or elsewhere within the Borough.
23.Editor's Note: Former subsection 3-19.13, Loitering for Unlawful Purposes, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1972 Code § 80-22 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 2025-08.
§ 3-19.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19.14
AO:79
other openings of dwelling places located thereon for no lawful purpose
shall be adjudged a disorderly person.
§ 3-19.15. Motor Vehicles or Motor-Drawn Vehicles Used for Living
or Sleeping Purposes Prohibited. [1972 Code § 80-24; Ord. No.
1513-90]
No person shall occupy or use any motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle
while parked within the Borough, either on public or private property, for
living or sleeping purposes.
§ 3-19.16. Use of Tents and Sleeping Bags. [Ord. No. 1792-99 § 1]
No person or persons shall sleep in a tent, sleeping bag or similar device
except within a dwelling unit during the hours between sundown and
sunrise. The term dwelling unit is defined in Section 35-3 of Chapter 35,
Zoning, of the Municipal Code. No provision of this subsection shall be
deemed to permit occupancy of a dwelling unit in violation of the provisions
of Chapter 13, Section 13-1, Property Maintenance Code, of the Municipal
Code.
§ 3-20. SELLING FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS.24
§ 3-20.1. Parking on Certain Streets Prohibited for Selling
Merchandise from Vehicles. [1972 Code § 69-25; Ord. No. 868; Ord.
No. 1214; Ord. No. 1581-92; Ord. No. 1612-93]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on any
street, sidewalk or public walkway on, along or adjacent to North Main
Street, East Main Street, Atlantic Avenue east of North Main Street, Broad
Street south of Blakey Avenue, First Avenue, Second Avenue, Third Avenue,
Fourth Avenue, State Highway Route No. 71 (also known as Taylor Avenue
north of Main Street and also known as Union Avenue south of Main
Street), Riverside Drive, Brielle Road, Ocean Avenue, Stockton Avenue,
Rogers Avenue east of Watsons Creek, Riddle Way, Tarpon Avenue, Marlin
Avenue, Pompano Avenue, Trout Avenue, Pike Avenue, Whiting Avenue,
Perch Avenue and Timber Lane in the Borough of Manasquan for the
purpose and during the process of selling goods, commodities or
merchandise to a consumer.
§ 3-20.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 69-25; Ord. No. 868]
For the purpose of this section:
VEHICLE — Shall mean anything operated on wheels or runners, and shall
include anything hitched or attached thereto.
§ 3-21. PROTECTION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT.
24.Editor's Note: For license requirements for Hawkers and Peddlers, see Section 4-6.
§ 3-19.14 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-21.1
AO:80
§ 3-21.1. Damaging or Destroying Fire Department Equipment.
[1972 Code § 11-23]
No person shall maliciously or wantonly break or injure any property
belonging to the Fire Department.
§ 3-21.2. Driving Vehicles Over Hoses. [1972 Code § 11-25]
No person shall willfully drive, propel, or cause to be driven or propelled,
any vehicle over any hose or other fire apparatus.
§ 3-22. FALSE ALARMS. [1972 Code § 11-26]
No person shall raise or cause to be raised any false alarm of fire within the
corporate limits of the Borough.
§ 3-23. FIRES AND EXPLOSIVES.
§ 3-23.1. Bonfires. [1972 Code § 11-31]
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or other fire, or shall
knowingly furnish the materials for any such fire, or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained on or in any street, or public ground, or upon
any private lot within the limits of the Borough unless a permit shall first
have been secured from the Fire Inspector.
§ 3-23.2. Open Fires in Barns, Boats or Buildings where Explosives
or Combustibles Stored. [1972 Code § 11-33]
No person shall use or take into any building, barn, vessel, boat or any other
place where gunpowder or any other explosive materials or hay, straw or
other highly combustible material may be kept, any burning light or open
fire unless the same shall be well secured in a glass globe, wire mesh cage
or similar device.
§ 3-23.3. Explosives. [1972 Code § 11-34; New]
It shall not be lawful to manufacture, keep, sell, use or handle for any
purpose whatsoever any gunpowder, nitroglycerin or blast oil, dynamite,
fulminate of silver, fulminate of mercury, explosive guncotton, soluble
cotton, petroleum, either crude or refined naphtha, gasoline, benzine,
kerosene or spirit gas, or any other explosive or highly combustible
materials whatsoever, liquid or vapor or solid, in any building or in or on
any property within the limits of the Borough, without first having obtained
a permit to do so from the Fire Inspectors.
§ 3-23.4. Fire Pits. [Ord. No. 2094-11 § 1]
Open burning in approved containers shall be allowed without a permit at
single-family homes, duplexes, and town homes, subject to the regulations
contained herein.
§ 3-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-23.4
AO:81
§ 3-24. PERMITTING CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS TO SOLICIT
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES IN THE RIGHT-OFWAY
OF A STATE OR COUNTY ROAD OR HIGHWAY.
§ 3-24.1. Soliciting Charitable Contributions on Roads or Highways;
Permits Required. [Ord. No. 1754-98 § 1]
Charitable organizations, as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, shall be
permitted to solicit contributions for charitable purposes in the right-of-way
of a road or highway maintained or under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation or the Monmouth County Board of Chosen
Freeholders subject to the charitable organization obtaining prior written
a. Fires shall be limited to a maximum three feet diameter and two feet in
height, must be contained in a noncombustible chimenea, outdoor
fireplace, fire pit, or other method approved by the Fire Prevention
Officer.
b. All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire mesh
or other screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks and
embers. All combustible material must be contained completely with
the enclosure.
c. Fires must be kept at least 15 feet from any structure or combustible
exterior wall.
d. Fires must be constantly attended by an individual 18 years of age or
older.
e. No such fire or container used for an open burning may be used on any
porch, deck, balcony or other portion of a building; within any room
space; or under any building overhang.
f. The burning of yard waste, leaves, brush, vines, evergreen needles,
branches smaller than three inches in diameter, treated lumber,
garbage, paper products or anything other than firewood as set forth
herein is prohibited.
g. The use of flammable liquids is prohibited.
h. The Fire Prevention Officer, Police Officer, or Code Enforcement Officer
may order any open fire, or use of a chimenea, outdoor fireplace, or fire
pit which creates a nuisance or a fire hazard of any sort to be
extinguished.
i. All other devices that produce an open flame not addressed in this
subsection shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
j. Violators of this subsection shall be subject to the general penalties set
forth in Section 1-5 et seq.
§ 3-23.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-24.1
AO:82
approval from the governmental entity having jurisdiction over the road or
highway.
In the case of any State road or highway or intersection thereof, a written
permit shall be obtained from the Department of Transportation in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 16:40-1 et seq.
In the case of any County road or highway or intersection thereof, a written
permit shall be obtained from the Monmouth County Board of Chosen
Freeholders in accordance with rules and regulations established by it.
Solicitation shall be subject to the specific terms and conditions of the
permit granted by the County or State. The State or County permit, as
applicable, shall be in the possession of the solicitor during all times of
solicitation and be available for inspection by local, County and State law
enforcement officers.
§ 3-24.2. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1754-98 § 2]
The following rules and regulations shall apply to charitable organizations
soliciting under the terms of this section:
a. Charitable organizations shall solicit only for charitable purposes.
b. Solicitations shall be permitted only at signalized intersections or when
an existing traffic control device causes temporary interruption in the
flow of normal traffic, such as at the opening of a movable bridge.
c. Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of a charitable
organization shall be at least 18 years old.
d. Solicitation is encouraged to be off the traveled way.
e. Solicitors shall not stop traffic or impede the flow of traffic. Traffic shall
already be stopped before solicitation may occur and shall cease when
traffic is moving. The use of flagmen is prohibited.
f. Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours. State,
County, local law enforcement officers or representatives of the
Department of Transportation may suspend solicitation operations at
any time if any condition of the permit is violated, or, if in the law
enforcement officer's or the Department's sole discretion, traffic is
being impeded or delayed or the public safety is at risk.
g. Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use drugs, or be under
the influence of drugs or alcohol while soliciting.
h. Solicitors shall not harass the public.
i. All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with
Department of Transportation standards.
j. Parking of vehicles shall comply with applicable traffic regulations.
§ 3-24.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-24.2
AO:83
§ 3-24.3. Solicitation at Intersection of State and County Highways.
[Ord. No. 1754-98 § 3]
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the intersection of a State and
County highway, the charitable organization must obtain written approval
from both the Department of Transportation and the Monmouth County
Board of Chosen Freeholders.
§ 3-24.4. Solicitation at Border of Any Other Municipality; Approval
Required. [Ord. No. 1754-98 § 4]
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the border of Manasquan and
any other municipality, the charitable organization must obtain approval for
the solicitation from the adjoining municipality.
§ 3-24.5. Filing of Application Forms Required. [Ord. No. 1754-98
§ 5]
A copy of the application form filed with the Department of Transportation
or the Monmouth County Board of Chosen Freeholders shall be filed with
the Municipal Clerk, and shall specify the location, date, duration and times
of the proposed charitable solicitation. One application form may cover
multiple dates during the same calendar year.
§ 3-24.6. Municipality Not Liable. [Ord. No. 1754-98 § 6]
The Municipality shall not be liable in any civil action for damages for
property damage or personal injury resulting from a motor vehicle accident
k. Solicitors shall not install any traffic control devices.
l. Signs advertising the roadway solicitation are permitted, provided the
signs are of a temporary construction and breakaway to the extent
possible. Signs shall be a maximum of 16 square feet.
Signage shall be in accordance with the temporary signage standards
contained in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1988, or
superseding issue.
At least two warning signs shall be placed as follows:
1. "CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 500 FEET AHEAD"
2. The second sign following shall identify the name of the charitable
organization.
Signs shall not be permitted in the traveled way or in medians less
than eight feet in width. All signs warning, noticing or advertising a
solicitation shall be removed immediately following the solicitation
event.
m. The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any
debris from the right-of-way.
§ 3-24.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-24.6
AO:84
arising out of or in the course of a charitable organization soliciting
charitable donations.
§ 3-25. SKATEBOARDS PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 1848-01 § 1]
§ 3-26. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
§ 3-26.1. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 1968-05 § 2]
No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of any
crime against a minor as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., and who as a
result of such conviction is required to register with certain governmental
authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq. shall be permitted to reside
or live within 1,000 feet of any school, park, playground, beach, library,
church, children's recreation center, day-care center or any municipally
owned property within the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 3-26.2. Time for Compliance. [Ord. No. 1968-05 § 3]
A person who resides or lives within 1,000 feet of any school, park,
playground, beach, library, church, children's recreation center, day-care
a. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a skateboard on
streets, roadways, curbs and sidewalks adjacent to streets and
roadways, and public or quasi-public areas, including but not limited to
walkways, sidewalks, driveways, promenades and plazas on private
property adjacent to the streets and roadways described below:
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street Both From a point 351 feet west of South
Street to Wycoff Avenue
Abe Voorhees Drive
(Old Squan Plaza)
Both Entire length
V. Miller Preston Way Both Entire length
South Street Both From Main Street to Abe Voorhees
Drive
Broad Street Both From Main Street to Beams Terrace
Pearce Avenue Both From Main Street to a point 217 feet
north of Main Street
Parker Avenue Both From Main Street to a point 156 feet
north of Main Street
b. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a skateboard in a
reckless or hazardous fashion or in a manner creating interference with
pedestrian traffic.
c. No person operating a skateboard shall hold onto a motor vehicle or
bicycle while such motor vehicle or bicycle is in motion.
§ 3-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-26.2
AO:85
center or any municipally owned property within the Borough of Manasquan
shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice of this prohibition to
relocate their residence. Failure to move to a location which is in
compliance with this section within such sixty-day period shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 3-26.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 1968-05 § 4]
This section shall not apply to any person who has established residence in
the Borough of Manasquan prior to January 1, 2006.
§ 3-26.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1968-05 § 5]
Any violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of Section 1-5, General Penalty, of Chapter 1, General Provisions,
of the Code of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 3-27. GAMES AND CONTESTS INVOLVING THE CONSUMPTION
OF ALCOHOL VIEWABLE FROM A PUBLIC STREET, PUBLIC
SIDEWALK, PUBLIC WALKWAY OR PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE.
§ 3-27.1. Legislative Findings. [Ord. No. 1984-06 § 1]
The Borough of Manasquan desires to amend and supplement the Municipal
Code in respect to alcohol related games and contests.
Manasquan is a family community and a popular tourist destination for
families, and is visited each summer by thousands of families with children,
most of whom either park in residential neighborhoods to walk to the beach,
or to attend events in the community, or to visit friends or relatives.
Municipal officials, residents, and the local/regional/and state newspapers
have taken notice of the increasing frequency of occasions on which
occupants of summer rental properties in the community have begun
engaging in games and contests on their lawns and porches that involve
as an element of the game or contest the consumption or use of alcoholic
beverages, such as 'Beer Pong' and chugging contests.
The Mayor and Council find that the playing of such outdoor alcohol related
games and contests in full view can expose these families and their
impressionable children to foul language, excessive noise, rowdy and
disorderly behavior and to examples of consumption of alcohol under
circumstances that are detrimental and to which they ought not to be
exposed, and that can adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of
these children, their families and the general public.
§ 3-27.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1984-06 § 2]
No game or contest that involves, as an element of the said game or
contest, the consumption or use of an alcoholic beverage shall be permitted,
performed or engaged outside of a house, building or other structure in a
§ 3-26.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-27.2
AO:86
location and/or manner that participants in such game or contest can be
viewed from a public street, public sidewalk, public walkway or other public
thoroughfare.
§ 3-27.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1984-06 § 3]
Violators of any provision of this section shall be subject to the provisions
of Section 1-5, General Penalty, of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the
Municipal Code.
§ 3-28. PROHIBITED NUISANCES.
§ 3-28.1. Word Usage. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
The word person as used herein shall include the singular and plural and
shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club,
partnership, society, or any other form of association or organization known
as "group rentals.
§ 3-28.2. Prohibited Conduct; General. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause, suffer or permit to be
made or to be continued any behavior or loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
or any noise or act which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any other person within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Manasquan. Such conduct shall be
considered a nuisance.
§ 3-28.3. Nuisance Prohibitions Enumerated. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation
of this section, when the noise emanating from such acts is clearly audible
from at least 100 feet from the actor, source, or device, within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Manasquan. The enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive:
a. Radios, Stereos, Etc. The playing of any radio, television, stereo,
musical instrument or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound, in such a manner or in such volume, as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons
in any dwelling, hotel or other types of residence or to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or to play or
operate the same with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing of the person or persons who are in the room, chamber, or
venue in which said machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto.
b. Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing
on the public streets or yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing
at any other place, whether public or private, in such a manner and in
such volume and intensity to disturb the peace and quiet of the
§ 3-27.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-28.3
AO:87
neighborhood, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office or dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence
or of any persons in the vicinity.
c. The shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors, in such a manner and
in such volume and intensity to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office or dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence or
of any persons in the vicinity.
d. Loudspeakers and Amplifiers for Advertising. The use, operation, or
permitting the playing, use or operation of any radio, television, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure, store
or establishment.
e. Construction. The operation of any equipment used in commercial
construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets or appurtenances thereto, in residential or
commercial land use categories on weekdays between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, or between 6:00 p.m. Saturday
night and 8:00 a.m. Monday morning and on legal holidays, except in
the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety
and then only with permission from Mayor and Council.
f. Landscaping Equipment. The operation of power mowers and power
tools used in landscaping outdoors between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day.
g. Loading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening, or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans or similar objects
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, in such
a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons
in any office or dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence or of any
persons in the vicinity.
h. Refuse Compacting Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle which can compact refuse, and which creates, during
the compacting cycle a disturbing noise between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. the following day in residential use districts.
i. Vehicle Repairs or Testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing
any motor vehicle, off-road vehicle or motorboat in or near a residential
use district in such a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office or dwelling, hotel or any other type of
residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
j. Standing Motor Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of a
motor vehicle whose gross motor vehicle weight is in excess of 10,000
pounds or any attached auxiliary equipment for a period longer than
§ 3-28.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 3-28.3
AO:88
§ 3-28.4. Prevailing Time. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
The hours referred to in this section shall be prevailing time, i.e. either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time.
§ 3-28.5. Persons Affected. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
This section is intended to apply and to bind the owners, tenants, occupants,
guests and all other persons as heretofore defined within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Manasquan. This section shall not apply to
representatives and employees of the Borough of Manasquan performing
tasks on official business of the Borough of Manasquan, or for specific
activities authorized by Mayor and Council.
§ 3-28.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Code Enforcement
Department of the Borough of Manasquan to determine whether or not this
section has been and is being complied with and to enforce the provisions
of this section against any person violating the same.
§ 3-28.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2051-09 § 3; Ord. No.
2181-15; Ord. No. 2185-15]
Any Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Manasquan or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough may make a
complaint in Municipal Court of the Borough of Manasquan for any
violations of this section or any subsection, paragraph or provision thereof.
three minutes in any hour while such vehicle is stationary on a public
right- of-way in a residential district, or is on private property in a
residential or commercial zone and is not within a completely enclosed
structure.
k. Bells and Alarms. The sounding or permitting the sound of any exterior
building alarm on any building or motor vehicle unless such burglar
alarm shall terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its being
activated.
l. Horns, Signal Devices, Etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or any other vehicle on any
street or public place of the Borough of Manasquan, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any horn or signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or the sounding of any said horn or
signaling device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
or the use of said horn or signaling device when traffic is for any reason
held up; or the use of any horn, whistle or device operated by engine
exhaust.
m. The keeping of any animal or bird, which shall emit frequent or longcontinued
noises.
§ 3-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-28.7
AO:89
Upon conviction for each and every violation, the person committing, taking
part in or assisting in such violation or violations shall be liable for a
minimum fine of $450 and a maximum fine of $2,000.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [1972 Code § 37A-1; Ord. No. 1533-91]
The purpose of this section is to promote the public safety and welfare by
alleviating conditions which lead to an unnecessary drain on manpower,
time, facilities and finances of the Borough and its Police Department
and Fire Department by establishing standards and regulations concerning
the installation, operation and maintenance of alarm systems within the
Borough.
§ 4-1.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 37A-2; Ord. No. 1533-91]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — Shall mean the fee payable to the Borough for
excessive false alarm activations or other violations as set forth in this
section.
ALARM AGENT — Shall mean any person or entity owning or employed
by an alarm business, whose duties include the altering, selling, servicing,
responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm system or device.
ALARM BUSINESS — Shall mean any business which engages in the
activity of installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing or responding to an alarm system or device which causes any
of these activities to take place. This definition shall not include retail
department stores which only sell and do not service or install alarm
systems or devices.
ALARM CONSOLE — Shall mean any console or control panel or devices
giving a visual or audio response, or both, and located within the confines
of the Manasquan Police Department.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Shall mean any alarm, device or combination of
devices installed for or in one or more buildings, boats or vehicles within
the Borough.
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any type of equipment, device or an
assembly of any equipment or devices designed to signal the presence of
an emergency or hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police and
fire departments or other emergency services may be expected to respond.
AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICE — Shall mean any device, such as a bell,
siren, whistle, horn or gong, employed to call attention to or provide
§ 3-28.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-1.2
AO:90
warning of intrusion by any person or by fire, smoke, flood, emergency or
other peril, whether the same provides a visual or audio response, alarm or
warning, if such warning is plainly audible across real property boundaries
or at any point 50 feet beyond the interior walls of the house, apartment,
offices, store, industrial building or other structure or at any point 50 feet
beyond the boat or motor vehicle in or on which the alarm system has been
placed.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICE SYSTEM — Shall mean any alarm device
which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct
connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message coded signal
indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is
designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION — Shall mean a communications center receiving
signals from an alarm signaling device which is operated for its subscribers,
and which will take appropriate action upon receipt of an emergency signal
from an alarm signaling device, including the relaying of such information
directly to the communication center of the Police Department.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean any member of the Police
Department or Code Enforcement Department, who may also function as
the alarm system inspector.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm device which automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT CONNECT — Shall mean any alarm signaling system other than
an automatic dialing device which, when activated by an alarm signaling
device, transmits a signal directly to the communications center or the
Police Department.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the actuation of an alarm system by causes
other than those to which the alarm system was designed or intended to
respond.
SUBSCRIBER — Shall mean any person or entity that buys, leases or
otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter either contracts
with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device,
or performs such service him/herself.
THIRD PARTY ALARM — Shall mean an alarm system whereby a signal is
sent to a contractor who transmits the occurrence of an alarm to the Police
Department by telephone.
§ 4-1.3. License and Registration Required; Content; Term;
Revocation; Fees. [1972 Code § 37A-3; Ord. No. 1533-91]
a. Prohibition. No person shall operate an audible alarm, dial alarm, panel
alarm or third party alarm within the Borough without first registering
the alarm system as provided in this section, except as follows:
§ 4-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.3
AO:91
§ 4-1.4. Exterior Audible Alarms. [1972 Code § 37A-4; Ord. No.
1533-91]
All audible signaling devices shall be equipped with a timing device to
limit the sounding of the signaling device to 10 minutes or less; provided,
however, that the device may be capable of automatically recycling for not
more than one period having a duration of 10 minutes or less.
1. An alarm system in a motor vehicle shall be exempt from
registration.
2. An alarm system in a boat shall be exempt from registration.
b. Contents of Alarm Registration Form. Each form shall contain the
following:
1. Name, address, and the business and residence telephone numbers
of the applicant.
2. Name, address and telephone number for the alarmed premises, if
other than that given for applicant.
3. Names addresses and residence telephone numbers of at least two
persons acquainted with the alarm system who can be contacted in
the event of an emergency or false alarm.
4. Type of alarm device.
5. Name, address and business telephone number of the installer.
6. Other information as may be required by the Chief of Police.
c. Registration and License Duration. Registration and licensing shall be
required only once for each alarm system; however, emergency
information must be updated as registration information becomes
obsolete.
d. Revocation. A license to operate an alarm within the Borough may be
revoked by the Borough Council after an administrative review of the
Police Committee, for failure to comply with the requirements of this
section, for negligence in the operation of an alarm system or for
improper installation or maintenance of an alarm system. Revocation of
a license to operate an alarm will result in a suspension of response to
alarms and the disconnection of the alarm (if applicable) from the panel
located at Police Headquarters. The Borough, its officials, employees
and agents shall not be held liable for failure to respond to alarms
which are operated by persons without a license or with a suspended
license.
e. Registration and License Fee. There shall be no fee to register and
obtain a license to operate an alarm system within the Borough.
§ 4-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-1.5
AO:92
§ 4-1.5. Automatic Dial Alarms. [1972 Code § 37A-5; Ord. No.
1533-91]
§ 4-1.6. Response Requirement. [1972 Code § 37A-6; Ord. No.
1533-91; Ord. No. 2180-15]
When an alarm activation is received by, or reported to, the Police
Department it shall be the responsibility of the subscriber or his/her agent
to respond within 30 minutes of being notified, to assist the Police in their
investigation of the alarm activation. A failure to respond will result in an
administrative fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. This fee shall be in addition
to any fees assessed for excessive false alarms.
§ 4-1.7. False Alarms. [1972 Code § 37A-7; Ord. No. 1533-91; Ord.
No. 2180-15]
a. Automatic dialing devices designed to transmit signals directly to the
Police Department shall be coded to dial a number specified by the
Chief of Police.
b. The contents of any recorded message from a dialer alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.
c. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the Police Department switchboard in the event that a
false alarm occurs.
d. The sensory mechanism of a dial alarm shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and to prevent its activation by impulses due
to pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noise,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows, or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
a. Each license shall be allowed to incur up to five false alarms during a
twelve-month period. The twelve-month period shall run from January
1st to December 31st of each year. Alarms during the first 30 days of
installation will not be counted in order to allow installers to correct
problems with the installation or equipment.
b. Administrative Fees. An administrative fee shall be imposed for false
alarms in excess of the five alarms allowed under the preceding section
as follows:
6th to 7th false alarms: See Chapter 16, Fees.
8th to 9th false alarms: See Chapter 16, Fees.
10th or more false alarms: See Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 4-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.7
AO:93
§ 4-1.8. Alarm Console License. [1972 Code § 37A-8; Ord. No.
1533-91]
c. No-Response Category. Following the 15th false alarm within the
twelve-month period, the Police Department shall have the option to
notify the subscriber and the appropriate alarm company if known, that
the subscriber has been placed in the no-response category. After
proper notification to the subscriber, the Borough shall not be liable for
any loss which results from the Police not responding to any alarm at
that location.
d. Response Status Reinstatement. In order for the subscriber to be
reinstated to a response status, the subscriber must provide written
proof to the Chief of Police that the alarm has been repaired and is
operating properly. Approval may be given on a trial basis for 60 days.
e. Multiple Alarms in Short Period. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where
two or more false alarms are received within a short duration of time by
the Police Department due to equipment malfunction only, the Chief of
Police, in his discretion, may count the incidents as one false alarm for
the administrative fee provision of this section.
f. Appeal to Police Committee. Whenever the Chief of Police (or his
designee) is empowered to make a decision with respect to: the
installation, operation and maintenance of any alarm equipment; or
with respect to the issuance or denial of any application relating
thereto; or in the imposition of any administrative fee, any person or
entity aggrieved by the decision may, within 10 days following the
decision, file a written appeal therefrom with the Police Committee,
which shall review the appeal and conduct a hearing to affirm, modify
or reverse the decision.
a. Alarm Console License. There is hereby established a police alarm
console license which shall be granted only after advertisement for bids
as required by the Local Public Contracts Law. Any such licensee shall
have exclusive use and control of the alarm console, except for the use
by the Borough of Manasquan, and such licensee will be responsible, at
no cost to the Borough, for the establishment, construction and
installation of the console containing equipment and being of a design
approved by the Chief of Police or his designated representative and for
the care, maintenance and management thereafter of the console, if
necessary, under the supervision of the Chief of Police or his designee at
no cost to the Borough. The licensee will assume all liability for the
police alarm console and shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Borough, its officials, employees and agents for any act of whatsoever
nature related to the alarm console system.
b. Length of License. The alarm console license shall be for a term of three
years.
§ 4-1.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-1.8
AO:94
§ 4-2. (RESERVED)
§ 4-3. AMUSEMENT GAMES AND DEVICES.
§ 4-3.1. Boundaries Described. [1972 Code § 41-1; Ord. No. 963;
Ord. No. 1010]
It is hereby determined, declared and found that this municipality
constitutes a seashore resort, with part thereof constituting an amusement
or entertainment area according to the customary understanding of the
terms in the community and which the part thereof is more particularly
described as follows:
All that area bounded on the west by the eastern boundary of First Avenue;
on the east by the monumental beachfront line; on the north by the
northerly boundary line of B-2 Zone north of East Main Street as shown on
the Zoning Map of the Borough of Manasquan; and on the south by Brielle
Road.
§ 4-3.2. License Required. [1972 Code § 41-2; Ord. No. 963]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
amusement game or games or amusement device for business purposes
within this Borough without first obtaining a license from the Mayor and
Council.
§ 4-3.3. Definitions. [1972 Code § 41-3; Ord. No. 963]
As used in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Shall include any machine or apparatus, whether
coin-operated or not, which is employed for amusement or skill and for the
playing of which a fee is charged and regardless of whether or not any
prizes or things of value are awarded to participants. This definition shall
include but shall not be limited to such devices as pool and billiard tables,
bowling alleys, pinball machines, shuffleboards and electronic games of
c. Determination of Licensee. The alarm console license as provided for
herein shall be awarded by the Borough Council after advertisement for
bids as required by the Local Public Contracts Law.
d. Alarm Console Maintenance and Repairs. The licensee shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the alarm console and shall provide
for twenty-four-hour repair service, at no cost to the Borough.
Emergency repair service numbers must be provided to the Police
Department and all response must be within two hours of notification.
e. Registration of Subscribers to Alarm Board. Subscribers to the
licensee's alarm console shall meet all requirements of, and be subject
to, all provisions of this section including but not limited to, registration
requirements and administrative penalties for excessive false alarms.
§ 4-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.3
AO:95
skill or chance. The term "amusement device" shall not include vending
machines which have no game or amusement feature, or music-producing
apparatus.
AMUSEMENT GAMES — Shall include all games as defined in the
Amusement Games Licensing of New Jersey, Chapter 109, P.L. 1959, as well
as all games for which a fee is charged and for which no prizes or things of
value are awarded participants.
§ 4-3.4. Application for License. [1972 Code § 41-4; Ord. No. 963;
Ord. No. 967; Ord. No. 1570-92; Ord. No. 1735-98 §§ 1 — 3]
§ 4-3.5. Fees. [1972 Code § 41-5; Ord. No. 963; Ord. No. 1005; Ord.
No. 1229; Ord. No. 1362; Ord. No. 1436; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Municipal Clerk a written
application in a form to be provided by the Borough and, where
applicable, in accordance with the New Jersey Amusement Games
Licensing Law and the rules and regulations of the Amusement Games
Control Commission. All applications shall contain the following
information:
1. Name and address of the applicant and, if a corporation, the names
of its principal officers, its principal office and the agent for service
of process.
2. The location and description of the premises where any amusement
game or amusement device is to be located.
3. A description of each amusement game and each amusement
device, together with the amount charged for the use of same.
b. No license shall be issued except to persons of good moral character
and who are approved by the Borough Council.
c. Subject to the provisions of Amusement Games Licensing Law of New
Jersey, one license may issue for each location where amusement games
or devices are to be employed.
d. Three amusement games or devices shall be permitted on any licensed
premises, except for those located within the area described in
subsection 4-3.1.
a. The following fees shall be charged for the type of licenses set forth as
follows:
1. Games of skill or chance subject to Chapter 109, P.L. 1959:
(a) Stop and go: See Chapter 16, Fees.
(b) Arcade games: Each 50 units or any part thereof: See Chapter
16, Fees.
§ 4-3.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-3.5
AO:96
§ 4-3.6. Supervision of Devices; Inspections; Minors; Gambling.
[1972 Code § 41-6; Ord. No. 963]
§ 4-3.7. Forfeiture of License. [1972 Code § 41-7; Ord. No. 963]
In the event that any licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this
section or the Amusement Games Licensing Law or the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Amusement Games Control
Commissioner or the terms of such license, in addition to suffering any
other penalties which may be imposed, will forfeit any license issued to the
licensee under this section.
(c) Any other games permitted under Chapter 109, P.L. 1959: See
Chapter 16, Fees.
2. Games of skill or chance not subject to Chapter 109, P.L. 1959: The
fee stated in Chapter 16, Fees, per year for each amusement game
or device except in the area described in subsection 4-3.1, where
the fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees for each unit of 25
devices or any part thereof.
b. Each applicant shall pay a fee as established by the New Jersey State
Police for fingerprinting and issuance of identification cards, when
required under the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Amusement Games Control Commissioner for each licensee and
employee of the licensee.
a. Amusement games and devices shall be kept and placed in plain view of
any person or persons who may frequent and be in any place or place of
business where such devices or games are used. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize or license any gambling device or game
not specifically permitted by the laws of New Jersey. No windows, doors
or other openings in buildings where such devices or games are located
shall be in any way obstructed so as to limit the view of the games or
devices from outside the building.
b. The Mayor and Council shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all amusement games and devices located in the Borough.
c. The Chief of Police shall inspect or cause to be inspected any place or
building in which amusement games or devices are operating and shall
inspect each device or game at least twice in each month that the same
are in operation.
d. Minors under the age of 18 years shall, under no circumstances, be
permitted to frequent, loiter or remain in any premises where pool,
billiards and similar table games are provided for public use and for a
fee or charge, except with the express consent of the parent, guardian
or other person having lawful custody of such minor.
e. No gambling between participants in any amusement games or the
users of any amusement device shall be permitted at any time.
§ 4-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4
AO:97
§ 4-4. GAMES OF CHANCE ON SUNDAYS.
§ 4-4.1. Sunday Games Authorized. [1972 Code § 41-8]
Pursuant to the rules of the Legalized Games of Chance Commission to
the State of New Jersey, the conduct of such games on Sundays is hereby
specifically authorized.
§ 4-5. DOOR-TO-DOOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.25
§ 4-5.1. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 1]
It is the purpose of this section to protect the safety of residents of the
Borough of Manasquan, to prevent fraud from being perpetrated upon them
and to protect their privacy, while balancing such interests against the
opportunity for commercial, political, religious, charitable, and nonprofit
organizations to exercise their rights of free speech.
§ 4-5.2. Word Usage and Definitions. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 2]
a. Word Usage. For the purpose of this section, certain words or phrases
shall be interpreted in the following manner:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
2. Words used in the singular include the plural, and conversely words
in the plural include the singular.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
4. The use of the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
b. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person or entity seeking to obtain a permit
for solicitation from the Borough of Manasquan.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Manasquan, Monmouth
County, New Jersey.
EMPLOYER — Shall mean any individual or entity providing
compensation, in any form whatsoever, to an individual engaged in
solicitation within the Borough of Manasquan.
PERMIT — Shall mean a permit for solicitation issued by the Borough
of Manasquan pursuant to the provisions of this section.
25.Editor's Note: Former Section 4-5, Canvassers and Solicitors, previously codified herein
and containing portions of 1972 Code §§ 69-1 through 69-12 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 1948-05.
§ 4-4 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-5.2
AO:98
§ 4-5.3. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 3]
No person or entity shall engage in solicitation within the Borough without
first having obtained a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Failure to obtain a permit prior to solicitation shall constitute a violation of
this section. Each day of solicitation without a valid permit shall constitute
a separate violation of the section.
§ 4-5.4. Exemptions from Provisions of Section. [Ord. No. 1939-04
§ 4]
Door-to-door canvassing, solicitation, campaigning, advocacy, education,
proselytizing, handbill distribution, or other entry upon private property
by individuals representing any entity which (1) qualifies for tax-exempt
status under the Internal Revenue Code; (2) qualified for exemption from
property tax under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6; (3) qualifies for exemption from sales
tax under N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9; or, (4) was created under or is otherwise
subject to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section. Solicitation of donations by
any such organizations shall not constitute solicitation as defined in this
section. Individuals representing such organizations may request a copy of
the Borough's "Do Not Solicit" list for their information, but no penalties
shall be imposed if they enter in or upon a property identified on the "Do
Not Solicit" list.
§ 4-5.5. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 5; Ord. No.
2063-10 § 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
SOLICITATION — Shall mean to go in or upon private property in
the Borough of Manasquan without having been invited to do so by
the owner or occupant, for the purpose of (1) advertising, promoting,
or selling any product, goods, or service; or (2) conducting market
research or a market or opinion survey regarding commercial products
or services. By way of illustration and not of limitation, solicitors shall
include peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors
of goods or services. Solicitation shall also include the placement upon
private property of handbills or other written material advertising
goods or services for sale. Solicitation shall also include the sale of
goods or services which the solicitor promises to donate or delivery to
a charitable or other nonprofit institution on behalf of the purchaser.
Solicitation shall not include the entry upon private property without
prior invitation of the owner or occupant by any person representing
an entity which (1) qualifies for tax exempt status under the Internal
Revenue Code; (2) qualifies for exemption from property tax under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6; (3) qualified for exemption from sales tax under
N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9; or (4) was created under or is otherwise subject to
the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes.
a. Any person seeking to engage in solicitation within the Borough shall
apply to the Police Department for solicitation permit.
§ 4-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.5
AO:99
§ 4-5.6. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 6]
The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in charge of the Police
Department, shall issue a permit and identification badge upon completion
of the solicitation permit application form. The permit and badge shall be
issued to any and all applicants who complete the application form and
provide photo identification. A separate permit and badge shall be issued to
b. An applicant for a solicitation permit shall be required to provide the
following information in writing:
1. The name of each individual who will engage in solicitation within
the Borough;
2. The present address of each individual who will engage in
solicitation within the Borough.
3. As to each such individual, whether the individual has ever been
convicted of a crime, and if so, the nature of the conviction, where
convicted, the date of conviction, and the penalty imposed;
4. The employer or organization for which solicitation will be made;
5. The address of the employer or organization;
6. The telephone number of the employer or organization;
7. The name of the contact person at the offices of the employer or
organization;
8. The type of goods or services to be sold, or the type of survey or
research to be conducted;
9. As to any vehicle to be used by the applicant, the make, model,
year, color and license plate information of the vehicle; and
10. The expected dates of solicitation within the Borough.
c. An applicant for a solicitation permit shall also be required to produce
photo identification, which the Police Department will photocopy and
attach to the application form.
d. The application form shall be signed by the applicant, under penalty of
perjury.
e. Application forms, including photographic identification, shall be
retained by the Police Department.
f. A fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be paid for a solicitation
permit.
g. Misrepresentation, false statements, or failure to disclose information
on the solicitation permit application form shall constitute a violation of
this section.
§ 4-5.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-5.6
AO:100
each individual who engages in solicitation within the Borough. The permit
shall be signed by the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in charge
of the Police Department. The permit shall state the name of the individual,
the business or organization for which solicitation is made, and the date the
permit was issued.
§ 4-5.7. Carrying and Displaying Solicitation Permit and Badge.
[Ord. No. 1939-04 § 7]
Each individual engaging in solicitation within the Borough shall carry
the permit issued to him upon his person and display his badge at all
times while soliciting within the Borough, and shall produce the permit and
badge if requested to do so by the police or any resident. Failure to carry
the permit and/or display the badge during solicitation shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 4-5.8. Time Limits on Solicitation. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 8]
§ 4-5.9. "Do Not Solicit" List. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 9]
a. A solicitation permit shall be effective for three months after the date it
is issued. Solicitation without a valid permit in effect shall constitute a
violation of this section.
b. Solicitation shall take place within the Borough only between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Solicitors are encouraged to wear reflective
clothing and/or to carry flashlights if soliciting after dark.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this section, any
person or entity owning property within the Borough may register such
property on a "Do Not Solicit" list.
b. Registration for the "Do Not Solicit" list shall be made as follows:
1. The "Do Not Solicit" list shall be maintained by the Police
Department.
2. It shall consist solely of property addresses, and shall include no
further identifying information concerning the ownership of each
property.
3. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Police Department of any change
in ownership of property within the Borough. The Police
Department shall remove from the "Do Not Solicit" list any
property which has changed ownership.
c. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in charge of the Police
Department, shall provide a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" list to each and
every applicant to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this section.
Upon request, the Chief of Police or his alternate shall also make
available a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" list to any individual or entity
otherwise exempt from the provisions of this section which intends to
§ 4-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.9
AO:101
§ 4-5.10. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1939-04 § 10]
For a violation of any provision of this section, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction thereof, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment
for up to 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
or any combination thereof. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 4-6. HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS.26
§ 4-6.1. License Required. [1976 Code § 69-14; Ord. No. 1948-05
§ 2]
No person, firm or corporation shall hawk or peddle on a public street,
any goods, wares or merchandise of any description from a peddler's cart,
wagon or automobile, without first procuring a license from the Chief
of Police in the manner and under the conditions hereinafter prescribed;
provided that this section shall not apply to any person engaged in the
delivery of goods, wares or merchandise in the regular course of business
to the premises of persons ordering same.
§ 4-6.2. Application. [1972 Code § 69-15]
Each applicant for such a license shall give to the Chief of Police, in writing,
his name, address and such personal data as is required to identify him,
together with the nature of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold and
any prior convictions of crime.
§ 4-6.3. Issuance of License. [1972 Code § 69-16]
Each such applicant, upon paying the fee required by this section, shall be
issued a license by the Chief of Police; provided, however, that no person
who has been convicted of crime shall be issued any such license.
§ 4-6.4. Fee and License Term. [1972 Code § 69-17; Ord. No.
1948-05 § 3; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The fee for the license required by this section shall be as stated in Chapter
16, Fees. The license shall be effective for three months after the date that
it is issued.
engage in door to door canvassing, solicitation, campaigning, advocacy,
education, proselytizing, or handbill distribution.
d. Solicitation at any address identified on the "Do Not Solicit" list shall
constitute a violation of this section. Each and every solicitation at an
address identified on the "Do Not Solicit" list shall constitute a separate
violation of the section.
26.Editor's Note: See subsection 3-20.1, Parking on Certain Streets Prohibited for Selling
Merchandise from Vehicles.
§ 4-5.9 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-6.5
AO:102
§ 4-6.5. Exhibition of License. [1972 Code § 69-18]
Each licensee shall carry the license at all times and shall exhibit it to any
person upon request.
§ 4-6.6. Compliance. [1972 Code § 69-19]
No such license shall be issued to any person who has not complied with
any law of the State of New Jersey or ordinances of the Borough.
§ 4-6.7. Private Residence Calls Restricted. [1972 Code § 69-20]
No person, firm or corporation, whether licensed or not, shall visit or
call at any private residence for the purpose of peddling goods, wares or
merchandise when banned by the householder by a sign bearing words to
the effect that peddlers are not invited or are prohibited.
§ 4-6.8. Revocation of License. [1972 Code § 69-21]
Any such license so issued may be revoked by the Chief of Police for
violation of this section or any other ordinance of the Borough regulating
peddlers or for any false information given in the application.
§ 4-6.9. Prohibited Hours for Peddling. [1972 Code § 69-22; Ord.
No. 1214; Ord. No. 1948-05 § 4]
No person shall hawk or peddle wares, goods or merchandise before the
hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m.
§ 4-6.10. Supplemental to Other Provisions. [1972 Code § 69-24]
This section is in addition to any other ordinance or ordinances regulating
peddlers, transient merchants, itinerant vendors of merchandise,
solicitation or canvassing within the Borough.
§ 4-7. MASSAGE THERAPY.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 74-1; Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No.
2116-12 § 2]
As used in this section:
LICENSEE — Shall mean any person who holds a license or certification
to practice massage and bodywork therapies pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:11-68 et seq.
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPIES or MASSAGE AND BODYWORK
— Shall mean systems of activity of structured touch which include, but
are not limited to, holding, applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing
soft tissue of the body by manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic,
auditory and palpating skills to assess the body for purposes of applying
therapeutic massage and bodywork principles. Such application may
§ 4-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.1
AO:103
include, but is not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external applications, explaining
and describing myofascial movement, self-care and stress management as
it relates to massage and bodywork therapies. Massage and bodywork
therapy practices are designed to affect the soft tissue of the body for the
purpose of promoting and maintaining the health and well-being of the
client. Massage and bodywork therapies do not include the diagnosis of
illness, disease, impairment or disability.
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPIST — Shall mean a person licensed
or certified to practice massage and bodywork therapies pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:11-68 et seq.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment or place of
business wherein massage and bodywork therapies as to all or any one or
more of the subjects and methods of treatments defined in "massage and
bodywork therapies" is administered or used.
§ 4-7.2. License or Certification Required. [1972 Code § 74-2; Ord.
No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 3]
§ 4-7.3. Application for Permit. [1972 Code § 74-3; Ord. No. 1037;
Ord. No. 2116-12 § 4]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in the practice
or attempt to practice massage and bodywork therapies in the Borough
of Manasquan without a license or certification issued pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:11-68 et seq.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or conduct any
massage establishment:
1. Without first obtaining a permit from the Municipal Clerk in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this section;
2. Which does not conform to the sanitary provisions herein
contained; and
3. Which employs or permits any person to work as a massage and
bodywork therapist who does not hold a license or certification
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
45:11-68 et seq.
a. An applicant for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
submit the following information:
1. The type of permit sought i.e. whether for a new massage
establishment, a renewal of a massage establishment permit or a
change in corporate structure.
2. The type of ownership of the business i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
§ 4-7.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-7.3
AO:104
§ 4-7.4. Inspection; Fees. [1972 Code § 74-4; Ord. No. 1037; Ord.
No. 2116-12 § 5; Ord. No. 2180-15]
3. If applicant is an individual, the applicant's name, residential
address, telephone number, date and place of birth, and the name
as it shall appear on the permit.
4. If applicant is a corporation, the full names, residence addresses,
dates and places of birth of each major officer and each
stockholder, the names and addresses of the registered agent and
the address of the principal office.
5. Whether the individual applicant and/or each major officer and
each major stockholder has even been arrested or convicted of a
crime, the date of the arrest, the crime or charge involved and the
disposition thereof.
6. The name and address of any and all previous locations the
applicant has owned operated or been employed by that provided
massage therapy or similar services.
7. Whether the applicant or any major officer or stockholder of the
applicant has ever been denied a massage therapy license,
registration or permit and the location, date and reason for the
denial.
8. The address of the premises where the permit is to be used,
whether the applicant leases or owns the premises, and
information regarding any mortgage on the premises.
9. The names, addresses and dates of birth for all employees of the
massage establishment.
b. The applicant must furnish copies of all massage and bodywork therapy
licenses and certificates held by all massage therapists employed at or
providing massage or bodywork therapy at the establishment.
a. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage
establishment shall submit an application to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall refer all such applications to the Chief of Police, Building
Department and Health Department for an appropriate inspection.
b. Each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
c. The Chief of Police, Building Department and Health Department shall
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage
establishment and shall make written recommendations to the
Municipal Clerk concerning compliance with the codes that they
administer. No massage establishment shall be issued a permit or be
operated, established or maintained in the Borough unless an
inspection by the Building Department and Health Department reveals
§ 4-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.4
AO:105
§ 4-7.5. Issuance; Appeals; Term of Permit. [1972 Code § 74-5; Ord.
No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 6]
§ 4-7.6. Display of Permit and License/Certification. [1972 Code
§ 74-6; Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 7]
that the establishment complies with the minimum requirements of the
Building and Health Codes for businesses operating in the Borough of
Manasquan. In addition, the establishment must comply with each of
the following minimum requirements:
1. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
2. Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided
for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event that the
male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate
bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be
provided.
3. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
4. Adequate hand washing facilities shall be provided at convenient
locations as necessary to maintain clean hands and arms of all
employees during hours of operation.
a. Upon payment of the application fee, submitting of all information
required by application and upon proper inspection, a permit shall be
granted immediately if all requirements described herein are met and
unless it appears that any such applicant has deliberately falsified the
application or the record of such applicant reveals a conviction of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude.
b. Any person denied a permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal to
the Borough Council in writing stating reasons why the permit should
be granted. The Council may grant or deny the permit. The Council may
also review any determination of the Chief of Police granting or denying
a license on its own motion.
c. All permits issued hereunder are nontransferable; provided, however,
that a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted
pursuant to the provisions hereof.
d. All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be for a term
commencing on January 1st of each year and terminating on December
31st of the same year. The permit application fees provided for in
subsection 4-7.4 shall not be prorated in the event that an application
for a permit is made at any time after January 1st of any year.
§ 4-7.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-7.6
AO:106
§ 4-7.7. Change in Location. [1972 Code § 74-7; Ord. No. 1037; Ord.
No. 2116-12 § 8; Ord. No. 2180-15]
A change of location of the massage establishment shall be approved by the
Chief of Police, provided that all applicable ordinances are complied with
and the change of location fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, is first paid.
§ 4-7.8. Massage Therapist Employees to Obtain License or
Certification; Responsibility of Permit Holder. [1972 Code § 74-8;
Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 9]
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit for a massage
establishment to ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist
and each person working as a massage therapist at said massage
establishment shall first have obtained a valid license or certification
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:11-68 et seq.
§ 4-7.9. Notice to Permit Holder of Revocation Hearing. [1972 Code
§ 74-11; Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 10]
§ 4-7.10. Grounds for Revocation of Permit. [1972 Code § 74-12;
Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No. 2116-12 § 11]
The permit for operation of a massage establishment may be revoked upon
one or more of the following grounds:
a. Every person or business to whom a permit shall have been granted
shall display the permit in a conspicuous place at such person's place of
business.
b. Every licensee employed by or providing massage and bodywork
therapy at a massage establishment shall display his license or
certification in a conspicuous place in his principal office, place of
business or employment.
a. No permit shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall
have been held before the Borough Council to determine just cause for
such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and
served at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing therein. The
notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of
such a permit and shall designate the time and place where such
hearing will be had.
b. The notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering same
personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or
residence of the permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age
and discretion. In the event that the permit holder cannot be found and
the service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner
herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be sent through certified
mail, addressed to the permit holder at his place of business or
residence at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing.
§ 4-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.10
AO:107
§ 4-7.11. Exceptions. [1972 Code § 74-13; Ord. No. 1037]
The requirements of this section shall have no application and no effect
upon and shall not be construed as applying to physicians, surgeons,
chiropractors, osteopaths or any nurse working under the supervision of a
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice the
respective professions in this State.
§ 4-8. (RESERVED)
§ 4-9. ENCUMBRANCES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. [Ord. No. 2063-10
§ 6]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to
erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street, sidewalk, right-ofway,
or in any other public way or place, in the Borough any structure
without first obtaining a license from the Municipal Clerk specifying the
exact location of such structure.
§ 4-9.1. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2063-10 § 6]
Application for a license shall be made, in writing, to the Borough Council
upon such form as may be provided and shall contain the name and address
of the applicant and the exact location of the proposed encumbrance, and
shall be signed by the applicant.
a. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for the
permit.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the permitted business in the Borough.
c. Any violation of this section.
d. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, or any crime involving dishonesty.
e. Fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising, the prescription
of medicines, drugs or the practice of any other licensed profession
without legal authority therefor.
f. That the permit holder is guilty of willful negligence in the practice of
massage or has been guilty of employing, allowing or permitting any
unlicensed or uncertified person to perform massage in his or her
establishment.
g. Conducting the permitted business in the Borough in the unlawful
manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
§ 4-7.10 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-9.2
AO:108
§ 4-9.2. Liability; Fees; Term of License. [Ord. No. 2063-10 § 6; Ord.
No. 2180-15]
As an express condition of the acceptance of such license, the applicant
agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough, its officers, directors
and employees against any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and
costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by
any person or as the result of the installation, use or maintenance within
the Borough.
As stated in Chapter 16, Fees, the fee to be charged for the encumbrance
shall be calculated by the Tax Assessor based upon the size of the
encumbrance located upon the public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other
public way or place.
Licenses shall be valid for the calendar year in which the license is issued
and may be renewable with the Borough's permission and with the payment
of the annual fee. License agreements in excess of one year may be granted
at the Borough's discretion and subject to a separate written license
agreement.
§ 4-9.3. Late Fee. [Ord. No. 2063-10 § 6]
If the license fee is not paid on or before the due date, a late fee equal to
10% of the amount due and owing shall be immediately assessed.
§ 4-10. NEWSRACKS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 4-10.1. Findings. [1972 Code § 75-1; Ord. No. 1574-92]
§ 4-10.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 75-2; Ord. No. 1574-92]
As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean the person, firm, corporation or other entity
responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.
a. The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way
present an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of
persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons
entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing
essential utility, traffic control and emergency services.
b. Newsracks so located cause an inconvenience or danger to persons
using public rights-of-way, and unsightly newsracks located therein,
constitute public nuisances.
c. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are
in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the
public health and general welfare of persons in the Borough of
Manasquan in their use of public rights-of-way.
§ 4-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.2
AO:109
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display
and sale of newspapers or other news periodicals.
PARKWAY — Shall mean that area between the sidewalks and the curb of
any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of
the roadway and property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include
any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any surface provided for the exclusive use of
pedestrians.
STREET — Shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways,
alleys and sidewalks.
§ 4-10.3. Permit Required. [1972 Code § 75-3; Ord. No. 1574-92]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to
erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or sidewalk, or in
any other public way or place, in the Borough any newsrack without first
having obtained a permit from the Municipal Clerk specifying the exact
location of such rack(s). One permit may be issued to include any number
of newsracks, and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 4-10.4. Application for Permit. [1972 Code § 75-4; Ord. No.
1574-92]
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Municipal
Clerk upon such form as shall be provided, and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of the newsrack, and
shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 4-10.5. Liability; Fees; Term of Permit. [1972 Code § 75-5; Ord.
No. 1574-92; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee
thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough, its
officers, directors, and employees against any loss or liability or
damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and
for property damage sustained by any person or as the result of the
installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack within the Borough.
b. Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
without prior inspection of the location but such newsrack or newsracks
and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned
upon observance of the provisions of this section and such reasonable
rules and regulations as may be established by the Borough Council.
Permits shall be issued within 72 hours after the application has been
§ 4-10.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-10.5
AO:110
§ 4-10.6. Standards for Installation and Maintenance. [1972 Code
§ 75-6; Ord. No. 1574-92; Ord. No. 1578-92]
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
filed. An annual permit fee for the first newsrack and for each additional
newsrack is required as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
c. Permits shall be valid for the calendar year in which the permit is issued
and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original
applications and upon payment of the permit fee.
a. No newsrack shall exceed 50 inches in height, 32 inches in width, or 24
inches in thickness.
b. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the
newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
c. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coinreturn
mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
d. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund
in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism.
e. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
1. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
2. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint
in the visible painted areas thereof.
3. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
4. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration.
5. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free
of tears, peeling or fading.
6. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
§ 4-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.7
AO:111
§ 4-10.7. Location and Placement of Newsracks. [1972 Code § 75-7;
Ord. No. 1574-92; Ord. No. 1578-92]
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of
a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection:
§ 4-11. PRIVATELY OWNED OPEN-AIR PARKING LOTS.
§ 4-11.1. Definition. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020]
As used in this section:
OPEN-AIR PARKING LOT — Shall mean any open-air plot of ground, lot or
land where motor vehicles are parked, kept or located for a parking fee,
charge or other consideration.
§ 4-11.2. License Required. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020]
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a
privately owned open-air parking lot without first having obtained a license.
§ 4-11.3. Exemption. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020]
This section shall not apply to parking areas where parking privileges
are permitted only for employees, customers, clients or other persons on
business visits of businesses, industries or professional establishments,
provided that no charge or fee is required and that no overnight parking
is permitted. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to premises
utilized in connection with any business of automobile repair, service or
storage.
a. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or
over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
b. No newsracks shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance
endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or
location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation
purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic including any legally marked or stopped vehicle, the
ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the
use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other
objects permitted at or near the location.
c. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, anchored to the ground or
otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right-of-way,
except to other newsracks.
§ 4-10.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-11.4
AO:112
§ 4-11.4. Application Information. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No.
1020]
The following information shall be provided with each application for a
license under this section:
§ 4-11.5. Investigation. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020]
Upon receipt of an application, the Code Enforcement Official shall refer
it to the Police Chief and Fire Inspector for investigation and report as to
compliance with the terms of this section and all other applicable Borough
ordinances.
§ 4-11.6. Construction and Maintenance. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord.
No. 1020; Ord. No. 1252]
All open-air parking lots for motor vehicles shall be constructed and
maintained as follows:
a. Tax map description of the premises to be used as a parking lot.
b. Name and address of the property owner.
c. Name and address of the applicant.
d. Evidence of the consent of the owner if the applicant is not the owner.
e. Sketch of location of premises showing accurately the area to be used,
adjacent buildings, streets and all driveways within 100 feet of the exit
and entrance to the premises. The sketch shall also show the layout of
the proposed use, exits and entrances and the individual parking
arrangement for each motor vehicle setting forth the type of vehicles to
be parked.
a. No motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or located within three feet of
any building occupied as a residence.
b. Before any license is issued, the complete area included in the license,
with exits and entrances established, shall be enclosed by a suitable
means of bounding the licensed area and preventing vehicles from
protruding beyond the licensed area.
c. The licensee shall keep the licensed premises free from filth, paper and
rubbish.
d. No motor vehicle which is used for the conveyance of any flammable
liquid, including gasoline, naphtha, benzine, kerosene, motor fuel oil or
other flammable liquids or any flammable gases or explosives shall be
parked within 200 feet of any fuel pump, place where gasoline or other
fuel is stored or kept or any building or structure on the premises of the
parking lot or adjacent thereto.
§ 4-11.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11.6
AO:113
§ 4-11.7. License Fee. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020; Ord. No.
1435; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The annual license fee for open-air parking lots for motor vehicles shall be
a sum equal to the multiplication of the number of square feet of the area
to be licensed by the amount stated in Chapter 16, Fees, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $50.
§ 4-11.8. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 79-1; Ord. No. 1020]
It shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Official to control the
establishment of each parking area, and the Police Chief shall supervise the
operation of same for the purpose of assuring compliance with the terms
of this section as well as all other applicable Borough ordinances. After the
license is issued and the parking business established, it shall be the duty
of the Police Chief to notify the licensee of any violations and to prosecute
same in the Municipal Court.
§ 4-11.9. Other Business Activity Prohibited. [1972 Code § 79-1;
Ord. No. 1020]
At no time, except in an emergency, shall the repair of vehicles be permitted
within the area licensed hereunder nor shall any other business activity be
permitted within the area, except the parking of vehicles.
§ 4-12. through § 4-13. (RESERVED)
§ 4-14. TOWING AND STORAGE.
§ 4-14.1. List of Authorized Towers; Waiting List. [1972 Code
§ 98A-1; Ord. No. 1554-91]
e. No motor vehicle which is used for the conveyance of any flammable
liquid, including gasoline, naphtha, benzine, kerosene, motor fuel oil or
other flammable liquids or any flammable gases or explosives shall be
parked on any parking lot overnight unless there is an attendant
present on the premises of the parking lot.
f. All fees and charges to be imposed on patrons of open-air parking lots
shall be posted and be clearly visible so as to allow the patron to be
made aware of the fees and charges before using the parking area.
a. The Chief of Police shall establish a list of persons or firms who shall be
utilized by the Police Department to provide towing and wrecking
services for abandoned or wrecked vehicles. The list shall be comprised
of a maximum of 12 operators. In establishing the list, the Chief of
Police shall determine as eligible any operator capable of responding to
any location in Manasquan within 15 minutes of receiving a telephone
call to provide the towing service.
§ 4-11.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-14.1
AO:114
§ 4-14.2. Application; Equipment Requirements. [1972 Code
§ 98A-2; Ord. No. 1554-91]
b. The Chief of Police shall also establish and maintain a waiting list for
operators in the event that the number of authorized operators exceeds
12. The placement on the waiting list shall be based on the date of filing
the application by the person or firm wanting to be utilized by the Police
Department for towing and wrecking services.
a. An application for a license as a proprietor of a towing or wrecking
business to be placed upon the list to be utilized by the Police
Department shall be made by the person or firm engaged in operating a
wrecker or wreckers. The application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Police Department and shall specifically report the following
facts:
1. The full name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of the officers
and directors thereof, its registered office and its resident agent. If
the applicant is a partnership, it shall state the names and
addresses of all of the partners.
2. The year, make and type of each wrecker used in the business, its
serial number, registration number and registered owner.
3. The address where the wrecker or wreckers shall be regularly
garaged, the telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hourper-
day basis and the names of all operators, their addresses and
the serial numbers of their New Jersey motor vehicle licenses.
b. The application for a towing and wrecking license shall be accompanied
by a certificate of liability insurance for the wrecker in the policy limits
of no less than $200,000 for injury to one person, $500,000 for injury to
two or more persons and $50,000 for property damage. The certificate
of insurance shall be issued by a company certified to do business in
New Jersey, and each policy must contain an endorsement providing for
30 days' notice to Manasquan in the event of any material change in the
policy or cancellation thereof.
c. The Police Department shall conduct a check of all equipment,
personnel and facilities of the applicant to determine the ability of the
applicant to perform the towing services.
d. The office and storage area of the applicant must be located in zones
where such use is permitted and be within the boundaries of the
Borough.
e. Each vendor providing towing services must show proof of ownership
or a valid lease for proper land areas to store a minimum of five cars.
f. Each wrecker must meet all of the requirements of Title 39 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes, and all applicable vehicle rules and
§ 4-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-14.2
AO:115
§ 4-14.3. Record of Operators. [1972 Code § 98A-3; Ord. No.
1554-91]
The Chief of Police shall be responsible to maintain documents containing
the names, addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of all
licensed wreckers and a record of the types of wreckers available to meet
the specific need of the emergency. The Chief of Police shall also see that
a record is maintained of the regular response of wreckers to police calls,
including any complaints from vehicle owners as to improper service or
charges.
§ 4-14.4. Revolving List. [1972 Code § 98A-4; Ord. No. 1554-91]
The Chief of Police shall maintain, a weekly revolving list of licensed
wreckers to provide service where needed and shall instruct all duty and
investigating officers to utilize the list.
§ 4-14.5. Towing and Storage Fees and Charges. [1972 Code
§ 98A-6; Ord. No. 1554-91; Ord. No. 1992-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15;
Ord. No. 2209-2016 § 1; Ord. No. 2225-2017 § 1]
regulations. The wrecker must have a boom-lifting capacity of at least
four tons. In addition, each wrecker must have the following equipment.
1. One large broom and shovel.
2. At least one set of dolly wheels.
3. Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
4. Tow-sling type tow bar to prevent any part of the crane metal from
touching the towed vehicle.
5. Emergency warning lights.
6. Portable safety lights capable of being installed on the rear of a
towed vehicle if necessary.
7. Safety flares for night work.
g. After the application has been submitted and been reviewed by the
Police Department, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for
approval or disapproval by him.
a. Towing fees and charges shall be stated in Chapter 16 Fees.
b. Storage fees and charges shall be as follows:
1. Storage per day (or any part thereof) commencing after the vehicle
is placed in storage (see Chapter 16, Fees). Tow operators are not
required to pick up vehicles between 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except in the case of an emergency. Tow operators will release
impounds seven days a week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
§ 4-14.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-14.5
AO:116
§ 4-14.6. Cruising Prohibited; Emoluments; Gratuities. [1972 Code
§ 98A-6; Ord. No. 1554-91]
The practice of cruising with a wrecker or tow truck is forbidden.
Furthermore, no person shall pay any emolument to any third person not
involved in the accident or to any Police Officer for information as to the
location of any accident or solicit employment of the licensee's service nor
give any gratuities, fees or other compensation or gifts to any members of
the Police Department.
§ 4-14.7. Responsibility of Applicant. [1972 Code § 98A-7; Ord. No.
1554-91]
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such employment, the person or firm agrees
to:
6:00 p.m. Vehicles involved in a MVA (motor vehicle accident) shall
be released during normal business hours of the storage facility/
body shop. The term "vehicles" shall mean all vehicles recognized
under Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
c. Additional Charges:
1. Lockout/Disconnect Linkage/Go Jacks;
2. Clean Up Fee MVA;
3. Off Road Recovery and Stand-By Time.
d. Show Up Fee. The towing service operator shall be entitled to a "show
up" charge if the operator or owner of a vehicle appears at the stated
location within the 15 minute period in which the tow operator is
required to respond to the police dispatcher's request for towing
service.
e. Hook Up Fee. A towing service operator shall be entitled to a "hook up"
fee if the towing service operator responds to a request by the Borough,
appears at the towing location and hooks up the tow truck to vehicle to
be towed, regardless of whether the actual towing is commenced.
f. Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner a written
estimate of cost and a written receipt when paid.
g. This towing fee schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the
business location of any authorized tower participating in the Towing
Service Rotation Program.
a. Provide a prompt response to each call and appear at the location of the
vehicle to be towed within 15 minutes of being notified of the need for
the towing services.
§ 4-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-14.7
AO:117
§ 4-14.8. Suspension or Revocation; Hearing. [1972 Code § 98A-8;
Ord. No. 1554-91]
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section.
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to suspend or revoke the
right of any person or firm which is on the authorized list if the person or
firm violates any of the terms and conditions of this section. Any person or
firm aggrieved by any rule or regulation promulgated by the Chief of Police
or by a suspension or revocation made by him shall be given a hearing by
the Borough Council within 35 days of filing a hearing request with the
Municipal Clerk.
§ 4-14.9. Calling of Towers by Vehicle Owners. [1972 Code § 98A-9;
Ord. No. 1554-91]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any owner or operator
of a motor vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident from calling any
tower or wrecker of his or her own choice. However, if the tower or wrecker
designated by the owner or operator of the motor vehicle is not immediately
available, the tower or wrecker designated on the weekly revolving list
established under subsection 5-14.4 utilized.
§ 4-15. GARAGE SALES.
§ 4-15.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 67A-1; Ord. No. 1172]
As used in this section:
GARAGE SALE — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sale,"
"lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any similar
b. Clean all debris and fluid, exclusive of toxic materials, at the accident
site resulting from the accident.
c. Provide the Police Department with the following information on
vehicles unclaimed over 30 days:
1. Year, make, color and vehicle identification number.
2. Owner's name and address.
3. Copy of certified letter advising the owner of the vehicle's
whereabouts.
4. Photograph of vehicle.
d. Maintain a record in a bound volume of all towing and wrecking jobs
handled, the name of the owner or operator involved, the charge made
for the service, the date and the amount of payment.
e. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this section.
§ 4-14.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-15.1
AO:118
casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
GOODS — Shall mean and include any books, warehouse merchandise or
other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individuals, partnerships, voluntary
associations and corporations.
§ 4-15.2. Permit Required; Application. [1972 Code § 67A-2; Ord.
No. 1172; Ord. No. 2063-10; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 4-15.3. Number of Permits Per Premises; Display. [1972 Code
§ 67A-1; Ord. No. 1172]
§ 4-15.4. Application. [1972 Code § 67A-4; Ord. No. 1172; Ord. No.
2063-10 § 3]
The information to be filed with the Code/Construction Department shall be
as follows:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
Borough without first filing with the Code/Construction Department the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from the Code/
Construction Department a permit to conduct such sale, to be known as
a "garage sale permit." A fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be
required for the issuance of such permit.
b. The person making application for the garage sale permit shall file a
completed application with the Code/Construction Department seven
days before the first day of the garage sale in order to provide adequate
time for the processing of the permit. The Code Enforcement Official or
his designee shall review the information contained on the permit. The
Code Enforcement Official or his designee shall have the right to
impose conditions on the permit relating to matters of public safety.
a. The permit shall be issued only to premises on which a residential
dwelling is located, it being the intention to prohibit garage sales on
vacant lots and further to limit the issuance of the permits to specified
premises rather than to any individual. The permit may be issued to any
premises only twice within any twelve-month period, and the permit
shall be issued for no more than three consecutive calendar days.
Furthermore, no person, firm, group, corporation or association shall
directly or indirectly conduct a garage sale at any premises within the
Borough more than twice in any twelve-month period. Charitable,
religious and civic organizations may be allowed more than two permits
with the approval of the Borough Council.
b. Each permit issued under this section must be prominently displayed on
the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the garage sale.
§ 4-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-15.4
AO:119
§ 4-15.5. Hours. [1972 Code § 67A-5; Ord. No. 1172]
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 4-15.6. Sign and Newspaper Requirements. [1972 Code § 67A-6;
Ord. No. 1172; Ord. No. 2063-10 § 3]
§ 4-15.7. Exceptions. [1972 Code § 67A-7; Ord. No. 1172; Ord. No.
1828-00 § 1; Ord. No. 2063-10 § 3]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
a. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting the sale.
b. The name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted and consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the
owner.
c. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
d. The number of days of the sale.
e. The date and nature of any past sale.
f. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting the sale and the date or dates of such sale.
g. Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by
any municipal, County, State or Federal agency.
h. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full, true and known to him to be so.
i. Any other information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Official so as to process the application.
a. Signs posted or handbills advertising a garage sale, as herein defined,
shall be of a size not larger than 12 inches by 12 inches and must
contain the address of the person conducting the sale, the number of
the permit issued by the Borough and the dates for which such permits
were issued.
b. All such signs shall be removed within 24 hours after the completion of
the sale.
c. Newspaper advertisement of such sale shall contain the permit number.
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 4-15.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-15.7
AO:120
§ 4-15.8. Enforcement; Maintenance of Order. [1972 Code § 67A-8;
Ord. No. 1172; New]
§ 4-16. TAXICABS, AUTOCABS. [Ord. No. 2098-11 §§ 1 to 13; Ord.
No. 2131-13 § 1-3; Ord. No. 2171-14; Ord. No. 2180-15; amended
2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2276-19]
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement, which separate items do not exceed one in number.
d. Any sale conducted by any merchant or other business establishment in
a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning
regulations of the Borough or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof, or any sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and would not otherwise be prohibited in the
Borough ordinances.
e. Any bona fide, charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or other
organization or association not for profit may be exempted from the
limitation established in subsection 4-15.3 hereof, upon demonstrating
to the Borough Council its right to such exemption. The production of a
certified copy of a certificate of incorporation, pursuant to Title 15 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, shall be presumptive evidence of
the right of such organization to this exemption.
f. Garage sales are not permitted at properties abutting Union Avenue,
Parker Avenue (Route 71), Taylor Avenue and South Street. This
includes corner properties at these locations.
a. This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer,
Chief of Police or their designated agent to investigate any violation of
this section.
b. The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No
such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the
premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any
roads or streets or interfere with the orderly passage of pedestrian
traffic on sidewalks in the area of such premises. All such persons shall
obey the reasonable orders of any member of the Code Enforcement
Department or the Police Department in order to maintain the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 4-15.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.1
AO:121
§ 4-16.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — Borough of Manasquan.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxi/autocab within the Borough of
Manasquan and such taxi/autocab holds a business registration certificate
from the State of New Jersey bearing a Borough of Manasquan street
address.
LICENSE — A certification and/or document from the Borough of
Manasquan issued to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission stating that
the operator is authorized to operate a taxi/autocab pursuant to Ordinance
No. 2272-18 and has been issued a decal to utilize the Borough of
Manasquan designated taxi stands.
OPERATION — Operation of a taxi/autocab shall consist of transporting in
such taxi/autocab of one or more persons for hire. A taxi/autocab which
is operated or run, over any of the streets within the Borough, to seek
or accept passengers for transportation from points or places to points or
places within or outside the Borough shall be deemed to be operation of
a taxi/autocab within the Borough. A taxi/autocab parked or idling on a
Borough street or accepting a passenger for hire from a point of departure
within the Borough shall be deemed to be operation. Operation of a taxi/
autocab by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner, as well as operation by the person actually driving the taxi/autocab.
The transportation in or through the Borough of any person other than the
owner or driver of any motor vehicle bearing signs therein or thereon using
the word "taxi," "cab," "autocab," "car service," "hack," "dial a ride," "call a
ride," "transport," transport vehicle," "car service" or "transportation" shall
be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, business entity or association in whose
name title to any taxi/autocab is registered with the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission, or who appears in any governmental records to be
the conditional vendee or licensee thereof and holds a business registration
certificate from the State of New Jersey bearing a Borough of Manasquan
street address.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any
court whatsoever.
TAXI/AUTOCAB — Means and includes any automobile commonly called
"taxi," holding a business registration certificate from the State of New
Jersey bearing a Borough of Manasquan street address and engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or
advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run over any of the
streets within the Borough and which accepts or discharges passengers for
transportation from points or places to points or places within or outside the
§ 4-16.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-16.1
AO:122
Borough. "Taxi/autocab" shall not include a limousine as defined by N.J.S.A.
48:16-3.
§ 4-16.2. Requirement of Taxi/Autocab Owner or Operator License.
No person shall receive a certification and/or document from the Borough
of Manasquan issued to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission unless
both the taxi/autocab and the driver thereof are licensed in the Borough in
accordance with this section and said person or corporation conforms to all
of the laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-16.3. Licenses.
§ 4-16.4. Applications for Licenses.
Application Form. Each applicant for the issuance or renewal of a license
of either class shall supply, in full, the information requested on the
application forms approved by the Borough Administrator and obtained
from the Borough Clerk, and shall verify the correctness thereof by
certification. The completed application must be filed with the Borough
Clerk, together with the fee hereinafter fixed.
a. All taxi/autocab owners and operators operating within the Borough
shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
b. There are hereby established two classes of taxi/autocab licenses in the
Borough as follows:
1. Taxi/Autocab Driver's License. This license shall entitle the
individual named therein to operate within this Borough any taxi/
autocab duly licensed hereunder. Such license may only be issued
in the name of an individual and not in the name of the business
entity.
2. Taxi/Autocab Owner's License. This license shall entitle the vehicle
therein listed and described to be used as a taxi/autocab and
operated in this Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder.
a. Applications for taxi/autocab owner's and driver's licenses shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk at any time, but no taxi/autocab shall receive a
certification and/or document from the Borough of Manasquan issued
to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, unless both the taxi/
autocab and driver are licensed in accordance with this section each
year.
b. Requirements for Taxi/Autocab Owner's Licenses. Each applicant for a
taxi/autocab owner's license must meet the following requirements to
be considered for issuance of a license:
1. Be of the age of 21 years, or over.
2. Possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
§ 4-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.4
AO:123
3. Submit a completed medical examiner's certificate required under
49 CFR 391.41 to 391.49 to the Borough from a licensed physician
stating that the applicant has been examined within 60 days of the
date of the application and is fit for the safe operation of a taxi/
autocab.
4. Fully complete an application form provided by the Borough Clerk,
which shall be signed and sworn to or certified by the applicant and
filed with the Borough Clerk as a permanent record.
5. The applicant shall be required to consent to and submit to a state
and federal criminal history check, either by fingerprinting or live
scan through Morphotrak, Inc. (a private company under contract
with the State of New Jersey), or whoever the current state vendor
under contract is at the time, at the Borough's sole discretion, or
provide a CDL passenger endorsement, which shall be forwarded
to the Borough at the cost and expense of the applicant.
6. The applicant shall be required to apply to the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission for a certified driver history abstract which
shall be forwarded to the Borough at the cost and expense of the
applicant.
7. Insurance.
(a) Each applicant for a taxi/autocab owner's license shall,
together with the application, submit the insurance policy
required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et seq., covering the taxi/autocab
sought to be licensed; and each applicant shall then and
thereafter comply with all of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1
et seq., as well as the acts amendatory thereof or supplemental
thereto.
(b) If the applicant operates in more than one municipality, the
applicant must file an original duplicate autocab insurance
certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-7 by the Clerk of
the municipality within which the owner's principal place of
business is located.
(c) The minimum acceptable insurance liability limit is as follows.
Combined single limit coverage: $100,000.
c. Requirements for Renewal of Taxi/Autocab Driver's License. Each
renewal applicant for a taxi/autocab driver's license must meet the
following requirement:
1. For any applicant seeking to renew a taxi/autocab owner's and/or
driver's license who does not maintain a valid CDL passenger
endorsement, the Morphotrak criminal history check shall be
performed once every three consecutive years. For the two
consecutive years following each Morphotrak check, the applicant
shall submit to a Criminal History Record Information for a
§ 4-16.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-16.4
AO:124
§ 4-16.5. Issuance of License.
§ 4-16.6. Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Licenses.
Noncriminal Justice Purpose SBI 212B check to be performed
through the Borough Police Department at the applicant's expense.
Renewal applicant shall maintain insurance coverage as delineated
in Subsection 4-16.4b7 (Insurance).
a. Upon notification by the Borough Clerk of satisfactory fulfillment of the
foregoing requirements, the Mayor and Council shall either grant or
deny the license application, unless the governing body returns or holds
over the application for further investigation.
b. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall expire at 12:00
midnight of the 31st day of January of the following year from when it
was issued, and shall not be transferable. All taxi/autocabs duly
licensed shall receive a Borough of Manasquan decal, which shall be
affixed to the vehicle.
a. The Mayor and Council may, in their discretion, refuse to issue or
renew, or may after notice and hearing before the Mayor and Council,
revoke or suspend any taxi/autocab driver's and/or owner's license
issued hereunder if the applicant or licensee:
1. Has been convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction.
2. Violates any provision of this section.
3. Has not complied fully with all of the requirements of this section.
4. If the motor vehicle licensed, or to be licensed, has unsafe or
unsanitary conditions, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety or
health of the occupants or others.
5. If the policy of insurance required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and
Subsection 16.4b7 of this section lapses, or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
6. Has in any degree contributed to any injury to any person, or
damage to property, arising out of reckless operation of a motor
vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-96.
b. A person shall be disqualified from operating or driving an autocab if a
criminal history record background check as required by this section
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes:
1. In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
§ 4-16.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.6
AO:125
§ 4-16.7. Display of License and Certificate of Insurance.
§ 4-16.8. Lettering and Visual Identification Symbol.
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4, or 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
2. In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection b1 of this subsection.
3. If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection b1 and 2 of this subsection can produce
a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8
or, if the criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an
equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal
offense occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify the
applicant from operating or driving an autocab.
a. No taxi/autocab shall be operated in the Borough unless the taxi/
autocab driver's license (including photograph identification) of the
person operating the taxi/autocab is prominently displayed and open to
view of passengers in accordance with reasonable procedures of the
Borough.
b. The certificate of insurance required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-6 shall likewise
be prominently displayed in accordance with reasonable procedures of
the Borough provided by way of written notice to the licensee.
a. Every taxi/autocab operating within the Borough shall have affixed or
painted on both sides thereof the words "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least
six inches high, or the name of the operating owner containing the
words "taxi" or "cab" or "taxicab," as well as the business telephone
number.
b. Every taxi/autocab or other vehicle required to be licensed under this
section operating within the Borough shall display a visual
identification symbol the design, specification and contents of same to
be determined in the sole discretion of the Borough, by way of a decal,
magnetic device, placard or other method which will identify the
vehicle as properly and currently licensed. The method of display shall
be as determined by the Borough Police Department and communicated
in writing to the taxi license holder which shall be required to adhere to
the contents of said notice within seven calendar days of the date of the
notice. The Borough may elect to require that the visual identification
symbol be made and then affixed to the licensed vehicle by a vendor or
§ 4-16.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 4-16.8
AO:126
§ 4-16.9. Restrictions on Operation of Taxi/Autocabs.
§ 4-16.10. Taxi Stands.
The Borough of Manasquan may designate the location and size of any
taxi stand in accordance with state law and pursuant to the Borough of
Manasquan Code § 7-16. Only taxi/autocabs and taxi/autocab drivers
licensed by the Borough under this section may utilize the taxi stand. No
person shall sit idle, park or operate in a designated taxi stand for any
other purpose except to pick up or discharge passengers. A designated taxi
stand may only be occupied by a taxi/autocab and driver licensed by the
Borough in accordance with this section. No person shall leave any vehicle
unoccupied at any designated taxi stand. A taxi stand shall allow a person
the opportunity to find transportation services in an expeditious, unbiased,
nondiscriminatory and courteous manner. No passenger may be denied
transportation by any taxi/autocab occupying any portion of a designated
taxi stand provided that said passenger has the ability to meet the terms,
fare or fee for the service to be rendered. Call ahead or prearranged
pickups may not be picked up from any designated taxi stand.
vendors of the Borough's designation, all such costs for such production
and affixing to the licensed vehicle to be paid by the licensee.
a. No Cruising. No person shall cruise the streets of the Borough in any
vehicle, including but not limited to taxi/autocabs at any time for the
purpose of soliciting for one or more persons for transportation for a fee
or fare.
1. Prearranged Pickup. Any taxi/autocab may pick up passengers if
the taxi/autocab owner or the owner's agent has been specifically
called by the person seeking transportation or someone acting on
said person's behalf or such person has otherwise arranged in
advance for pickup at a specific time and place. The taxi/autocab
driver must have proof of such prearrangement including at a
minimum the full name of the person to be picked up, the full name
of the person making the arrangements and a contact phone
number for said person making the arrangements.
b. All persons shall be picked up or discharged at the curb, or in off-street
areas designated by business establishments for the use of their
patrons, and the taxi/autocab shall at no time interfere with traffic on
any roadway.
c. Nothing herein shall preclude commercial establishment locations to
establish pickup areas in parking lots.
a. Temporary Taxi Stand. The ranking or senior Borough police officer on
duty may, in the event the number of people at any location seeking
transportation from taxi/autocabs creates or may create a safety
concern and/or may create a disturbance of the peace, establish a
temporary taxi stand at any public location, such temporary taxi stand
§ 4-16.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.10
AO:127
§ 4-16.11. Fines and Penalties.
§ 4-16.12. Construction and Effective Dates.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Dogs
§ 5-1. LICENSING.
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 59-1]
As used in this section:
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
to be designated by temporary traffic signs or other traffic devices
identifying the temporary taxi stand. The provisions of Subsection
4-16.11 applicable to taxi stands shall be applicable to temporary taxi
stands pursuant to the Borough of Manasquan Code § 7-16.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction of a first offense be subject to a fine of not to exceed $250; on
conviction of a second offense be subject to a fine of not to exceed $500
and for a third or subsequent offense be subject to a fine of $1,250; and/
or be subject to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the
county jail, or in any other place provided by the municipality for the
detention of prisoners, or both.
b. Any corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than $500 or more than $1,250.
c. Nothing herein shall preclude the prosecution of any such violation
under Title 48 and or Title 2C of the New Jersey statutes nor restrain or
prohibit the Mayor and Council from suspending or revoking any
license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
a. Should any section or provision of this section be held invalid in any
proceedings, the same shall not affect any other section or provision of
this section, except insofar as the section or provision so held invalid
shall be inseparable from the remainder of any such section or
provision.
b. Chapter 97 et seq., of the Borough of Manasquan Code and all
ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with this section
herewith are hereby repealed.
c. This section shall become effective following the final passage and
publication according to the law.
§ 4-16.10 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-1.1
AO:128
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
§ 5-1.2. License and Vaccination Required. [1972 Code § 59-2]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Borough without first
obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the Municipal Clerk upon
application by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee and no person
shall keep or harbor any dog within the Borough except in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-1.3. Annual Licensing; Registration Tags. [1972 Code § 59-3]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, in the
month of January, apply for and procure from the Municipal Clerk a license
and official registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored,
and shall place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 5-1.4. Fees; Exemptions. [1972 Code § 59-4; Ord. No. 921; Ord.
No. 1218; Ord. No. 1259; Ord. No. 1504-90; Ord. No. 2018-07 § 1;
Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. All persons applying for licenses and registration tags shall pay an
annual fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees for each spayed dog and the
fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, for each nonspayed dog to be
licensed, which fee shall include the license fee, clinic fee, registration
fee and cost of tags to be issued for each dog. All licenses and
registration tags, and renewals thereof, shall expire on the first day of
January of each year. In the event a license and registration tag is not
obtained by January 31, a late fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, will be
imposed.
b. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag shall be
accepted by the Borough as compliance with this section.
c. Dogs used as guides for blind persons, commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
d. Duplicate license fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.5
AO:129
§ 5-1.5. Newly Acquired Dogs; Application for License Required.
[1972 Code § 59-5]
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag
for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-1.6. Application Information Required. [1972 Code § 59-6]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a
long or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of
the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog and proof of
rabies vaccination. The information on the application and the registration
number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by
the Clerk or other local official designated to license dogs in the Borough.
In addition he/she shall forward to the State Department of Health each
month, on forms furnished by the State Department, an accurate account of
registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. Registration numbers
shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 5-1.7. Dogs from Other States. [1972 Code § 59-7]
§ 5-1.8. Removal of Tags Restricted. [1972 Code § 59-8]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 5-1.9. Disposition of Moneys Collected. [1972 Code § 59-9]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this section shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Borough within
30 days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough and which shall be
used for the following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing
of dogs liable to seizure under this section; for local prevention and control
of rabies; for providing antirabic treatment under the direction of the
Borough Council for any person known or suspected to have been exposed
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days, shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough limits for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
§ 5-1.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-1.9
AO:130
to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject, and for administering the provisions of this section.
Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following, and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. At the end of
the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of
the Borough any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next
preceding.
§ 5-2. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 5-2.1. Running at Large Prohibited. [1972 Code § 59-11]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
run at large upon the public streets or in any public park or in any public
building, or in any other public place within the Borough.
§ 5-2.2. Leashing Requirements. [1972 Code § 59-12]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it
to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Borough
unless such dog is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash.
§ 5-2.3. Property Damage Prohibited. [1972 Code § 59-13; Ord. No.
887]
No person owning, keeping, harboring, walking or in charge of any dog
shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such dog to do any injury or to do any
damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of persons in
the Borough other than the owner or person having the care, custody or
control of such dog.
§ 5-2.4. Soiling and Defiling Public or Private Property;
Responsibility to Remove. [1972 Code § 59-14; Ord. No. 887]
No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer, permit or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway,
road, bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk or upon any boardwalk, beach or beachfront in this Borough, or upon
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of the private property in the last instance. If any
such person shall permit such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on the areas aforesaid, he or she shall immediately remove
all feces and droppings deposited by such dog, which removal shall be in a
sanitary manner by shovel, container, disposal bag, etc., and the feces and
droppings shall be removed by the person from the aforesaid designated
areas and disposed of by the person in a sanitary manner.
§ 5-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.5
AO:131
§ 5-2.5. Howling and Barking Restricted. [1972 Code § 59-15; Ord.
No. 1504-90; Ord. No. 1670-95]
No person shall own, keep, possess or harbor any dog which by frequent or
habitual howling, barking or other noisemaking causes a noise disturbance.
The provisions of this restriction shall also apply to all private or public
facilities, including any animal or dog pound, which holds or treats dogs.
A barking dog is defined as a dog barking continuously for 10 minutes or
intermittently for 30 minutes.
§ 5-3. DOGS ON BEACHES, BOARDWALK, PUBLIC PARKS,
PLAYGROUNDS.27
§ 5-3.1. Restricted Use. [1972 Code § 59-17; Ord. No. 874; Ord. No.
1593-93]
§ 5-3.2. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2110-12 § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer,
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Manasquan, or the Animal
Control Officer/Entity contracted with the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 5-3.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2089-11 § 1; Ord. No.
2110-12 § 2]
Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction of a first offense thereof, be subject to a
fine in the amount of $150. Any violator convicted of a second or subsequent
offense under this section shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $300.
§ 5-4. through § 5-7. (RESERVED)
Cats
§ 5-8. DEFINITIONS. [1972 Code § 71-1]
As used in Sections 5-8 through 5-10:
ANIMAL — Shall mean dog or cat.
a. No dog shall be allowed upon the boardwalk or its approaches
maintained by the Borough east of First Avenue, or upon the beach east
of the boardwalk, whether the dog be on a leash or otherwise during the
period between April 1st and October 31st. The owner of any dog under
the control of a leash may utilize the beach east of the boardwalk, and
the approaches and boardwalk for access only, between November 1st
and March 31st.
b. Dogs are prohibited at all times from public parks and playgrounds.
27.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning parks and recreation areas, see
Chapter 10. For additional regulations concerning beaches, see Chapter 12.
§ 5-2.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-8
AO:132
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species; male, female,
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage, or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the agency or department of the
Borough or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of Section 5-8 through Section 5-10.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 5-9. VACCINATIONS AND LICENSING.
§ 5-9.1. Vaccinations Required. [1972 Code § 71-2]
a. Vaccination and License Requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor, or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough, unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this subsection do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by a
State or Federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical, or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels, or pet shops.
b. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in paragraph d.
c. Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the
State.
§ 5-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.1
AO:133
§ 5-9.2. License Required. [1972 Code § 71-3; Ord. No. 1962-05 § 1;
Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2216-2016]
d. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
a. Annual Licensing; Registration Tags. Any person who shall own, keep or
harbor a cat of licensing age shall, in the month of January, apply for
and procure from the Municipal Clerk a license and official registration
tag for each such cat owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon
each such cat a collar or harness with the registration tag securely
fastened thereto.
b. Fees; Exemptions. All persons applying for licenses and registration
tags shall pay an annual fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees for each
spayed cat and the fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, for each
nonspayed cat to be licensed, which fee shall include the license fee,
clinic fee, registration fee and costs of tags to be issued for each cat. All
licenses and registration tags, and renewals thereof, shall expire on the
first day of January of each year. In the event a license and registration
tag is not obtained by January 31, a late fee as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees, will be imposed.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any cat owned in New Jersey, and such licenses and tag shall
be accepted by the Borough as compliance with this section.
Duplicate license fees as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
c. Newly Acquired Cats; Application for License Required. The owner of
any newly acquired cat of licensing age or any cat which attains
licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag for
such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
d. Application Information Required. The application shall state the breed,
sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which license and
registration are sought, and whether it is of a long or shorthaired
variety; also the name, street, and post office address of the owner, and
the person who shall keep or harbor such cat and proof of rabies
vaccination. The information on the application and the registration
number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years
by the Clerk or other local official designated to license cats in the
Borough. In addition he/she shall forward to the State Department of
Health each month, on forms furnished by the State Department, an
accurate account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed
of. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
§ 5-9.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-9.2
AO:134
§ 5-10. PROPERTY DAMAGE BY CATS.
§ 5-10.1. Property Damage. [Ord. No. 1707-96 § 2]
No person owning, keeping, harboring, walking or in charge of any cat
shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such cat to do any injury or to do any
damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of persons in
the Borough other than the property of the owner or person having the care,
custody or control of such cat.
§ 5-10.2. Soiling and Defilement on Public or Private Property. [Ord.
No. 1707-96 § 3]
No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any cat shall
cause, suffer, permit or allow such cat to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
e. Cats from Other States. Any person who shall bring or cause to be
brought into the Borough any cat licensed in another state for the
current year and bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than
90 days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for
each such cat.
Any person who shall cause to be brought into the Borough an
unlicensed cat of licensing age and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Borough limits for a period of more than 10
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each
such cat.
f. Removal of Tags Restricted. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a cat for which it was not issued.
g. Disposition of Moneys Collected. License fees and other moneys
collected or received under the provisions of this section shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer of the Borough and shall be placed in a
special account separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough
and shall be used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping
and disposing of cats liable to seizure under this section; for local
prevention and control of rabies; for providing antirabic treatment
under the direction of the Borough Council for any person known or
suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for all other purposes
prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the subject; and for
administering the provisions of this section. Any unexpended balance
remaining in such special account shall be retained therein until the
end of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 5-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.2
AO:135
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway,
road, bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk upon any boardwalk, beach or beachfront in the Borough, or upon
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of such private property.
§ 5-10.3. Revocation of License; Compliance. [Ord. No. 1707-96 § 4]
The Borough may revoke a license if the person holding the license refuses
or fails to comply with this section, or fails to maintain the quarters where
cats are kept in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to create a
health hazard or disturbance by reason of noise, odor or other cause, the
regulations promulgated by the local Board of Health, the Borough or any
State or local law governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of animals.
§ 5-11. PROHIBIT FEEDING OF UNCONFINED WILDLIFE IN ANY
PUBLIC PARK OR ON ANY OTHER PROPERTY OWNED OR
OPERATED BY THE MUNICIPALITY.
§ 5-11.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned, operated or controlled
by the Borough of Manasquan, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 5-11.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 5-11.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned,
operated or controlled by the Borough of Manasquan, any wildlife,
excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks
§ 5-10.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-11.3
AO:136
or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education
centers).
§ 5-11.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
§ 5-11.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum
fines and penalties established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 and as same may be
amended from time to time. Each and every day a violation of this section
shall exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 5-12. SALE OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 5-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2121-12]
PET SHOP OPERATOR or PET STORE OPERATOR — Shall mean a person
who owns or operates a pet store, or both.
PET SHOP or PET STORE — Shall mean a retail establishment open to
the public wherein animals, including, but not limited to, dogs or cats, are
kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose of sale to individuals for personal
appreciation and companionship rather than for business or research
purposes.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs or other
animals seized either under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. or
otherwise.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs or other animals are
received, housed and distributed.
§ 5-12.2. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2121-12]
No pet shop or pet shop operator shall sell, offer for sale, barter, auction,
breed or otherwise dispose of dogs, cats or both in the Borough of
Manasquan. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a shelter, pound or
other establishment from keeping, displaying, selling or otherwise
transferring any dog, cat or both that has been seized, rescued or donated.
§ 5-12.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2121-12]
a. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer
or Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Manasquan.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
a. Any person who violates, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000 for each
separate offense or confinement in the Monmouth County Jail for a
period of not more than 90 days or community service for a period of
§ 5-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-12.3
AO:137
§ 5-13. PERMITTING THE MANAGED CARE OF FREE-ROAMING
CATS.
§ 5-13.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2261-18]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in
the male gender include the female gender.
ABANDONED — Means that an owner or caregiver has forsaken a
domesticated cat entirely, or has neglected or refused to provide care and
support to the cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Means a person employed or appointed
by the Borough who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and
regulations concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with
New Jersey law and this Code.
CAREGIVER — Means any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a cat.
EAR MARKED — Means a tagged, notched or tipped left ear as performed
by a licensed veterinarian.
FERAL CAT COLONY — Means a group of cats that congregates, more or
less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any
non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of
it.
FERAL DOMESTICATED CAT — Means a cat that is not socialized to
humans and is not appropriate as an inside companion for humans.
FRIENDLY DOMESTICATED CAT — Means a cat that is socialized to
humans and is appropriate as a companion for humans.
MANAGED CAT COLONY — Spaying and neutering the cats to stabilize the
population of the feral cat colony.
NUISANCE — Means disturbing the peace by (a) habitually or continually
howling, crying or screaming or (b) the habitual and significant destruction,
desecration or soiling of property against the wishes of the owner of the
property.
not more than 90 days or any combination of fine, imprisonment and/
or community service as determined at the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons
allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be subject
to penalties as provided herein for each separate offense.
b. The violation of any one or more provisions of this section shall be
subject to abatement, summarily by a restraining order or by injunction
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 5-12.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-13.1
AO:138
OWNER — Means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, estate, or any other legal entity.
RESCUE GROUP — Is a for-profit or not-for-profit entity, or a collaboration
of individuals with at least one of its purposes being the adoption or
placement of cats in homes with humans to serve as companion animals.
STRAY CAT — Means a cat that is regularly off the property of the owner,
is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not
regularly provided with food by its owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Means shelter that provides protection from rain,
sun, and other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the cat.
TNR — Means Trap, Neuter and Return.
TNR PROGRAM — Means a program pursuant to which feral and stray cats
are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and returned to
the location where they congregate.
ZOONOTIC DISEASE — Means those diseases transmittable to humans
from animals, including parasitic, bacterial, fungal and viral diseases.
§ 5-13.2. Responsibilities of Owners of Domesticated Cats. [Ord. No.
2261-18]
§ 5-13.3. Feral Cat Colonies. [Ord. No. 2261-18]
a. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate
food, water and shelter for their cats.
b. The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to
guard against the cat creating a nuisance and shall be subject to the
provisions in Section 5-10 Property Damage by Cats in the Borough of
Manasquan Code.
c. The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated
cat shall not permit his/her cat to roam unsupervised.
d. An owner shall not abandon a domesticated cat.
a. Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
section.
b. Sponsorship of Colony TNR Programs.
The Monmouth County Associated Humane Societies is approved as
Sponsor. Other persons may apply to the Borough to serve as colony
TNR Program sponsors. Any person or entity so applying shall comply
with the requirements of this section for sponsors and execute an
Associated Humane Societies approved sponsor contract. Any person
intending to undertake the responsibilities of sponsor shall advise the
Associated Humane Societies in writing and provide his/her/its address
and telephone number.
§ 5-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-13.3
AO:139
c. Sponsor Requirements.
It shall be the duty of the sponsor to:
1. Review and approve of colony caregivers;
2. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony
caregiver or of cats with a colony;
3. Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the size and
location of the colonies as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the sponsor's colonies;
4. Report annually to the Borough on the following:
(a) Number of colonies in the Borough.
(b) Total number of cats in colonies.
(c) Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to
the TNR Program.
(d) Number of cats and kittens spaced in permanent homes.
5. Register feral cat colonies;
6. Equally responsible with that of the Animal Control Officer for
humanely capturing, trapping, neutering, vaccinating, identifying
and spaying or neutering feral cats.
7. Sponsor shall obtain and maintain liability insurance in the
minimum amount of $500,000 for all activities, action and work
performed pursuant to this section and the laws of this state,
naming the Borough of Manasquan as an additional named insured,
providing an annual copy of the declaration of insurance and proof
of payment of same.
8. Sponsor shall agree to forever defend, protect, indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Manasquan, its officers, agents and
employees from and against any and all claims, causes of action,
injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of or
which may arise out of the creation and operation of the TNR
Program for the first year of program.
d. Feral Cat Caregiver Requirements. Caregivers are responsible for the
following:
1. Registering as a feral cat caregiver with the sponsor and the
Borough;
2. Registering the feral cat colony with the sponsor;
3. Taking steps that are reasonably likely to result in the vaccination
of the colony population for rabies and making reasonable efforts to
update the vaccinations on cats that can be recaptured;
§ 5-13.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-13.3
AO:140
4. Taking steps that are reasonably likely to further the objective of
the spay/neuter of at least 90% of the colony population;
5. Providing the sponsor with descriptions of each cat in the colony
and copies of documents evidencing that the cats have been
vaccinated and spayed/neutered;
6. Providing food, water and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats;
7. Feed cat colony on a schedule approved by sponsor and return to
location within two hours to clean and maintain area as required;
8. Observing the colony cats at least twice per week and keeping a
record of any illnesses or unusual behavior noticed in any colony
cats;
9. Obtaining the approval, in writing, of the owner of any property, to
which the caregiver requires access to provide colony cats;
10. In the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, the caregiver shall
take reasonable steps likely to result in the removal of the kittens
from the colony after they have been weaned, and the placement of
the kittens in homes or foster homes for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement or with the sponsor for subsequent
permanent placement;
11. Reporting annually in writing to the sponsor on the status of the
colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats in the
colony, the number of cats that died or otherwise ceased being a
part of the colony during the year, the number of kittens born to
colony cats and their disposition and the number of cats and kittens
placed in permanent homes as companion cats;
12. Obtaining proper medical attention to any colony cat that appears
to require it;
13. Taking reasonable steps to prevent cats from creating a nuisance in
adjacent properties.
e. Colony Cat Requirements.
1. The left ear of a colony cat that has been spayed or neutered and
vaccinated shall be eartipped.
2. An electronic animal identification device (EAID) shall be inserted
into the cat by a veterinarian in accordance with professional
medical standards. The colony number shall be used for purposes
of the EAID.
f. Disposition of Colony Cats.
1. An Animal Control Officer or sponsor who has trapped a cat whose
left ear has been tipped or which bears some other distinguishing
mark indicating that it belongs to a feral cat colony shall scan any
§ 5-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-13.3
AO:141
§ 5-13.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2261-18]
cat trapped or picked up for an EAID. If an EAID is found, the
officer shall return the cat to its colony or its owner. If an EAID is
not found, the Officer shall contact the sponsor immediately.
2. If the cat does not have an EAID then the Animal Control Officer
shall contact the sponsor so the cat can be properly placed in a
colony. If the cat is obviously an owned domestic cat the sponsor
shall arrange for care for the cat until the owner is located and may
determine the disposition of the cat in those circumstances where
the domestic cat's owner cannot be located. If the cat does not have
an EAID and the owner cannot be located, then the sponsor will
nevertheless treat the cat as any stray with a seven day holding
period.
g. Requirements in General.
1. Unless you are a registered caregiver, it is prohibited to feed feral
cats and/or leave food outdoors on any property within the
Borough.
2. It shall be the responsibility of all residents of Manasquan along
with the sponsor, feral cat caregivers, and all involved individuals
to use due consideration to avoid the taking of rare, threatened or
endangered species under the Endangered and Non-Game Species
Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1, et seq. and pursuing the actions
allowed by this section.
h. Registration of Feral Cat Colonies.
1. The sponsor shall register feral cat colonies maintained by
approved caregivers. Feral cat colonies with the Borough that are
not registered by the sponsor are not entitled to any benefits or
protections set forth in this section. No colonies may be established
except in accordance with this section. On an annual basis the
sponsor shall provide the Borough of Manasquan with a colony
management plan for the Borough containing all registered feral
cat colonies with information on the number of cats, anticipated
rate of attrition and the length of project, efforts to deter predation
and to prevent immigration of more cats into each colony. The list
of registered feral cat colonies and the annual colony management
plan shall be filed with the Borough Manager.
a. The Borough shall have the following rights:
1. The right to seize or remove cats from a colony that have not been
vaccinated against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
2. The right to seize or remove a cat from a colony that is creating a
nuisance as defined above and the caregiver and sponsor have
§ 5-13.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 5-13.4
AO:142
§ 5-13.5. Study and Review. [Ord. No. 2261-18]
Not later than December 31, 2018, the Borough of Manasquan shall study
the effectiveness of the TNR program and review the continuance of this
section. This section however shall continue as provided until specifically
rescinded or amended.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1972 Code § 38-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Manasquan in accordance with the provisions
of an act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A.
33:1-1, et seq., and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the
State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1972 Code § 38-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
been given 30 days to remove and relocate the cat and have failed
to do so.
3. The right to seize or remove a colony of cats when the caregiver
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this section and
the sponsor has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute
caregiver within 30 days of the Borough's notice to the sponsor of
the caregiver's failure to comply with this section.
b. Nuisance Complaints.
1. The requirements of this section notwithstanding, Animal Control
Officers, Code Enforcement Officers and Police Officers may
investigate any nuisance complaint.
2. The provisions of sections 5-1 through 5-9 as well as the provisions
of sections 5-10 through 5-10.3 remain in full force and effect and
are not to be superseded by the aforesaid provisions. If there is any
conflict between this section and the aforesaid ordinance, the
ordinances are to be read in concert as they are consistent with
protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Borough.
§ 5-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.1
AO:143
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for license, all licenses issued, and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1972 Code § 38-3]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Borough Council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. Application for License. [1972 Code § 38-5]
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by a plan, in duplicate,
to scale, of the premises for which application is made, detailing, with
measurements, the location and height of all walls, partitions and fixed
furnishings therein. No changes, modifications or alterations in the
premises shall be made without the consent of the Governing Body first had
and obtained, the application for which shall be accompanied with a plan,
in duplicate, to scale, detailing such property changes or modifications or
alterations.
§ 6-3.4. Floor Space Requirements. [1972 Code § 38-6A; Ord. No.
966]
No retail consumption license shall be issued for any premises having a
floor space of less than 1,000 square feet.
The hours shall be construed to indicate Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Saving Time, whichever shall be in effect within the Borough.
§ 6-3.5. License Required. [1972 Code § 38-4]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Borough
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.6. License Fees; Maximum Number. [1972 Code § 38-6; Ord.
No. 827; Ord. No. 907; Ord. No. 966; Ord. No. 1011; Ord. No. 1165;
Ord. No. 1108; Ord. No. 1148; Ord. No. 1228; Ord. No. 1267; Ord.
No. 1333; Ord. No. 1434; Ord. No. 1932-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the Borough shall be as follows:
§ 6-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 6-3.6
AO:144
Class of License Annual Fee Number
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
See Chapter 16, Fees 6
Plenary Retail Consumption
License Hotel/Motel
See Chapter 16, Fees 1
Plenary Retail Distribution License See Chapter 16, Fees 2
Club License See Chapter 16, Fees 5
No seasonal retail consumption or limited retail distribution licenses shall
be granted in this municipality.
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued. The licenses fees shall be payable in accordance with the
New Jersey Statutes Annotated and rules and regulations promulgated by
the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
The foregoing license fees are hereby fixed and imposed for the purpose of
revenue.
§ 6-3.7. Hotel/Motel License. [New]
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the issuance of plenary retail
consumption licenses in excess of the above quota for bona fide hotels or
motels containing 100 sleeping rooms, or for hereafter constructed and
newly established hotels or motels containing at least 100 sleeping rooms.
Hotel or motel premises for which plenary retail consumption licenses are
issued pursuant to this exception shall continue to be operated as bona
fide hotels or motels and for failure to do so the license will be subject to
revocation.
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1972 Code § 38-10; Ord. No. 916]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises on
weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1972 Code § 38-10; Ord. No. 916; Ord. No.
2259-18 § 1]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays,
no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 6-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.3
AO:145
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1972 Code § 38-10; Ord. No. 916]
Subsections 6-4.1 and 6-4.2 shall not apply to New Year's Day in each year
when alcoholic beverages may be sold, delivered, or served between 4:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. when New Year's Day falls on a weekday, and between
the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon when New Year's Day falls on a
Sunday.
§ 6-4.4. Hours for Sale or Delivery of Alcoholic Beverages for Off-
Premises Consumption. [1972 Code § 38-10B; Ord. No. 1202; Ord.
No. 2259-18 § 2]
No licensee shall sell or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery
of any distilled spirits at retail in the original container for consumption off
the licensed premises or allow, permit or suffer the removal of any distilled
spirits in its original container from the retail licensed premises before 9:00
a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week except Sunday, and on
Sunday before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., except as provided for by any
rule or regulation of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons Restricted. [1972 Code § 38-11;
Ord. No. 954]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, nor allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to
intoxicated persons, or to any person under the legal age, or allow, permit
or suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon
the licensed premises, or permit any of the same to congregate in or about
the licensed premises, or shall any minor be allowed in any room in which
any bar is located, unless accompanied by one of his or her own parents.
§ 6-4.6. Closing Provisions. [New; Ord. No. 2259-18 § 3]
No licensee shall permit, suffer or allow any person to be on or upon any
part of the licensed premises on any weekday between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. except regular employees of the licensee actually engaged in the
course of their employment; tradesmen with whom the licensee is actually
engaged in doing business or public officers or employees engaged in the
course of their official duties.
§ 6-4.7. Retail Distribution License Restriction. [1972 Code § 38-7]
No retail distribution licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in
and upon any premises in which any other mercantile business is carried on
except the retail sale of cigars, cigarettes and tobacco as an accommodation
to patrons, and the sale of chewing gum and Clorets, and cocktail cherries,
olives and onions, and bitters, ice cubes and bottle stoppers, and potato
chips, popcorn, pretzels, nuts, corn twists, Fritos and similar snack items.
§ 6-4.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 6-4.8
AO:146
§ 6-4.8. Restrictions on Club Licenses. [1972 Code § 38-8; Ord. No.
966]
No club license shall be granted except to organizations having exclusive
possession of a premises no less than 800 feet in area. The premises shall
be separated by permanent building walls or partitions from any other
premises not under the exclusive control of the licensee.
§ 6-4.9. Soliciting Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages. [1972 Code
§ 38-12]
No licensee shall, directly or indirectly, solicit from house to house,
personally or by telephone, the purchase of alcoholic beverages, nor allow,
permit or suffer such solicitation.
§ 6-4.10. Disturbances on Premises. [1972 Code § 38-14]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any disturbance, brawl or unnecessary noise, nor allow, permit or suffer the
licensed place of business to be conducted in such manner as to become a
nuisance.
§ 6-4.11. Lotteries. [1972 Code § 38-15]
No licensee shall allow, suffer or permit any lottery to be conducted, nor any
ticket or participation right in any lottery to be sold or offered for sale, on
or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.12. Pool Selling and Bookmaking. [1972 Code § 38-16]
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any pool selling,
bookmaking or any playing for money or other valuable thing at faro,
roulette, rouge et noir, nor any unlawful game or gambling of any kind, nor
any device or apparatus designed for any such purposes, on or about the
licensed premises.
§ 6-4.13. Gambling Devices. [1972 Code § 38-17]
No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed
premises any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which
may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing.
§ 6-4.14. (Reserved)
§ 6-4.15. Advertising Brands of Alcoholic Beverages. [1972 Code
§ 38-19]
No licensee shall permit or suffer the display, on the exterior of the licensed
premises, of any signs or other advertising matter bearing the name, brand
or trademark of any manufacturer or wholesaler of any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.16
AO:147
§ 6-4.16. Advertising Prices of Alcoholic Beverages. [1972 Code
§ 38-20]
No licensee shall, directly or indirectly, advertise, or permit or suffer the
advertising of, the price of any alcoholic beverage or size of the container
thereof on the exterior of the licensed premises, or in the show window or
door thereof, or in the interior thereof when visible from the street.
§ 6-4.17. Advertising Brands of Alcoholic Beverages Not on
Premises. [1972 Code § 38-21]
No licensee shall permit or suffer in or on the licensed premises any sign
or other matter advertising the sale of any particular brand or type of
alcoholic beverages unless such brand or type of alcoholic beverage is
actually available for sale at such premises.
§ 6-4.18. View from Public Thoroughfares. [1972 Code § 38-22]
All premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, excepting
guest rooms and private dining rooms in hotels, shall be so arranged that
a full view of the interior may be had from the public thoroughfare. All
such premises shall be lighted sufficiently so that a full view of the interior
thereof may be had at all hours from the public thoroughfare.
§ 6-4.19. Deliveries. [1972 Code § 38-23]
No delivery or deliveries of alcoholic beverages shall be made by any
licensee of this municipality unless the same be accompanied by the original
signed order and delivery memoranda or slips, which shall at all times
be the subject of examination and checking with the alcoholic beverages
then being delivered, by any officer or other person authorized and acting
pursuant to instructions from such officer so doing in the course of or for
the purpose of enforcing the Act and/or this section.
§ 6-4.20. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Persons Under the Legal
Age. [New]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age.
§ 6-5. ROOM LIMITATIONS.
§ 6-5.1. Serving in Private Rooms Restricted. [1972 Code § 38-36;
Ord. No. 1120]
No person shall be served alcoholic beverages in any room which is not
open to the use of the public generally, except that, in hotels or motels
where entire premises are licensed, guests may be served in their rooms
or in private or public dining rooms; and further, this prohibition shall not
apply to alcoholic beverages served under club licenses.
§ 6-4.16 MANASQUAN CODE § 6-5.2
AO:148
§ 6-5.2. Size of Rooms.28 [1972 Code § 38-37; Ord. No. 1120]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in,
or allowed to be sold, served or delivered to or consumed in, any licensed
premises in which the number of persons is greater than one person to each
seven square feet of floor area which is not covered by a bar or working
space.
§ 6-6. IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION OF CERTAIN
EMPLOYEES.
§ 6-6.1. Identification of Employees by Plenary Retail Consumption
License. [1972 Code § 38-38; Ord. No. 1237]
Every person, partnership or corporation holding or applying for any
plenary retail consumption license is issued or to be issued in the Borough
shall furnish to the Police Department, the name and address of each
employee of the licensee whose employment requires his presence upon
the licensed premises, except those employees who are employed primarily
in the preparation, handling or service of food. The name and address of
employees shall be furnished to the Police Department within 24 hours after
the commencement of such employment or within 24 hours of approval of a
license in instances of newly licensed premises.
§ 6-6.2. Registration with Police. [1972 Code § 38-39; Ord. No.
1237]
All persons who are employed on the premises of a plenary retail
consumption licensee within the Borough, except those employees who
are employed exclusively as waiters, waitresses, cashiers, cooks or kitchen
helpers, shall register with the Police Department within seven days of their
employment or within seven days of approval of a license in instances of
newly licensed premises.
§ 6-6.3. Manner of Registration. [1972 Code § 38-40; Ord. No. 1237]
The registration shall be accomplished by furnishing the following:
a. A color photograph of the employee, not less than two inches by two
inches in size showing such employee from the shoulders up and
accurately depicting the employee's facial features, including presence
or absence of beard or mustache and color of hair, at the time of
registration; and
b. The following information concerning the employee, which shall be
placed on the back of the photograph:
1. Full name.
28.Editor's Note: This section was amended 2-28-1980 by order of the Superior Court of New
Jersey.
§ 6-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.3
AO:149
§ 6-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any
other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-8. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-8.1. Entering Premises. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her, any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 6-8.2. Consumption; Purchase. [1972 Code § 38-26; Ord. No. 954;
Ord. No. 1251]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-8.3. Attempting to Purchase Alcoholic Beverages. [1972 Code
§ 38-27; Ord. No. 954; Ord. No. 1251]
It shall be unlawful for a person in the Borough of Manasquan under legal
age to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him or
her any alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-8.4. Misrepresentation of Age. [1972 Code § 38-28; Ord. No.
954; Ord. No. 1251]
It shall be unlawful for any person under legal age to misrepresent or
misstate his or her age for the purpose of inducing any licensee or any
2. Home address.
3. Home telephone number.
4. Social security number.
5. Date of birth.
6. Signature.
§ 6-6.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 6-8.4
AO:150
employee of any licensee, or any person acting in behalf of any licensee, to
sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverages to him or her.
§ 6-8.5. Serving Persons Under the Legal Age. [1972 Code § 38-29;
Ord. No. 954; Ord. No. 1251]
No person under legal age shall order, be served with or have in his or her
possession any alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-8.6. Altering or Falsifying Identifications. [1972 Code § 38-31;
Ord. No. 766; Ord. No. 954; Ord. No. 1251]
No person under legal age shall have in his or her possession any altered
or false document or documents which can be used for the purpose of
identification and/or establishing the age of the person.
§ 6-8.7. Legal Age Defined. [1972 Code § 38-31A; Ord. No. 1251]
For the purpose of this section, legal age shall mean that age established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 9:17B-1, and as same may be amended and
supplemented by the Legislature of the State of New Jersey.
§ 6-8.8. Violations and Penalties. [1972 Code § 38-32; Ord. No. 874;
Ord. No. 1251; New; Ord. No. 2181-15; Ord. No. 2185-15]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, other remedies
will include:
§ 6-9. POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION BY UNDERAGE PERSONS
ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.29
a. Statutory Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person,
and upon conviction thereof and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-81,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. In addition, the Court
shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a
motor vehicle in this State for six months beginning on a date he/she
becomes eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction,
whichever is later. In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an
offense, the Court may require any person under the legal age who
purchases or attempts to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates
this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment program
authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed the
maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
29.Editor's Note: See also subsection 3-2.3, Prohibition Against Serving, Offering to Serve or
Permitting the Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by a Person Under the Legal Age.
§ 6-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-9.1
AO:151
§ 6-9.1. Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by
Underage Person on Private Property Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1831-00
§ 2]
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 6-9.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1831-00 § 2]
a. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of $350 for any
subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, upon a finding of guilty,
in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone
for six months the driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the
conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that
person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Motor
Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the
defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
b. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be required
to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to
receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt
of the written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
c. If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon
receipt of a report by the court, the Commission shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
§ 6-9.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 6-9.3
AO:152
§ 6-9.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1831-00 § 3]
§ 6-9.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1831-00 § 4]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: Chapter 7, Traffic, was adopted by Ordinance No.
1951-05 on April 18, 2005. The New Jersey Department of
Transportation in their letter dated July 29, 2005 issued approval for
Ordinance No. 1951-05 and the codification of Chapter 7, Traffic.
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used therein.
a. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
b. This section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who has been licensed under Title 33 of the
Revised Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food
while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a
County vocational school or post-secondary educational institution;
however, this section shall not be construed to preclude the imposition
of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of
law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.2
AO:153
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. CLOSING OF STREETS.
§ 7-2.1. Authorization for the Closing of Any Street.
§ 7-2.2. Closing of Certain Streets When School Is in Session.
§ 7-2.3. Temporary Closing of Riddle Way. [Ord. No. 2153-14]
Riddle Way between 2nd Avenue and 3rd Avenue shall be temporarily closed
from May 1st through September 30th annually. The detour route for traffic
shall be along the municipal streets of Main Street and 3rd Avenue. Any and
a. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the
Deputy Chief of Police, and in the event of his absence, disability or
inability to act, then the Shift Commander of the Police Department, is
hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street
or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing
is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated hereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
a. Virginia Avenue between Union Avenue and Mount Lane.
1. Virginia Avenue, between the easterly side of Route NJ 71 (Union
Avenue) and the westerly side of Mount Lane, shall be closed
between the hours of 11:45 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. on any days when
the St. Denis School is in session to permit the use of that portion of
Virginia Avenue for ingress and egress to the St. Denis School and
for use by the pupils of the St. Denis School for recreational
purposes, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.7.
2. Proper warning signs indicating that the above described portion of
Virginia Avenue is closed during 11:45 a.m. until 12:30 p.m. shall
be posted as required by law.
§ 7-1.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-2.3
AO:154
all properties which have residential driveway access between 2nd and 3rd
Avenues shall be exempted during the enforcement of this subsection.
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF ORDINANCE.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan that are
contained in this chapter are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
§ 7-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.2
AO:155
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal.
§ 7-7.4. Stopping and Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Atlantic Avenue
(CR #524S)
North All From Osborn Avenue to
Newark Avenue
Broad Street (CR
#20)
West 6:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m. school
days
From Atlantic Avenue to
Blakey Avenue
East Main Street North All From a point 132 feet west of
the west curbline of First
Avenue to the east curbline of
Second Avenue
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any Police Officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
Name of Streets Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.4
AO:156
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
North Main Street East All From the northerly curbline of
Atlantic Avenue to a point 100
feet north therefrom
Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Both All From the westerly curbline of
Route NJ 71 to a point 135 feet
westerly therefrom
North All From the easterly curbline of
Route NJ 71 to a point 215 feet
easterly therefrom
South All From the easterly curbline of
Route NJ 71 to a point 195 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 7-7.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. No. 1790-99
§§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 1858-01 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1889-02 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 2115-12]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
The time limitations set forth in subsections "a" through "d" shall not reset
or start over if the vehicle is moved to a different parking spot on the same
street or if the vehicle leaves and returns at a later time during the specified
hours on the same day.
a. Two-hour Parking.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Blakey
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
Between Route NJ 71 and
Broad Street (C.R. #20)
South 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
Between Broad Street (C.R.
#20) and Curtis Place
Broad Street
(CR #20)
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
North of Blakey Avenue 365
feet south of Sea Girt
Avenue
§ 7-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.5
AO:157
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 53 feet north
of the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 176
feet north therefrom
East 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
school days
From a point 506 feet north
of Woodland Avenue to a
point 60 feet north
therefrom
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 73 feet north
of the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 203
feet north therefrom
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 128 feet north
of the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 149
feet north therefrom
Curtis
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Saturday
From a point 35 feet east of
the east curbline of Route
NJ 71 (Union Avenue) to a
point 107 feet east
therefrom
Curtis Place East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
From the south end to a
point 300 feet north of
Blakey Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
From the south end to Sea
Girt Avenue (CR #49)
East Main
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 213 feet east
of the east curbline of
Route NJ 71 to a point 144
feet east therefrom
Elizabeth
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
Between Osborn Avenue
and North Main Street
Main Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Route NJ 71 to South
Street (CR #20)
§ 7-7.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.5
AO:158
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Broad Street (CR
#20) to a point 375 feet
west therefrom
Osborn
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
From Atlantic Avenue (CR
#524S) to Elizabeth Avenue
Parker
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 160
feet north therefrom
Pearce
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
From Woodland Avenue to a
point 500 feet south thereof
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
when public
school is in
session
North of Woodland Avenue
to north end (dead end)
V.M. Preston
Way
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Main Street to Abe
Voorhees Drive
b. One-hour Parking.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
East Main
Street
North From Third Avenue to
Pearce Court
Riverside Drive South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Beginning at the east
curbline of Third Avenue for
its entire length
c. Thirty-minute Parking.
§ 7-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.5
AO:159
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Broad Street
(CR #20)
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 53 feet north
of the north curbline of Main
Street to a point 20 feet
north therefrom
East Main
Street
South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Beginning 54 feet from the
east curbline of Fourth
Avenue to a point 40 feet
east therefrom
First Avenue West 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 54 feet north
of the north curbline of
Riverside Drive to a point 22
feet north therefrom
East 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the north curbline of
Riverside Drive to a point 54
feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 33 feet west of
the west curbline of First
Avenue to a point 32 feet
therefrom
Riverside Drive North 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point 112 feet west
of the westerly curbline of
First Avenue to a point 24
feet west therefrom
d. Fifteen-minute Parking.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Abe Voorhees
Drive [Added
10-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
2296-19]
South 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From a point 695 feet west
of the west curbline of
Union Avenue to a point 37
feet west therefrom
Brielle Road North 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet east of
the east curbline of Second
Avenue to a point 44 feet
east therefrom
East Main
Street
North 6:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From a point 45 feet east of
the east curbline of First
Avenue to a point 65 feet
east therefrom
North 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet west
of the west curbline of First
Avenue to a point 97 feet
therefrom
§ 7-7.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.5
AO:160
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
South 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 75 feet west
of the west curbline of First
Avenue to a point 65 feet
west therefrom
South 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 25 feet west
of the west curbline of
Third Avenue to a point 190
feet west therefrom
First Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet south
of the south curbline of
Main Street to a point 60
feet south therefrom
West 8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From a point 75 feet north
of the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 45
feet north therefrom
West 8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet south
of the south curbline of
Ocean Avenue to a point 44
feet south therefrom
West 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 85 feet south
of the south curbline of
Main Street to a point 150
feet south therefrom
East 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet north
of East Main Street to a
point 38 feet north
therefrom
Main Street North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Beginning 154 feet from the
westerly curbline of Broad
Street (CR #20) to a point
174 feet west therefrom
Ocean Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet west
of First Avenue to a point
50 feet west therefrom
Second Avenue East All From a point 35 feet north
of the north curbline of
Brielle Road to a point 93
feet north therefrom
East All From a point 157 feet north
of the curbline of Brielle
Road to a point 22 feet
north therefrom
§ 7-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.6
AO:161
§ 7-7.6. Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
designated street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Side Hours and Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.7. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord.
No. 1802-99 § 1; Ord. No. 1829-00 § 1; Ord. No. 1979-06 § 1; Ord.
No. 2037-08 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Side Location
Atlantic Avenue (CR
#524S)
North From the west curbline of Broad
Street (CR #20) to a point 286 feet
west there-from
North From a point 75 feet west of Osborn
Avenue to the east curbline of Newark
Avenue
South From the west curbline of Broad
Street (CR #20) to the west boundary
line of the Borough
Brielle Road Both From a point 100 feet west of the west
curbline of Third Avenue to a point
100 feet east of the east curbline of
Third Avenue
North From the east curbline of First Avenue
to the beach-front line
South From the west curbline of Deep Creek
Drive to a point 255 feet west
therefrom
South From a point 372 feet west of Fourth
Avenue to a point 30 feet west
therefrom
Broad Street (CR #20) East From the south curbline of Woodland
Avenue to a point 237 feet south
therefrom
East From the south curbline of Sea Girt
Avenue (CR #49) to a point 162 feet
south therefrom
West From the south curbline of Sea Girt
Avenue (CR #49) to a point 91 feet
south therefrom
§ 7-7.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.7
AO:162
Name of Street Side Location
West From a point 276 feet south of Atlantic
Avenue (CR #524S) to a point 50 feet
south therefrom
Captain's Court South From Fourth Avenue to its western
terminus including the entire cul-desac
Central Avenue East From the north curbline of Church
Street to the south curbline of Main
Street
Church Street North From the west curbline of South
Street (CR #20) to the west boundary
line of the Borough
Deep Creek Drive West From Brielle Road to its southern
terminus
East Main Street Both Within 50 feet of its inter-section with
McClellan Avenue
Both Within 50 feet of its intersection with
Farragut Avenue
Both Within 75 feet of its intersection with
Jackson Avenue
Both Within 75 feet of its intersection with
Potter Avenue
North From a point 132 feet east of the east
curbline of First Avenue to the
beachfront line
South From the east curbline of First Avenue
to the beachfront line
South From a point 75 feet west of the west
curbline of Warren Avenue to a point
75 feet east of the east curbline of
Warren Avenue
South From a point 82 feet east of the New
Jersey Transit easternmost rail to a
point 28 feet east therefrom
Elizabeth Avenue North From the east curbline of North Main
Street to a point 96 feet east
therefrom
Euclid Avenue North From the east curbline of Mount Lane
to a point 98 feet west therefrom
§ 7-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.7
AO:163
Name of Street Side Location
First Avenue East From a point 200 feet north of the
north curbline of Brielle Road to a
point 30 feet north therefrom
West From the south curbline of East Main
Street to a point 75 feet south
therefrom
West From the north curbline of Pompano
Avenue to a point 62 feet north
therefrom
West From the north curbline of Whiting
Avenue to a point 66 feet north
therefrom
Glimmer Glass Circle East From the north curbline of Brielle
Road to a point 148 feet north
therefrom
West From the north curbline of Brielle
Road to a point 132 feet north
therefrom
Entire Within any cul-de-sac
Lakewood Road/
Marcellus Avenue
Both From a point 100 feet west of the west
curbline of South Street (CR #20) to a
point 100 feet east of South Street (CR
#20)
Main Street North From a point 236 feet west from the
west curbline of Broad Street (CR
#20) to a point 20 feet west therefrom
South From west curbline of Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue) to a point 130 feet
west therefrom
Main Street and North
Main Street
West From the south curbline of Sea Girt
Avenue (CR #49) to the northwest
curbline of South Street (CR #20)
Mount Lane East From the north curbline of Euclid
Avenue to a point 63 feet south
therefrom
North Main Street East From the north curbline of Elizabeth
Avenue (CR #524S) to a point 100 feet
north therefrom
East From Main Street to Atlantic Avenue
(CR #524S)
§ 7-7.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.7
AO:164
Name of Street Side Location
East From the south curbline of Sea Girt
Avenue to a point 110 feet south
therefrom
Ocean Avenue South From the east curbline of First Avenue
to the beachfront line
South From the west curbline of Second
Avenue to a point 112 feet west
therefrom
Old Squan Plaza
(westbound)
Both From the east curbline of South Street
(CR #20) to a point 200 feet east
therefrom
Old Squan Plaza Exit North From the westerly curbline of Route
NJ 71 (Union Avenue) to a point 210
feet west therefrom
South From the westerly curbline of Route
NJ 71 (Union Avenue) to a point 310
feet west therefrom
Parker Avenue East From the north curbline of Main
Street to a point 190 feet north
therefrom
Pearce Court Both Entire length
Potter Avenue East From the north curbline of Ocean
Avenue to the south curbline of
Stockton Lake Boulevard
Riddle Way Both From the west curbline of Third
Avenue to a point 130 feet east
therefrom
Both From the west curbline of Pickle Alley
to a point 100 feet east therefrom
Riverside Drive North From the east curbline of First Avenue
to the beachfront line
South From a point 140 feet east of the east
curbline of First Avenue to the
beachfront line
Rogers Avenue Both From the east curbline of Pearce
Court to the west curbline of Third
Avenue
Sea Girt Avenue (CR
#49)
South From the west curbline of Broad
Street (CR #20) to a point 91 feet
west therefrom
§ 7-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.7
AO:165
Name of Street Side Location
East From the east curbline of Broad Street
(CR #20) to the west curbline of Route
NJ 71 (Parker Avenue)
South From the easterly curbline of
McGreevey Drive to a point 83 feet
east therefrom
Second Avenue East From a point 128 feet north of the
north curbline of Brielle Road to a
point 29 feet north therefrom
East From the south curbline of East Main
Street to a point 200 feet from the
north curbline of Brielle Road
West From the south curbline of Main
Street to a point 70 feet south
therefrom
South Street (CR #20) East From Main Street to the south
boundary line of the Borough
West From the north curbline of Lakewood
Road to a point 100 feet north
therefrom
West From the south curbline of Church
Street to a point 112 feet south
therefrom
West From the north curbline of Church
Street to a point 32 feet north
therefrom
South Street (CR #20) West From the south curbline of Lakewood
Road to the southerly boundary of the
Borough
West From the south curbline of Main
Street to a point 264 feet south
therefrom
Squan Court East From the curbline of Sea Girt Avenue
(CR #49) to a point 284 feet south
therefrom
Stockton Avenue Both From the west curbline of Second
Avenue to the west end of Stockton
Avenue
Stockton Lake
Boulevard
North From Potter Avenue to Jackson Avenue
§ 7-7.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.7
AO:166
Name of Street Side Location
South From the west curbline of North
Potter Avenue to a point 100 feet west
therefrom
Tarpon Drive North Entire length
Third Avenue Both From a point 100 feet south of the
south curbline of Brielle Road to a
point 100 feet north of the north curbline
of Brielle Road
East From the north curbline of East Main
Street to a point 120 feet north
therefrom
Timber Lane East Entire length
Virginia Avenue Both From the east curbline of Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue) to the west curbline of
Mount Lane
Warren Avenue Both From the south curbline of East Main
Street to a point 75 feet south
therefrom
Woodland Avenue North Entire length
South From the easterly curbline of Broad
Street (CR #20) to a point 125 feet
east therefrom
§ 7-7.8. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Broad Street (CR
#20)
East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From Woodland Avenue
to a point 506 feet north
therefrom
East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. school days
From a point 566 feet
north of Woodland
Avenue to Blakey Avenue
South Street (CR
#20)
West Entire day Monday
through Saturday
and Sunday except
between 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet
north of the north
curbline of Church Street
to a point 316 feet north
therefrom
§ 7-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.8
AO:167
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
West Entire day Monday
through Saturday
and Sunday except
between 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From a point 100 feet
north of the north
curbline of Lakewood
Road to a point 35 feet
south of the south
curbline of Church Street
Virginia Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m.
From a point 35 feet east
of the east curbline of
South Street (CR #20) to
a point 85 feet east
therefrom
§ 7-7.8A. Parking by Permit During Certain Hours on Certain Days
on Certain Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Borough of Manasquan is displayed on said vehicle
for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the
following sections.
Street Location Hours Days
Abe Voorhees
Drive
From Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue) to
South Street (CR
#20)
2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
All (except Sundays
and public holidays)
§ 7-7.8B. Parking Restricted to Fire Department Personnel. [Ord.
No. 1953-05 § 1]
No person, other than Fire Department personnel, shall cause or permit to
be parked any motor vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Sides Location
Abe Voorhees (Old
Squan Plaza)
South From a point 381 feet east of the east
curbline of South Street to a point 34
feet east therefrom
§ 7-7.9. Restriction on Parking of Boat Trailers, Recreational
Trailers, Utility Trailers or Similar Vehicles.
a. Commercial and Noncommercial Motor-Drawn Vehicles. No
commercial or noncommercial motor-drawn vehicle, such as a boat
trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar vehicle may be
parked on any street in the municipality excluding State Highways
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles
§ 7-7.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-7.9
AO:168
§ 7-7.10. Angle Parking. [Amended 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2296-19]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as Angle
Parking at an angle so indicated below.
Name of Street Side(s) Angle Location
Main Street Both 45° Between Route NJ 71 (Taylor
Avenue) and South Street (CR
#20)
Riverside Drive South Entire length
§ 7-7.11. Restriction for Omnibus or Limousine Parking. [Ord. No.
2087-11 § 1]
Vehicles with omnibus or limousine license plates issued by the State of
New Jersey or by any other state, territory or country shall be restricted to a
20 minute parking limitation whenever said vehicles are parked or placed or
caused to be parked or placed on any street or municipal parking lot within
the Borough of Manasquan other than for the purpose of picking up or
discharging passengers. All ordinances or provisions of any other ordinance
inconsistent with this provision are hereby repealed only to the extent of
those inconsistencies.
§ 7-8. VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED WEIGHT.
§ 7-8.1. Parking Prohibited for Certain Types of Vehicles and
Equipment in Residential Zones.
making deliveries or services to or for residents or occupants of
structures on the street.
b. Commercial and Noncommercial Motor-Drawn Vehicles Detached from
a Motor Vehicle. No commercial or noncommercial motor-drawn
vehicle, such as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or
similar vehicle, may be parked on any street in the municipality
excluding State highways when the same is detached from a motor
vehicle.
a. No person shall park or place or cause to be parked or placed any
vehicle, truck, tractor, trailer, tractor-trailer, construction vehicle or
construction equipment, or any vehicle of any description which weighs
over 12,000 pounds registered gross weight on any street or on any lot
in a residential zone for more than one hour. This prohibition shall not
apply to any vehicle being used to provide services or delivery to any
residence, or any public utility vehicle servicing a residence or
residences, except that these vehicles shall be removed as soon as such
services or deliveries are completed.
b. No construction vehicle or equipment, such as bulldozers, tractors,
cement mixers or similar equipment shall be parked or placed on any
§ 7-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8.1
AO:169
§ 7-8.2. Parking of Trucks Over 8,000 Pounds Registered Gross
Weight During Certain Hours.
No person shall park a truck over 8,000 pounds registered gross weight on
any street between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., excluding State highways.
§ 7-8.3. Vehicles Over Four Tons Excluded from Certain Streets.
lot in a residential zone except for immediate and continued use for
construction purposes on that lot, and such vehicle or equipment must
be removed as soon as construction is completed or terminated.
a. Vehicles Over Four Tons. Vehicles over four tons registered gross
weight are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets
described except for the pick-up and delivery of materials on such
streets and for trucks of public utilities and governmental agencies.
[Ord. No. 1854-01 § 1]
b. Parking of commercial vehicles over 8,000 pounds registered gross
weight on private property in any residential area. No person shall park
more than one commercial vehicle over 8,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight on any property in a residential zone between 9:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2231-17]
Name of Street Location
Central Avenue From North Main Street to Church
Street
Church Street From South Street (CR #20) to
Township of Wall-Borough of Manasquan
corporate line
Clark Street From Minnesink Road to Lakewood
Road
Curtis Avenue From South Street (CR #20) to Route NJ
71 (Union Avenue)
Manito Road From Lenni Lenape Trail to Iroquois
Road
Marcellus Avenue
Lakewood Road
From Route NJ 71 (Union Avenue) to the
Township of Wall-Borough of Manasquan
corporate line
Mohegan Road From Lakewood Road to the Township of
Wall-Borough of Manasquan corporate
line
Morris Avenue From Route NJ 71 (Union Avenue) to
South Street (CR #20)
Parker Avenue From Main Street to Route NJ 71
(Roberts Street)
§ 7-8.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-8.3
AO:170
§ 7-9. ONE-WAY STREETS.
§ 7-9.1. One-Way Streets Designated. [Ord. No. 2160-14]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Abe Voorhees
Drive
Westbound From a point 370 feet
west of the west
curbline of Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue) to South
Street (CR #20)
Eastbound From South Street (CR
#20) to a point 370 feet
west of the west
curbline of Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue)
Lake Avenue Eastbound From North McClellan
Avenue to North Potter
Avenue
Osborn Avenue Southbound From Atlantic Avenue
(CR # 524S) to Main
Street
Pearce Court Northbound From East Main Street
to Rogers Avenue
Perrine
Boulevard
Westbound From Cedar Avenue to
South Jackson Avenue
Westbound From Euclid Avenue to
Holly Place
Pickell Alley
[Ord. No.
2160-14]
Northbound Entire Length Prohibited
Both Sides
V. Miller Preston
Way
Southbound From Main Street to
Abe Voorhees Drive
Name of Street Location
Pearce Avenue Entire length
Woodland Avenue Entire length
§ 7-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9.2
AO:171
§ 7-9.2. Parking Permitted on Left Side of One-Way Street.
No person shall park a vehicle on the left side of a one-way street except on
the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Streets Sides Hours Location
Osborn Avenue East 9:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Sundays only
From a point 35 feet north
of the north curbline of
Main Street to a point 265
feet north therefrom
Perrine
Boulevard
South/East All From the south curbline of
Cedar Avenue to the east
curbline of South Jackson
Avenue
V. M. Preston
Way
East All Entire length
§ 7-10. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. No. 2123-12]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Blakey Avenue From State Highway 71 to Monmouth County
Road 20/Broad Street
Brielle Road Between the Borough of Brielle corporate line-
Borough of Manasquan corporate line and First
Avenue
Cedar Avenue Between Warren Avenue to South Potter Avenue
Church Street Between the Township of Wall corporate line-
Borough of Manasquan corporate line to South
Street (CR #20)
Clark Street Between Church Street to Lakewood Road
East Virginia Avenue Between Warren Avenue and a point 10 feet east
of Jackson Avenue
Euclid Avenue Between Warren Avenue and Perrine Boulevard
First Avenue Between Riverside Drive and a point 10 feet
north of Stockton Avenue
Fletcher Avenue Between Minerva Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Fourth Avenue Between Brielle Road and East Main Street
§ 7-9.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-10
AO:172
Name of Street Limits
Iroquois Road Between Lakewood Road and a point 50 feet
south of Manito Road
Lakewood Road Between South Street (CR #20) to Township of
Wall-Borough of Manasquan corporate line
McLean Avenue Entire length
Minerva Avenue Between East Main Street and Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Mount Lane Between Euclid Avenue and Morris Avenue
North Main Street-
Main Street-East Main
Street
a. Between Sea Girt Avenue and Atlantic
Avenue (CR #524S)
b. Between Atlantic Avenue (CR #524S) and
South Street-Broad Street (CR #20)
c. South Street-Broad Street (CR #20) and
Route NJ 71 (Union Avenue
d. Between Route NJ 71 (Union Avenue) and
First Avenue
North Potter Avenue Between Stockton Lake Boulevard and East Main
Street
Perrine Boulevard Between Cedar Avenue-Perrine Boulevard and
Warren Avenue
Pine Avenue Entire length
Ridge Avenue Between North Main Street and the Township of
Wall-Borough of Manasquan corporate line
River Place Virginia Avenue
Rogers Avenue Between North Potter Way and a point 10 feet
east of Pearce Court
Sea Girt Avenue Between the Township of Wall corporate line-
Borough of Manasquan corporate line and Broad
Street (CR #20)
Second Avenue Between East Main Street and Ocean Avenue
South Potter Avenue Between East Virginia Avenue and Euclid Avenue
Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Between Route NJ 71 (Parker Avenue) and North
Potter Avenue
Third Avenue Third Avenue to Second Avenue
Warren Avenue Between Perrine Boulevard and East Main Street
§ 7-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:173
§ 7-11. STOP INTERSECTION. [Ord. No. 2123-12; Ord. No. 2195-15;
Ord. No. 2250-18; amended 10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2296-19;
2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2309-20]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Abe Voorhees Drive Abe Voorhees Drive and Highway 71
Abe Voorhees Drive Abe Voorhees Drive and South
Street
Allen Avenue Allen Avenue and Central Avenue
Atlantic Avenue Atlantic Avenue and Broad Street
Blakey Avenue Blakey Avenue and Broad Street
Blakey Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Blakey Avenue and Curtis Place
Blakey Avenue Blakey Avenue and Highway 71
Beams Terrace Beams Terrace and Broad Street
Branin Avenue Branin Avenue and Church Street
Brielle Road Brielle Road and First Avenue
Broad Street (northwest corner and
one in median)
Broad Street and Main Street
Captain's Court Captain's Court and Fourth Avenue
Cedar Avenue Cedar Avenue and Perrine
Boulevard
Cedar Avenue Cedar Avenue and South Potter
Avenue
Cedar Avenue Cedar Avenue and Warren Avenue
Central Avenue Central Avenue and Church Street
Central Avenue Central Avenue and Main Street
Church Street Church Street and South Street
Clark Street Clark Street and Church Street
Colby Avenue Colby Avenue and East Main Street
Colby Avenue Colby Avenue and Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Cowart Avenue Cowart Avenue and Minerva Avenue
Curtis Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Curtis Avenue and Highway 71
Curtis Avenue Curtis Avenue and Mount Lane
§ 7-11 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-11
AO:174
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Curtis Avenue Curtis Avenue and South Street
Curtis Place (southeast and
northwest corners)
Curtis Place and Blakey Avenue
Curtis Place Curtis Place and Sea Girt Avenue
Deep Creek Drive Deep Creek Drive and Brielle Road
Dewey Avenue Dewey Avenue and Cedar Avenue
Dewey Avenue Dewey Avenue and East Main Street
Dewey Avenue Dewey Avenue and East Virginia
Avenue
Dewey Avenue Dewey Avenue and Perrine
Boulevard
Dewey Avenue Dewey Avenue and Pine Avenue
East Main Street East Main Street and First Avenue
East Virginia Avenue East Virginia Avenue and Cedar
Avenue
East Virginia Avenue East Virginia Avenue and Warren
Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue Elizabeth Avenue and North Main
Street
Euclid Avenue Euclid Avenue and Highway 71
Euclid Avenue Euclid Avenue and Perrine
Boulevard
Euclid Avenue Euclid Avenue and Warren Avenue
Fisk Street Fisk Street and Church Street
Fisk Street Fisk Street and Minnesink Road
Fletcher Avenue Fletcher Avenue and Minerva
Avenue
Fletcher Avenue Fletcher Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Fletcher Avenue Fletcher Avenue and Wyckoff
Avenue
Fourth Avenue Fourth Avenue and Brielle Road
Fourth Avenue Fourth Avenue and East Main Street
Gertrude Place Gertrude Place and Clark Street
Glimmer Glass Circle Glimmer Glass Circle and Brielle
Road
Holly Place Holly Place and Cedar Avenue
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:175
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Holly Place Holly Place and Euclid Avenue
Iroquois Road (southeast and
northwest corners)
Iroquois Road and Lakewood Road
James Place James Place and McGreevey Drive
James Place James Place and North Main Street
Lake Avenue Lake Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Lockwood Avenue Lockwood Avenue and East Main
Street
Long Avenue Long Avenue and Fourth Avenue
Manito Road Manito and Iroquois Road
Manito Road Manito Road and Lenni Lenape Trail
Marcellus Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Marcellus Avenue and Highway 71
Marcellus Avenue Marcellus Avenue and Mount Lane
McGreevey Drive McGreevey Drive and Sea Girt
Avenue
McLean Avenue McLean Avenue and Minerva
Avenue
McLean Avenue McLean Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Meadow Avenue Meadow Avenue and East Main
Street
Minerva Avenue Minvera Avenue and East Main
Street
Minerva Avenue Minvera Avenue and Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Minnesink Road Minnesink Road and Clark Street
Mohegan Road Mohegan Road and Lakewood Road
Morris Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Morris Avenue and Highway 71
Morris Avenue Morris Avenue and South Street
Muriel Place Muriel Place and McGreevey Drive
Muriel Place Muriel Place and North Main Street
Narrumson Road Narrumson Road and Iroquois Road
Narrumson Road Narrumson Road and Lenni Lenape
Trail
§ 7-11 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-11
AO:176
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Newark Avenue Newark Avenue and Atlantic Avenue
Newark Avenue Newark Avenue and Ridge Avenue
North Farragut Avenue North Farragut Avenue and Cowart
Avenue
North Farragut Avenue North Farragut Avenue and East
Main Street
North Farragut Avenue North Farragut Avenue and Fletcher
Avenue
North Farragut Avenue North Farragut Avenue and McLean
Avenue
North Farragut Avenue North Farragut Avenue and
Stockton Lake Boulevard
North Jackson Avenue North Jackson Avenue and East
Main Street
North Jackson Avenue North Jackson Avenue and Fletcher
Avenue
North Jackson Avenue North Jackson Avenue and Lake
Avenue
North Jackson Avenue North Jackson Avenue and McLean
Avenue
North Jackson Avenue North Jackson Avenue and Stockton
Lake Boulevard
North Main Street North Main Street and Sea Girt
Avenue
North McClellan Avenue North McClellan Avenue and East
Main Street
North McClellan Avenue North McClellan Avenue and
Fletcher Avenue
North McClellan Avenue North McClellan Avenue and
McLean Avenue
North McClellan Avenue North McClellan Avenue and
Stockton Lake Boulevard
North Potter Avenue North Potter Avenue and East Main
Street
Ocean Avenue Ocean Avenue and First Avenue
Ocean Avenue Ocean Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Old Squan Road Old Squan Road and Sea Girt
Avenue
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:177
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Osborn Avenue Osborn Avenue and Atlantic Avenue
Osborn Avenue Osborn Avenue and Main Street
Parker Avenue Parker Avenue and Main Street
Pearce Avenue Pearce Avenue and Main Street
Pearce Avenue (southeast and
northwest corners)
Pearce Avenue and Woodland
Avenue
Perrine Boulevard Perrine Boulevard and East Main
Street
Pershing Avenue Pershing Avenue and East Main
Street
Pine Avenue Pine Avenue and South Potter
Avenue
Pine Avenue Pine Avenue and Warren Avenue
Pompano Avenue Pompano Avenue and First Avenue
Pompano Avenue Pompano Avenue and Third Avenue
Riddle Way Riddle Way and First Avenue
Ridge Avenue Ridge Avenue and North Main
Street
River Place (southeast corner) River Place and East Virginia
Avenue
Rogers Avenue Rogers Avenue and North Potter
Avenue
Second Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Riddle Way and Second Avenue
Second Avenue Second Avenue and Brielle Road
Second Avenue (southeast and
northwest corners)
Second Avenue and East Main
Street
Second Avenue (northwest and
southeast corners)
Second Avenue and Ocean Avenue
Sims Avenue Sims Avenue and East Main Street
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and Cedar
Avenue
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and East
Main Street
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and East
Virginia Avenue
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and Euclid
Avenue
§ 7-11 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-11
AO:178
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and Perrine
Boulevard
South Farragut Avenue South Farragut Avenue and Pine
Avenue
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and Cedar
Avenue
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and East
Main Street
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and East
Virginia Avenue
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and Euclid
Avenue
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and Perrine
Boulevard
South Jackson Avenue South Jackson Avenue and Pine
Avenue
South Jackson Avenue (southeast
and northwest corners)
South Jackson Avenue and River
Place
South McClellan Avenue South McClellan Avenue and Cedar
Avenue
South McClellan Avenue South McClellan Avenue and East
Main Street
South McClellan Avenue South McClellan Avenue and East
Virginia Avenue
South McClellan Avenue South McClellan Avenue and Euclid
Avenue
South McClellan Avenue South McClellan Avenue and Pine
Avenue
South Potter Avenue South Potter Avenue and East Main
Street
South Potter Avenue South Potter Avenue and Euclid
Avenue
South Street South Street and Main Street
Squan Court Squan Court and Sea Girt Avenue
Stockton Avenue Stockton Avenue and Second
Avenue
Stockton Lake Boulevard (northeast
corner)
Stockton Lake Boulevard and Parker
Avenue
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:179
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Third Avenue (southeast and
northwest corners)
Third Avenue and Brielle Road
Third Avenue (southeast and
northwest corners)
Third Avenue and East Main Street
Third Avenue Third Avenue and Second Avenue
Timber Lane (southeast and
northwest corners)
Timber Lane and Pompano Avenue
Timber Lane (southeast and
northwest corners)
Timber Lane and Whiting Avenue
Trenton Avenue Trenton Avenue and Atlantic Avenue
Trenton Avenue Trenton Avenue and Ridge Avenue
Virginia Avenue (northeast and
southwest corners)
Virginia Avenue and Highway 71
Virginia Avenue Virginia Avenue and Mount Lane
Virginia Avenue Virginia Avenue and South Street
Warren Avenue Warren Avenue and East Main
Street
Watson Place Watson Place and East Main Street
Watson Place Watson Place and Euclid Avenue
Wigwam Path Wigwam Path and Church Street
Wigwam Path Wigwam Path and Minnesink Road
Woodland Avenue Woodland Avenue and Broad Street
Woodland Avenue Woodland Avenue and Parker
Avenue
Wyckoff Avenue Wyckoff Avenue and East Main
Street
Wyckoff Avenue Wyckoff Avenue and Stockton Lake
Boulevard
§ 7-12. YIELD INTERSECTION. [Amended 10-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2296-19]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On:
Parker Avenue and Stockton Lake
Boulevard
Stockton Lake Boulevard
§ 7-11 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-13
AO:180
§ 7-13. through § 7-14. (RESERVED)
§ 7-15. LOADING ZONES.
Note: Minimum length for all loading zones is 50 feet. No loading zone may
be established in any area where it is prohibited to stop, stand or park by
N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in the location during the times indicated other than for
the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of
Street Time Side Location
East Main
Street
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
North From a point 60 feet east of the
east curbline of First Avenue to a
point 110 feet east therefrom
Riverside
Drive
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
North From a point 68 feet west of the
westerly curbline of First Avenue
to a point 118 feet west
therefrom
§ 7-16. TAXI STANDS; ACTIVE PICKUP AND DROP-OFF ZONES.
§ 7-16.1. Taxi Stands Established. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2277-19]
The locations described are hereby designated as taxi stands. No other
vehicle other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy the locations during
the times indicated. Only those vehicles issued a decal from the Borough
of Manasquan, evidencing compliance with the taxi/autocab licensing
requirements, are permitted to occupy the taxi stand locations.
Street Side Hours Location
East Main Street North 10:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m.
From a point 60 feet west
of the west curbline of
First Avenue to a point 84
feet west therefrom
First Avenue East 10:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m.
From a point 35 feet
south of the south
curbline of East Main
Street to a point 40 feet
south therefrom
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-16.2
AO:181
§ 7-16.2. Active Pickup and Drop-Off Zone. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord.
No. 2277-19]
The locations described are hereby designated as active pickup and drop-off
zones only. Only vehicles that are actively picking up or dropping off people
are allowed to occupy these locations.
Street Side Hours Location
East Main
Street
South 10:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m.
From a point 75 feet west
of the west curbline of
First Avenue to a point 65
feet west therefrom
First Avenue West 10:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m.
From a point 85 feet
south of the south
curbline of East Main
Street to a point 150 feet
south therefrom
§ 7-16.3. Fines and Penalties. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2277-1930]
a. Any person violating; § 7-16.1, Taxi Stand Established, and § 7-16.2,
Active Pickup and Drop-Off Zone, upon conviction, is subject to fine not
to exceed $54; any person violating any provision other than § 7-16.1,
Taxi Stand Established, and § 7-16.2, Active Pickup and Drop-Off Zone,
of this section shall, upon conviction of a first offense, be subject to a
fine of not to exceed $250; on conviction of a second offense, be subject
to a fine of not to exceed $500; and for a third or subsequent offense, be
subject to a fine of $1,250, and/or be subject to a term of imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days in the county jail, or in any other place provided
by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, or both.
b. Any corporation violating any of the provisions of this section other
than § 7-16.1, Taxi Stands Established, and § 7-16.2, Active Pickup and
Drop-Off Zone, shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than $500
nor more than $1,250.
c. Nothing herein shall preclude the prosecution of any such violation
under Title 48 and/or Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes nor restrain or
prohibit the Mayor and Council from suspending or revoking any
license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 3-2-2020 by Ord. No. 2310-20 to correct the
number of the added section.
§ 7-16.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-17
AO:182
§ 7-17. BUS STOPS.
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy the location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-18. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-18.1. Right-Turn Prohibitions.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 7-18.2. Left-Turn Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1890-02 § 1]
No person shall make a left turn at any location listed and only in the
manner described.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
North Main Street and
exit driveway of
Hometown Market
Left Eastbound from driveway to
northbound on North Main
Street
Stockton Lake Boulevard
and exit driveway of Elks
Club
Left Northbound from driveway to
westbound on Stockton Lake
Boulevard
§ 7-18.3. U-Turn Prohibitions.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Broad Street (CR #20) From Main Street to Beams Terrace
Main Street From South Street (CR #20) to Warren Avenue
South Street (CR #20) From Main Street to the Borough of Brielle-
Borough of Manasquan corporate line
Third Avenue and
Brielle Road
At intersection
§ 7-18.4. No Turns.
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
§ 7-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-18.4
AO:183
Turn Intersection Movement Prohibited Prohibited
(Reserved)
§ 7-18.5. No Turn on Red.
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
(Reserved)
§ 7-19. LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Abe Voorhees Drive and
Route NJ 71 (Union
Avenue)
a. Eastbound left lane of Abe Voorhees Drive
reserved for left turn only
b. Eastbound right lane of Abe Voorhees
Drive reserved for right turns and through
traffic only
Abe Voorhees Drive and
South Street (CR #20)
a. Eastbound left lane of Abe Voorhees Drive
reserved for left turn only.
b. Eastbound right lane of Abe Voorhees
Drive reserved for right turn only.
§ 7-20. (RESERVED)
§ 7-21. SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED. [Ord. No. 1888-02 §§ 1 — 4;
Ord. No. 2248-2017]
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along certain streets in the
Borough of Manasquan are established as follows:
a. Twenty-five Miles Per Hour.
Name of Street Location
Abe Voorhees Drive (Old
Squan Plaza)
From the west side of Route NJ 71
(Union Avenue) to South Street (CR
#20)
Brielle Road From the Brielle-Manasquan Borough
Corporate Line to First Avenue
East Main Street From Wyckoff Avenue to First Avenue
Main Street From a point 100 feet west of the center
of South Street (CR #20) to the center
of Wyckoff Avenue
§ 7-18.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-21
AO:184
§ 7-22. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. No. 1904-03 § 1; Ord. No.
1958-05 § 1]
No person shall pass a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below:
Name of Street Sketch No. and Date
East Main Street See Sketch number NPZ-3346 dated April 18,
1988 on file with the Office of the Municipal
Clerk
First Street Entire length
Main Street See Sketch number NPZ-3346 dated April 18,
1988 on file with the Office of the Municipal
Clerk
North Main Street See Sketch number NPZ-3346 dated April 18,
1988 on file with the Office of the Municipal
Clerk
Third Avenue From Brielle Road to Riverside Drive
§ 7-23. IN-STREET PEDESTRIAN CROSSING RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
[Ord. No. 1863-01; New; Ord. No. 1959-05 § 1]
In street pedestrian right-of-way signs shall be established and maintained
at the following locations.
Name of Street Location
North Main Street and
Main Street
From Sea Girt Avenue to a point 100
feet west of the center of South Street
(CR #20)
Ocean Avenue Entire length
Stockton Lake Boulevard From North McClellan Avenue to North
Potter Avenue
Stockton Lake Boulevard From Route NJ 71 (Parker Avenue) to
North McClellan Avenue
Third Avenue Entire length
b. (Reserved)
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198, proper signs covering the regulation(s)
must be erected and must conform to the current "Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" unless otherwise specified by the
Commissioner of Transportation.
§ 7-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-23
AO:185
Name of Street At Intersection With
First Avenue a. Ocean Avenue
b. Riddle Way
c. East Main Street
d. Brielle Road
e. Pompano Avenue
f. Whiting Avenue
g. Riverside Drive
Main Street a. Pearce Avenue
b. Parker Avenue
c. Wyckoff Avenue
d. Broad Street
e. Highway 71
Third Avenue a. Riverside Drive
b. Pompano Avenue
c. Whiting Avenue
§ 7-24. (RESERVED)
§ 7-25. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-25.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [Ord. No. 1813-00 § 1;
Ord. No. 1824-00 § 1; Ord. No. 1868-02 § 1; Ord. No. 1891-02 §§ 1,
2]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are
for the use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces Location
Abe Voorhees
Drive
2 On the north side (east-bound lane)
from a point 50 feet east of V.M.
Preston Way to a point 24 feet east
therefrom
Brielle Road 1 On the south side from the easterly
terminus of Brielle Road to a point 24
feet east therefrom
§ 7-23 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-25.1
AO:186
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces Location
East Main Street 1 On the north side of the street from a
point 35 feet east of the east curbline
of Third Avenue to a point 20 feet east
therefrom
First Avenue 1 On the west side from a point 35 feet
north of the north curbline of Ocean
Avenue to a point 20 feet north
therefrom
First Avenue 2 On the west side from a point 35 feet
north of the north curbline of East
Main Street to a point 40 feet north
therefrom
Main Street 2 On the north side from a point 52 feet
east of the east curbline of Osborne
Avenue to a point 40 feet east
therefrom
Riverside Drive 1 On the south side from a point 35 feet
east of the east curbline of First
Avenue to a point 12 feet east
therefrom
1 On the south side from a point 35 feet
east of the east curbline of Third
Avenue to a point 12 feet east
therefrom
1 On the south side from a point 18 feet
west of the easterly end to a point 12
feet west therefrom
Rogers Avenue 1 In front of 42 Rogers Avenue from a
point 35 feet east of the east curbline
to a point 22 feet east therefrom
South Street (CR
#20)
1 On the west side from a point 204 feet
north of the north curbline of Church
Street to a point 24 feet north
therefrom
V.M. Preston Way 1 On the west side from a point 35 feet
south of the south curbline of Main
Street to a point 12 feet south
therefrom
Whiting Avenue 1 On the south side from a point 35 feet
west of the west curbline of First
Avenue to a point 24 feet west
therefrom
§ 7-25.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25.2
AO:187
§ 7-25.2. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences.
[New; Ord. No. 1847-01 § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front of
private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted in these spaces.
Street Location Permit Number
(Reserved)
§ 7-25.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [Ord. No. 1890-02 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No.
1897-02 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2204-2016 § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following off
street parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards or plates or placards by the Motor
Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police.
No other persons shall be permitted to park in these areas.
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces Location
Borough Hall 3 As indicated on Site Plan
Fourth Avenue
Municipal Parking
Lot
2 From a point 26 feet south of East
Main Street to a point 24 feet south
therefrom
Manasquan
Elementary School
4 On both sides of lot beginning at a
point 118 feet west of Curtis Place for
25 feet west therefrom
Manasquan High
School
2 On west side of the building
beginning 38 feet south of the west
door for 24 feet west therefrom
2 On the south side of the building at
the east end of the lot
Ocean Avenue Ramp 3 Between the north and south ramps
North Main Street
Municipal Parking
Lot
1 On the north side from a point 8 feet
east of the east curbline of North
Main Street to a point 12 feet east
therefrom
§ 7-25.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-25.3
AO:188
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces Location
1 On the north side from a point 8 feet
west of the west curbline of Osborn
Avenue to a point 12 feet west
therefrom
Pompano Avenue
Municipal Parking
Lot
2 On the north side from a point of 25
feet west of Third Avenue to a point
24 feet west therefrom
South Street (CR
#20) Municipal
Parking Lot
2 On the east side from a point 20 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 24 feet south
therefrom
Stockton Beach Park
Municipal Parking
Lot
2 On the east side from a point 15 feet
north of Stockton Avenue to a point
24 feet north therefrom
Third Avenue
Municipal Parking
Lot
2 On the east side from a point 11 feet
south of Riddle Way to a point 24 feet
south therefrom
§ 7-25.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public Is Invited (Retail Business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following off
street parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards or plates or placards issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or
temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Acme Supermarket 188
Main Street
2 Beginning 30 feet south of the main
entrance to a point 40 feet south
therefrom directly in front of the
main entrance
Algonquin Arts Theater
76 Abe Voorhees Drive
2 Located in the center island at the
north end
Allaire Community
Bank 155 Main Street
1 First space 20 feet south of the rear
entrance
Main Street Station 2 On the south side of the parking lot
at the west end
Manasquan Mini-Mart 1 On the south side of the parking lot
at the east end
§ 7-25.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25.4
AO:189
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Manasquan Savings
Bank 185 Main Street
1 On the west side of the parking lot
to the left of the rear entrance
Manasquan Savings
Bank Drive In 185 Main
Street (Rear of
Manasquan Savings
Bank
1 On the east side of the parking lot
beginning 36 feet north of Abe
Voorhees Drive to 12 feet north
therefrom
Monmouth Medical
Group 235 Parker
Avenue
2 Immediate left of the main entrance
PNC Bank 1 Beginning 25 feet south of the rear
entrance to 12 feet south therefrom
Asahi Japanese
Restaurant Manasquan
Bakery Route NJ 71 (99
Taylor Avenue)
2 On the north side of the lot
beginning 15 feet west of Route NJ
71 (Taylor Avenue) to 12 feet west
therefrom, and on the north side of
the lot beginning 60 feet west of
Route NJ 71 (Taylor Avenue) to 12
feet west therefrom
Spirit of 76 Liquors
Route NJ 71 (119
Taylor Avenue) and
Stockton Lake
Boulevard
2 In the center island beginning 40
feet east of Route NJ 71 (Parker
Avenue) to 24 feet east therefrom
Sun National Bank
Route NJ 71 (240
Parker Avenue)
2 Directly in front of the main
entrance
§ 7-25.5. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for the use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards or plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles,
or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall
be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-25.6. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parks.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following spaces
are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for use by persons
§ 7-25.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-25.6
AO:190
who have been issued special identification cards or plates or placards by
the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief
of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-26. through § 7-30. (RESERVED)
§ 7-31. CONTROL FOR THE MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-31.1. Regulations for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. No.
1974-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2204-2016 § 2]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
a. MANASQUAN MUNICIPAL COMPLEX, 201 East Main Street.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Road "A" North 30 minutes 9:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
As indicated on
site plan
Road "E" West 30 minutes As indicated on
site plan
2. Permit Parking: No person shall park a vehicle at the below
described location unless said vehicle shall have permit displayed.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Entire lot All 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire lot
A. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown
on the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
§ 7-25.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:191
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
3. Reserved Parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in
this section such as: police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc.
must be properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must
be shown on the attached site plan.
4. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On:
Road "C" and Road "B" Road "C"
Road "D" and Euclid Avenue Road "D"
5. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "C" Northbound From Road "D" to Road "B"
Road "D" Westbound From Road "B" to Euclid
avenue
Road "F" Eastbound From Road "A" to Main Street
6. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot
shall be 10 m.p.h.
B. The speed limit for both directions on the following roadways
are:
Name of
Roadway M.P.H. Limits
Road "C" 10 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
7. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstructed
or impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.1
AO:192
8. Turn Prohibitions. No person shall turn at the below described
location as indicated:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Road "D" and Euclid
Avenue
Left From Road "D" westbound to
Euclid Avenue southbound
b. NORTH MAIN STREET MUNICIPAL LOT, Block 33 Lot 1.01.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
D. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot for longer
than the time limit described below:
Location Side Limit Hours
Along the fence line on the
east side of the DCI
Building from a point 12
feet south of the south
curbline of Atlantic Avenue
(CR #524S) to a point 134
feet south therefrom (Block
33 Lot 1.01)
2
hours
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 20 feet east of
the east curb-line of North
Main Street to a point 40
feet east therefrom
1 hour 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 122 feet east
of the east curb-line of
North Main Street to a
point 50 feet east therefrom
Center 2
hours
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
§ 7-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:193
Location Side Limit Hours
From a point 170 feet south
of the south curbline of
Atlantic Avenue (CR #524S)
to a point 18 feet south
therefrom
Center 2
hours
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
Location Hours
Entire lot 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle
Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
c. SOUTH STREET (CR #20) MUNICIPAL LOT, Block 24 Lot 1.01 and
Block 27 Lot 5.01.
[Ord. No. 2204-2016 § 2]
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or non-commercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
trailer may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or non-commercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.1
AO:194
D. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot for longer
than the time limit described below:
Location Side Limit Hours
Parking
Spaces
From a point
11 feet south
of the
southerly
curbline of
Main Street to
a point 20 feet
south
therefrom
West 15
minutes
24 hours
a day
2
From a point
16 feet west of
the westerly
curbline of
South Street
(CR #20) to a
point 20 feet
west
therefrom
South 2 hours
(Vehicles
must be
charging)
24 hours
a day
2
Entire lot
except for 2
designated
handicap
spaces, 2
designated 15
minutes
parking spaces
and 2 motor
vehicle
charging
parking spaces
and 2 motor
vehicle
charging
parking spaces
All 2 hours 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Entire lot
except for 2
designated
handicap
spaces, 2
designated 15
minutes
parking spaces
and 2 motor
vehicle
charging
parking spaces
2. Permit Parking:
A. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot during times
indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit displayed.
§ 7-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:195
Location Hours
Entire lot except for 2 designated 15
minute parking spaces and 2
designated vehicle charging spaces
2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
3. Handicapped Parking:
A. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide and signed with the R7-8 and
R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle
Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zones:
A. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or present
in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing
the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
d. SECOND AVENUE PARKING LOT, Block 163 Lot 1.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
D. All motor vehicles shall be parked in the parking area in
accordance with the instructions of the parking lot attendant,
and all persons parking motor vehicles in the parking area
shall obey the parking lot attendant at all times.
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.1
AO:196
Location Hours
Entire lot 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
3. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Limits
Entrance Entrance to the parking lot shall be made
from Second Avenue only
Exit Exit from the parking lot shall be onto
Stockton Avenue only
4. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
5. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
e. THIRD AVENUE PARKING LOT, Block 169.02 Lot 30 and Block 169.03
Lot 11.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
D. All motor vehicles shall be parked in the parking area in
accordance with the instructions of the parking lot attendant,
and all persons parking motor vehicles in the parking area
shall obey the parking lot attendant at all times.
§ 7-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:197
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
Location Hours
Entire lot 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
f. FOURTH AVENUE PARKING LOT, Block 173 Lot 1.01 and 1.04.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
D. All motor vehicles shall be parked in the parking area in
accordance with the instructions of the parking lot attendant,
and all persons parking motor vehicles in the parking area
shall obey the parking lot attendant at all times.
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
Location Hours
Entire lot 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.1
AO:198
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
g. POMPANO AVENUE PARKING LOT, Pompano Avenue.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
D. All motor vehicles shall be parked in the parking area in
accordance with the instructions of the parking lot attendant,
and all persons parking motor vehicles in the parking area
shall obey the parking lot attendant at all times.
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
Location Hours
Entire lot 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
§ 7-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:199
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
h. MANASQUAN HIGH SCHOOL, Block 38 Lot 1.01.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
2. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Main driveway Counterclockwise
From the northerly intersect
with Broad Street (CR #20) to
the southerly intersect with
Road Street (CR #20)
Atlantic Avenue (CR
#524S) driveway
Counterclockwise
From the easterly intersect
with Atlantic Avenue (CR
#524S) to the westerly
intersect with Atlantic Avenue
(CR #524S)
3. Speed Limits. The speed limit for all directions of travel in the
driveways and parking lots shall be 10 miles per hour.
4. Turn Prohibitions. No person shall turn at the below described
location as indicated.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Manasquan High
School driveway and
Broad Street (CR
#20)
Left From the exit driveway onto
Broad Street (CR #20)
northbound between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Manasquan High
School driveway and
Atlantic Avenue (CR
#524S)
Left From the exit driveway onto
Atlantic Avenue (CR #524S)
westbound between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
5. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide and
signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty
Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
6. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.1
AO:200
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
i. MANASQUAN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, Block 47 Lot 41, 43, 52.01,
50.05 and 62.01.
REGULATIONS:
1. General Parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas with
proper identification and between the lines provided.
2. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
North driveway Eastbound From Broad Street (CR #20) to
Curtis Place
Parking lot
driveway
Counterclockwise
From Curtis Place north
intersect, to Curtis Place south
intersect
3. Speed Limits. The speed limit for all directions of travel in the
driveways and parking lots shall be 10 miles per hour.
j. ABE VOORHEES DRIVE MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS. [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2296-19]
REGULATIONS
1. General Parking.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No commercial or noncommercial motor-drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle, may be parked on this lot between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for vehicles making deliveries to or
performing services for residents or occupants of structures on
the street.
C. No commercial or noncommercial motor-drawn vehicle, such
as a boat trailer, recreational trailer, utility trailer or similar
vehicle, may be parked at any time on this lot when the same is
detached from a motor vehicle.
2. Permit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle on the parking lot
during times indicated unless the vehicle shall have a valid permit
displayed.
§ 7-31.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-31.1
AO:201
§ 7-31.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public Is
Invited (Retail Business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the regulations listed herein.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the following
regulations.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
The penalty for a violation and conviction of this section shall be as
established by the State Administrative Office of the Court.
§ 7-31.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes is hereby made applicable to the
properties listed below.
Property
(Reserved)
§ 7-31.4. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Park Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide and signed
with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued
the handicapped parking permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
4. Tow-Away Zone. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-31.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 7-31.5
AO:202
§ 7-31.5. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
United States Post Office Property.
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the following Various Traffic Regulations are hereby made
applicable to the properties listed below as follows. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 7-31.6. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-31.2, 7-31.3 and
7-31.5 shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required,
which signage and markings shall be in accordance with the most current
edition of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." The cost for the
procurement and installation of signs and pavement markings shall be the
responsibility of the owner of said property.
The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation,
maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or
expense to the Borough of Manasquan. The owner shall be responsible for
the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 9-1. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 1900-02 § 1]
The following residency requirements are established for initial
appointment for employment by the Municipality.
§ 9-1.1. Residence of Officers and Employees.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, all applicants for positions
designated as career service by the Department of Personnel shall be
bona fide residents of the Borough of Manasquan as of the date of
appointment for employment, subject to the exceptions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-1 et seq. Legal residence shall be determined by the standards
established in N.J.A.C. 4A:4-2.11.
b. Unavailability of Qualified Residents.
§ 7-31.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.1
AO:203
§ 9-1.2. Residence of Police Personnel. [Ord. No. 1900-02 § 1]
1. When the appointing authority of the Borough of Manasquan has
determined that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of
qualified residents for available specific positions or employments,
the appointing authority shall advertise for other qualified
applicants. Classification of qualified applicants in such instances
shall be determined in the following manner:
(a) Other residents of Monmouth County.
(b) Other residents of counties contiguous to Monmouth County.
(c) Other residents of the State.
(d) All other applicants.
All appointments shall be made in the order of preference
established above, except subject to preferences granted
pursuant to any other provisions of the law.
c. Special Talent Positions.
1. Whenever the appointing authority shall determine that there are
certain specific positions and employments requiring special
talents or skills which are necessary for the operations of the
Borough of Manasquan and which are not likely to be found among
the residents of the municipality, such positions or employments so
determined shall be filled without reference to residency.
2. These provisions shall set forth the formal criteria pursuant to
which such positions and employments shall be so determined. The
criteria shall be established by the appointing authority as the need
shall so exist from time to time.
d. Provisions Applicable to Initial Appointment. The above provisions shall
apply only to initial appointments and not to promotional appointments.
a. Classification of Applicants.
1. Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the
Manasquan Police Department, the appointing authority shall
classify all the duly qualified applicants for the position or positions
to be filled in the following classes:
(a) Class I: Residents of Manasquan.
(b) Class II: Other residents of Monmouth County.
(c) Class III: Other residents of the State.
(d) Class IV: All other qualified applicants.
§ 9-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 9-1.2
AO:204
§ 9-2. SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
§ 9-2.1. Annual Salary Ordinance. [1972 Code § 24-1]
The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the Borough
of Manasquan shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.31
§ 9-2.2. Copy on File. [1972 Code § 24-2]
A copy of the current Salary Ordinance shall be kept on file in the Office of
the Municipal Clerk for examination and inspection by the public.
§ 9-3. PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.
§ 9-3.1. Adoption of Manual. [1972 Code § 18B-1; Ord. No. 1585-92]
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing personnel policies
and procedures for the operation and government of the Borough a manual
entitled "Borough of Manasquan-Personnel Policies and Procedures." The
manual is incorporated by reference in this section, and three copies of the
manual are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk.
2. All appointments shall be made in the order of preference
established above, except subject to preferences granted pursuant
to any other provision of the law.
b. Appointments by Classification. In making appointments, the
appointing authority shall first appoint all those in Class I and those in
each succeeding class in the order above listed and shall appoint a
person or persons in any such class only to a vacancy or vacancies
remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes
have been appointed or have declined an offer of appointment.
c. Lists to Be Separate and Successive. The classes of qualified applicants
defined above shall be considered as separate and successive lists of
eligibles, and the Department of Personnel shall, when requested to
certify eligibles for positions specified in this section, make such
certifications from said classes separately and successively and shall
certify no persons from any such class until all persons in the preceding
class or classes have been appointed or have declined offers of
appointment.
d. Provisions Applicable to Initial Appointments. This above provision
shall apply only to initial appointments and not to the promotional
appointments.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance is on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 9-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.2
AO:205
§ 9-3.2. Changes, Alterations, Amendments. [1972 Code § 1813-2;
Ord. No. 1585-92]
The personnel policies and procedures contained in the manual may be
changed, altered, supplemented, and amended by resolution duly adopted
by the Borough Council.
§ 9-4. PROCEDURES TO ADOPT PERSONNEL PRACTICES.
§ 9-4.1. Establishment of Titles for Employment. [Ord. No. 2006-07
§ 1]
The Borough Council shall by ordinance establish titles for public
employment by the Borough of Manasquan and salary ranges for municipal
employees. The titles shall conform to the New Jersey Civil Service Act and
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Personnel.
§ 9-4.2. Adoption and Amendment of Policies and Practices. [Ord.
No. 2006-07 § 2]
The Borough Council shall by resolution adopt and amend from time to
time personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment,
and regulations required to comply with applicable Federal and State
employment related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 9-4.3. Municipal Administrator to Implement. [Ord. No. 2006-07
§ 3]
The Municipal Administrator shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel
practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement,
personnel services contract or Federal or State law, the terms and
conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the
practices adopted pursuant to this ordinance shall prevail.
Chapter 10
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Editor's Note: For regulations prohibiting dogs in public parks and
playgrounds, see Chapter 5, Animal Control, Section 5-3.
§ 10-1. CONDUCT IN PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
§ 10-1.1. Prohibited Acts. [1972 Code § 79A-1; Ord. No. 1219; Ord.
No. 1899-02 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-07 § 1]
§ 9-3.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-1.1
AO:206
a. No person in a public park and recreation area shall:
1. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
pavings or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
2. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person above the age of six years
shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
3. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
4. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued in this chapter.
5. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seeds of any trees or plants, dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
6. Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, foundations, railings, fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
7. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
8. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall be
remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or
the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous or
deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
9. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any part or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the
waters.
10. Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
§ 10-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.1
AO:207
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed
in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on
the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided; where receptacles are not provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
11. Drive any motor vehicle on any area except on the paved park
roads or parking areas, or such areas as may be otherwise posted.
12. Park a motor vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, and such shall be in accordance with posted
directions and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
13. No unregistered motor vehicle shall be operated within a public
park or on paved park roads or parking areas.
14. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
15. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
16. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
17. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees,
or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by it.
18. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereinafter adopted; nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, when such activities
are prohibited by the Mayor and Council upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
19. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Mayor and Council
for such purposes for each individual site.
20. Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area
any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into the tent, shelter or structure from at least
two sides, nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension brace or
support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any
other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
§ 10-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-1.1
AO:208
21. Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit so as to
indecently expose his person.
22. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other
place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
23. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motorpowered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
24. Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy, frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
25. Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning, nor shall any person be on or remain
on or in any boat during the closed hours of the park.
26. Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
27. Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden.
28. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for the
purpose.
29. Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
30. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
31. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins,
horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes, except in those areas set
apart for such forms of recreation.
32. Engage in any prohibited act or activity or violate any rule or
regulation established by a resolution duly adopted by the Borough
Council; provided that such prohibited act, prohibited activity, rule
§ 10-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.1
AO:209
or regulation is conspicuously posted in the public park or
recreation area.
33. Play or take part in playing baseball, basketball, football, soccer or
other similar activities prior to 8:00 a.m. and after sunset or
through the time in which the park is illuminated, whichever is
later.
b. While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner and in particular, no person
shall:
1. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink the same at any time, nor shall
any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor in the park
or recreation area.
2. Have in his possession, set or otherwise cause to explode,
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material or
discharge them or throw them into such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with
any other substances or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the Mayor and
Council, permits may be given for conducting properly supervised
fireworks in designated park areas.
3. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
4. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
5. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park or on
any highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
6. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public" nor shall any person
use or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
7. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Mayor and Council.
8. Go onto the ice on any of the waters, except such areas as are
designated as skating fields and provided that a safety signal is
displayed.
9. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the public peace.
§ 10-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-1.1
AO:210
§ 10-2. HOURS OF OPERATION. [1972 Code § 79A-2; Ord. No. 1219;
Ord. No. 1587-92]
§ 10-3. PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
§ 10-3.1. Application. [1972 Code § 79A-3; Ord. No. 1219; New; Ord.
No. 2201-2016]
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Municipal Clerk in accordance with the following procedure:
10. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
11. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to a park.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year from the hour of 7:00 a.m. through
sunset or through the time in which the park is illuminated, whichever
is later. No person shall enter upon or occupy any park except during
such hours without the written permission of Mayor and Council.
b. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time for any interval of time, either temporary or at regular and
stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either entirely or merely for
certain uses.
a. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Municipal Clerk's Office stating:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
5. Certificate of liability insurance in an amount established by the
Mayor and Council and naming the Borough as the insured party.
b. Individuals or Groups Seeking Issuance of a Permit Hereunder for a
Walk/Run/Race in the Borough.
1. Fully complete and submit to the Borough Clerk, for approval by
the Mayor and Borough Council, the application entitled
"Application for Walk/Run/Race" attaching a fully detailed map of
the proposed route along with the application fee of $50.
§ 10-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.1
AO:211
§ 10-3.2. Standards for Issuance. [1972 Code § 79A-3; Ord. No.
1219]
Standards for issuance of a use permit include the following findings:
§ 10-3.3. Approval of Permit. [New]
Applications for permits shall be reviewed for approval by the Mayor and
Council at any regular or special meeting.
§ 10-3.4. Rules and Regulations. [1972 Code § 79A-3; Ord. No.
1219]
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the permits.
2. The application must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the
event.
3. Events proposed from May 1st through the first weekend of
October are discouraged as are events requiring road closures. No
more than one event per date will be approved.
4. Provide a Certificate of Liability Insurance naming the Borough of
Manasquan as an additional insured in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000 is required and shall be submitted at least seven days
prior to the event or any approvals shall be rescinded.
5. The application shall be reviewed by the Police Department who
will provide an agreement advising the manpower requirements as
determined by the Chief of Police or his designee. An invoice will be
sent to the applicant within 30 days of the event and is due and
payable immediately after the event. Failure to pay the invoice, will
result in the denial of future events.
6. All applicants shall be bound by the terms of the "Application for
Walk/Run/Race" and the terms of the agreement with the Police
Department.
a. The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park.
b. The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere or detract
from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
c. The proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not
include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
d. The proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome
expense or police operation by the Borough.
e. The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the date
and hour requested in the application.
§ 10-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-3.5
AO:212
§ 10-3.5. Revocation. [1972 Code § 79A-3; Ord. No. 1219]
The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon
finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown.
§ 10-4. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR
VOLUNTEER COACHES.
§ 10-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 2]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COSPONSORED PROGRAM — Shall mean any program, including but not
limited to nonprofit youth serving organizations as defined below, which
receives benefits, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to
the provision of funding and/or the provisions of fields, facilities and/or
equipment (and including the maintenance of same), from the Borough of
Manasquan.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division and the State
Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police.
NONPROFIT YOUTH SERVING ORGANIZATIONS ("YOUTH
ORGANIZATION") — Shall mean a corporation, association or other
organization established pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title
15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other law of this State, but excluding
public and nonpublic schools, and which provides recreational, cultural,
charitable, social or other activities or services for persons younger than 18
years of age, and is exempt from Federal income taxes.
REVIEW COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee consisting of the Borough
Administrator, the Borough Attorney and the Chief of Police. The Committee
shall be charged with the review of all appeals of any volunteer coach
whose criminal history background check reveals a disqualifying criminal
conviction.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Shall mean recreation programs run directly
by the Borough of Manasquan, including oversight, control and/or fiscal
contribution.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean the entity located
within the New Jersey State Police responsible for retrieving criminal
background information on individuals as requested by State, local or
private entities.
VOLUNTEER COACH — Shall mean any person involved with coaching
or supervising participants in a sports-related nonprofit youth serving
organization, whether the title is coach, manager or another title consistent
with these terms.
§ 10-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.1
AO:213
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION ("VRO") — Shall mean the unit located
within the State Bureau of Identification that is responsible for
administering criminal background checks for volunteer coaches as
specified in this section.
§ 10-4.2. Requests for Volunteer Criminal History Record
Background Checks; Costs. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 3]
a. The Borough of Manasquan requires that all volunteer coaches of
nonprofit youth serving organizations ("youth organization") involved in
sponsored or cosponsored programs request through the youth
organization that the State Bureau of Identification and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation ("FBI") conduct a criminal history record
background check on each prospective and current volunteer coach of
youth organizations in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO. No person will
be permitted to act as a volunteer coach until the results of the
background checks have been received and reviewed by the
Manasquan Borough Recreation Committee through coordination with
the youth organization.32
b. The youth organization shall have a criminal history record background
check conducted only upon receipt of the name, address, fingerprints
and written consent from the prospective or current volunteer coach.
c. Any prospective or current volunteer coach of a youth organization who
refuses to consent to this procedure shall not be permitted to
participate in any sponsored or cosponsored programs involving youth
organizations.
d. The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history record background checks for prospective or current volunteer
coaches for Borough sponsored programs. The youth organizations
shall bear the costs for conducting checks for prospective or current
volunteer coaches participating in cosponsored programs in
accordance with the regulations established by the VRO.
e. The Chairperson of the Recreation Committee may set forth policies
and procedures which shall not be inconsistent with this section.33
f. The VRO shall advise the youth organization of the eligibility of the
prospective or current volunteer coach under the law. The youth
organization shall immediately provide this information to the
Manasquan Borough Recreation Committee. Any information received
by the youth organization and Recreation Committee shall be
confidential.34
32.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
33.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 10-4.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-4.2
AO:214
§ 10-4.3. Conditions Under Which a Person Is Disqualified from
Service. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 4]
A person may be disqualified from serving as a volunteer coach of a youth
organization if that person's criminal history record background check
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes and offenses:
§ 10-4.4. Submission and Exchange of Background Information
Pertaining to Volunteer Coaches. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 5]
Prospective or current volunteer coaches of youth organizations for
cosponsored programs shall submit their names, addresses, fingerprints,
written consent, and any other necessary information to the youth
g. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
under the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO.
h. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may result in the
Borough of Manasquan withholding funding for the program, youth
organization or league, and/or prohibiting the use of the Borough
facility.
a. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
1. Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et
seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
2. Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
3. Involving theft as set forth in chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
4. Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection a of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-10.
b. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly person's
offenses described in subsection a of this section.
c. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize an excluded sex
offender, as defined in section 1 of P.L. 2009, c. 139 (C. 2C:7-22), to
serve as a volunteer in a youth serving organization or any other entity
from which the excluded sex offender is otherwise statutorily
disqualified.
34.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.4
AO:215
organization for the criminal history record background check to be
performed. The youth organization shall coordinate the background check
and refer the information to the State Bureau of Investigation for the
background check. The youth organization shall be responsible for
obtaining the above information for all prospective and current volunteer
coaches. Thereafter, the youth organization shall coordinate criminal
background checks every three years after the date of the initial check.
Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the Borough may also
contract with a youth serving recreation organization which may conduct
the criminal history background checks in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
§ 10-4.5. Continuing Obligation. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 6]
Notwithstanding prior compliance with the within section, no individual
shall be permitted to continue as a volunteer coach of youth organizations in
any capacity unless the latest criminal history background check on file with
the Borough of Manasquan Recreation Committee35 was performed within
the prior three-year period.
§ 10-4.6. Limitations on Access and Use of Criminal History Record
Information. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 7]
§ 10-4.7. Determination by Review Committee, Concerning
Volunteer Coaches; Appeal. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 8]
a. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
youth organization, members of the Review Committee and the
Recreation Committee,36 as authorized by Federal or State statute, rule
or regulations, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history
record information obtained under this section.
b. The youth organization, Review Committee and Recreation
Committee37 shall limit its use of criminal history record information
solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained, and criminal
history record information furnished shall not be disseminated to
persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records for
authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited solely to the
authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not be
disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
Federal or State regulations, governing access to criminal history
record information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
35.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
36.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
37.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 10-4.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-4.7
AO:216
a. The VRO shall make a recommendation based on the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. as to whether the prospective or current
volunteer coach is being recommended. The VRO will provide the youth
organization with a letter of recommendation or nonrecommendation
for each individual for whom the VRO completed a background check.
The youth organization will immediately provide the letter to the
Recreation Committee.38
b. The Recreation Committee shall promptly notify a prospective or
current volunteer coach who receives a letter of nonrecommendation
from the VRO via certified and regular mail. Individuals who receive a
letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO will not be permitted to
participate as a volunteer coach. Such individuals may obtain a copy of
their criminal history record by contacting the VRO in writing. The
individuals shall then have 30 days from the receipt of notification from
the Recreation Committee to petition the Review Committee in writing
for a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.39
c. Within 10 days of the filing of a written notice of appeal, the Review
Committee shall send a written notice to the applicant via certified and
regular mail providing a hearing date no later than 30 days from the
filing of the notice of appeal. The Review Committee's letter shall
inform the individual that he or she has the right to be represented by
counsel and that he or she may call witnesses and present
documentation on his or her behalf.
d. The hearing before the Review Committee shall be closed to the general
public. It shall be attended only by the members of the Review
Committee, the appealing individual, his or her attorney if so retained,
and any witnesses called by the appealing individual, which witnesses
shall be present only for the period of their own testimony.
e. Individuals may be permitted to serve as a volunteer coach if they
establish that the background check produced inaccurate information,
or alternatively, if they affirmatively demonstrate rehabilitation to the
Review Committee by clear and convincing evidence. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing
evidence of rehabilitation, the Review Committee may consider the
following factors in conjunction with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1
et seq.:
1. The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
2. The nature and seriousness of the offense;
3. The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
38.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
39.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 10-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.7
AO:217
§ 10-4.8. Compliance; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2125-12 § 9]
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may result in the
Borough of Manasquan withholding funding for the program, youth
organization or league, and/or prohibiting the use of the Borough facility.
§ 10-5. through § 10-6. (RESERVED)
§ 10-7. TENNIS COURTS.
4. The date of the offense;
5. The age of the person when the offense was committed;
6. Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
7. Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
8. Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision; and
9. Any other evidence the Review Committee deems relevant in
determining rehabilitation.
f. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to serve as a volunteer coach will lie in the sole discretion of
the Review Committee.
g. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective or current
volunteer coach whether he or she is qualified to serve as a volunteer
coach. The Review Committee shall also notify the youth organization
affected by the decision via regular mail.
h. When the Recreation Committee receives a letter of recommendation or
nonrecommendation from the VRO, the letter shall be kept on file with
the Recreation Committee for not less than three years from the date is
was issued and consistent with Chapter 15:3-17 et seq. of the New
Jersey Administrative Code.40
i. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Recreation Committee pursuant to the provisions of this section.41
40.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
41.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 10-4.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 10-7.1
AO:218
§ 10-7.1. Rules and Regulations. [1972 Code § 98-2; Ord. No. 1032;
Ord. No. 1374]
The Borough Council shall have the right to establish, in writing, reasonable
rules and regulations for the use and maintenance of the tennis courts. The
rules and regulations shall be available upon request, and further, pertinent
excerpts of such rules and regulations shall be posted conspicuously at the
municipal tennis courts.
Chapter 11
DOCKS AND BULKHEADS
§ 11-1. BOROUGH-OWNED DOCKS.
§ 11-1.1. Lease Required. [1972 Code § 58-1]
No person or corporation shall use or occupy any property owned by the
Borough in the waters or in the waterways of the Borough for the purpose
of docking or mooring of boats, or other purposes having to do with boats,
unless the person or corporation shall first apply to the Municipal Clerk for
and enter into a lease for such privilege and pay to the Borough the rental
fees hereinafter fixed for such use.
§ 11-1.2. Time Limits for Installation. [1972 Code § 58-12; Ord. No.
1658-95; Ord. No. 2045-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2103-12 § 1; Ord. No.
2218-2016 § 1; amended 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2305-19]
All leases shall commence on March 1st and terminate on February 28th of
each calendar year. The rental fee established in Subsection 11-1.3 shall be
payable in full, in advance. There shall be no refund for any unexpired part
of the term of lease.
§ 11-1.3. Rental Fees. [1972 Code § 58-14; Ord. No. 906; Ord. No.
965; Ord. No. 1009; Ord. No. 1025; Ord. No. 1059; Ord. No. 1147;
Ord. No. 1188; Ord. No. 1268; Ord. No. 1300; Ord. No. 1331; Ord.
No. 1363; Ord. No. 1400; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1472; Ord. No.
1495; Ord. No. 1658-95; Ord. No. 1736-98 § 1; Ord. No. 1843-2001
§ 1; Ord. No. 1906-03 § 1; Ord. No. 1965-05 § 1; Ord. No. 1987-06
§ 1; Ord. No. 2018-07 § 4; Ord. No. 2045-09 §§ 2 — 4; Ord. No.
2103-12 § 2; Ord. No. 2170-14; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2199-15;
Ord. No. 2218-2016; amended 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2305-19]
Annual rental fees for the year 2020 shall be charged for each boat moored
at the following locations:
a. Perrine Boulevard:
1. The annual fee for boat slips 13 1/2 feet by 30 feet is as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 10-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.3
AO:219
§ 11-1.4. Subleasing Restricted. [1972 Code § 58-13]
Leases shall not be assigned nor shall any leased stalls or slips or privileges
to sublet or underlet without the permission of the Borough.
§ 11-1.5. Use of Slip Restricted to Assignee. [1972 Code § 58-2]
Stalls or slips shall be assigned to the holder of a lease for a particular boat.
No other boat may occupy the assigned stall or slip unless the holder of the
lease requests and receives the consent of the Borough in writing.
2. The annual fee for boat slips 12 1/2 feet by 26 feet is as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
b. Fourth Avenue:
1. The annual fee for boat slips nine feet by 25 feet is as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees. Up to twenty-foot boat permitted.
c. Cedar Avenue:
1. The annual fee for boat slips 11 feet by 24 feet is as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
d. Euclid Avenue:
1. The annual fee for boat slips 8 1/2 feet by 20 feet is as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
e. Length of Boat Determined. The length of a boat shall be determined by
the New Jersey State Registration provisions.
f. Rental Term. The term of the rental shall commence on March 1st and
terminate on February 28th of each calendar year.
g. Dry Storage Fee. A dry storage fee shall be charged for each boat,
recreational vehicle or noncommercial vehicle (collectively the "stored
property") stored in Pompano Avenue parking lot between November
1st and April 30th of the succeeding year:
A dry storage fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be charged for
stored property having a length of 20 feet or less. An additional charge
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be charged for stored property
having a length in excess of 20 feet; provided however, no stored
property shall exceed 30 feet in length. Rules and regulations for dry
storage in the Pompano Avenue parking lot shall be established by the
Public Works and Property Committee. The rules and regulations shall
be binding upon every person having stored property in the Pompano
Avenue parking lot.
§ 11-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 11-1.6
AO:220
§ 11-1.6. Changes in Stalls Restricted. [1972 Code § 58-3]
No changes between lessees of stalls or slips shall be permitted without the
consent of the Borough in writing.
§ 11-1.7. Emergency Assignments. [1972 Code § 58-11]
In an emergency or under unusual conditions when the Borough shall so
determine, the Borough reserves the right to assign a stall or slip adequate
for the boat other than the stall or slip originally assigned to it.
§ 11-1.8. Docking Privileges Restricted to Private Pleasure Boats.
[1972 Code § 58-10]
The docking and mooring privileges to be let shall be restricted to private
pleasure boats used for private pleasure purposes only. No party, charter
or other commercial boat of any kind whatsoever, nor any boats for hire,
shall be eligible for docking or mooring privileges, and no such boat shall be
permitted to dock or moor in the stalls or slips constructed or maintained
by the Borough.
§ 11-1.9. Use of Potable Water Restricted. [1972 Code § 58-17; Ord.
No. 1552-91]
Potable water that is available at municipal boat slips shall be used only in
connection with the maintenance and operation of boats. Water supplied by
the Borough shall not be used for washing motor vehicles or any similar
purpose.
§ 11-1.10. Sleeping on Moored Boats Prohibited. [1972 Code
§ 58-16; Ord. No. 1031]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to sleep overnight on vessels moored at stalls
or slips leased by the Borough under the terms of this section. In the event
that a violation of this section shall occur, the Borough shall have the right
to declare the holder of a lease in breach of the terms thereof and the lease
shall become null and void at the option of the Borough.
§ 11-1.11. Walkways and Facilities to Be Kept Clear. [1972 Code
§ 58-5; Ord. No. 1791-99 § 1)]
Walkways and other facilities through or by which access is gained to boats
docked or moored in the stalls or slips shall be kept clear at all times. No
supplies, equipment or material of any kind shall be piled or placed thereon,
except that lessees may place a utility box on the municipal dock. The utility
box shall not exceed 48 inches in length, 24 inches in width and 24 inches
in height. The utility box must be white and be constructed of fiberglass or
plastic material. The utility box shall be anchored to the dock in a secure
manner. Lessees are responsible for all risks of theft or damage to the utility
box and its contents.
§ 11-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2
AO:221
§ 11-2. DOCK AND WATERWAY REGULATIONS.
§ 11-2.1. Dumping and Littering Prohibited. [1972 Code § 58-6]
Garbage, paper and other refuse shall not be thrown overboard from any
boat while the boat is in the waters or waterways of the Borough, or into any
waters or waterways under its jurisdiction. The disposal of garbage, paper
and other refuse shall be provided for by the owner, lessee or other person
in charge of such boat.
§ 11-2.2. Use of Boat Toilets. [1972 Code § 58-7]
Boat toilets shall not be used while the boat is in its stall or slip or while in
the waters adjacent thereto.
§ 11-2.3. Disposal of Waste Oil. [1972 Code § 58-8]
Waste oil shall not be deposited or disposed of into the waters of any stall
or slip nor into the waters adjacent thereto.
§ 11-2.4. Cleaning of Fish and Seafood. [1972 Code § 58-9]
The cleaning of fish or other seafood or the opening of clams or other
shellfish shall not be permitted on any boat while it is docked or moored in
its stall or slip or in the waters adjacent thereto, or on any catwalk, walkway
or other facilities through or by which access is gained to any boat. All such
fish offal or seafood offal shall be carried away and disposed of by the owner,
lessee or other person in charge of the boat.
§ 11-2.5. Removal of Fire Hazards. [1972 Code § 58-4]
Any conditions about or around a boat declared to be a fire hazard in the
judgment of the Fire Inspector shall be removed by the owner or person in
charge of such boat.
§ 11-3. FEES FOR THE REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF BOATS AND
VESSELS MOORED IN MUNICIPAL SLIPS OR LOCATED ON
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
§ 11-3.1. Legislative Findings. [Ord. No. 1760-98 § 1; Ord. No.
1872-02 § 2]
The Borough of Manasquan owns and maintains boat slips in various areas
of the Municipality and leases these boat slips to the general public under
the provisions of this Chapter. The Municipality owns various parcels of
real property and uses and maintains these properties for public purposes.
In certain instances, owners of boats and vessels have moored their boats
and vessels at municipal boat slips: without obtaining a valid lease; without
paying required lease fees; or have created a hazardous condition. For
the purpose of this provision, such boats and vessels shall be termed as
"illegally moored." Owners of boats and vessels also placed or stored such
§ 11-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 11-3.1
AO:222
boats and vessels on real property owned by the Municipality without
receiving permission to do so. The Borough Council is desirous of
establishing a procedure for the removal of illegally moored boats and
vessels or boats and vessels which are illegally stored or placed on
municipal property.
§ 11-3.2. Procedure to Notify Owner of Illegal Placement of Vessel.
[Ord. No. 1760-98 § 2; Ord. No. 1872-02 § 2]
Upon receiving a report that a boat or vessel is illegally moored at any
slip owned by the Municipality or is illegally placed or stored on any real
property owned by the Municipality, the Manasquan Police Department
shall attempt to locate the owner of the boat or vessel. If possible, a
representative of the Manasquan Police Department shall telephone the
owner for the purpose of advising that the Municipality intends to remove
the boat or vessel and store same at a location to be determined by the
Municipality. If the owner cannot be reached by telephone, notice of
removal of the vessel shall be sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 11-3.3. Removal and Storage of Unauthorized Boats. [Ord. No.
1760-98 § 3; Ord. No. 1872-02 § 2]
The Manasquan Police Department is authorized and directed to make all
necessary arrangements for the removal of boats or vessels illegally moored
in municipal boat slips or illegally placed or stored on municipal property.
The Police Department is authorized to retain the services of a private boat
hauler to remove the boat or vessel from a municipal slip or municipallyowned
real property and store the boat or vessel in an area to be designated
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 11-3.4. Recovery of Vessel; Storage Fee. [Ord. No. 1760-98 § 4;
Ord. No. 1872-02 § 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The owner of the boat or vessel shall be entitled to recover it subject to the
payment of expenses incurred by the Municipality in removing the boat or
vessel from a municipal boat slip or from municipally-owned real property
and a storage fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, for each day the boat or
vessel is stored by the Municipality.
§ 11-3.5. Disposal of Boats or Vessels Stored by the Municipality
over 90 Days. [Ord. No. 1872-02 § 2]
After the Municipality has stored a boat or vessel for more than 90 days
pursuant to subsection 11-3.4 above, the Municipality is authorized, as
determined in its sole discretion, to either sell the boat or vessel at public
sale or arrange for its destruction. If the boat or vessel is sold, the net
proceeds of sale shall be applied to reduce accrued storage fees. In the
event the boat or vessel is destroyed, the Municipality shall be entitled to
recover all expenses incurred by it.
§ 11-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4
AO:223
§ 11-4. LAUNCH SITE FOR NONMOTORIZED BOATS AND VESSELS.
[Ord. No. 2005-07 § 8]
§ 11-5. CONSTRUCTION OF BULKHEADS.42
§ 11-5.1. Building Permit Required. [1972 Code § 54A-1; Ord. No.
1041]
No person, firm or corporation shall take, construct, build or otherwise
develop a boat basin, boat docking facility, lagoon, stream, channel, marina
or other area where natural earth is moved and water substituted therefor,
in whole or in part, unless and until a building permit is obtained for such
project from the Borough through its Construction Code Official. The permit
shall include and require the construction of bulkheading, in accordance
with the specifications hereinafter provided.
§ 11-5.2. Permit Fees. [1972 Code § 54A-2; Ord. No. 1041; New; Ord.
No. 2180-15]
Permit fees for the construction of bulkheading are as follows:
§ 11-5.3. Compliance Required. [1972 Code § 54A-3; Ord. No. 1041]
No person or corporation shall construct or use such a boat basin, boat
docking facility, stream, lagoon, channel, marina or other areas in any zone
where same is not permitted by the Zoning Regulations or other ordinance
or ordinances of the Borough.
§ 11-5.4. Construction Permit Required. [1972 Code § 54A-4; Ord.
No. 1041]
No person, firm or corporation shall begin to or continue to dig, pump out
or construct a boat basin, boat docking facility, lagoon, stream, channel,
a. The following sites are designated as launch sites for nonmotorized
boats or vessels: (1) southerly terminus of South Jackson Avenue; (2)
Stockton Park launch site; and (3) launch site adjacent to the Fourth
Avenue parking lot.
b. All nonmotorized boats or vessels launched at these sites must be
carried by hand into the water and cannot be launched by trailer or
similar means. Nonmotorized boats or vessels may be launched at this
site from dawn to dusk. Motorized boats or vessels are prohibited at
these sites.
a. For the first 50 lineal feet or fractional part thereof, excluding bulkhead
returns, the fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
b. For each additional 50 lineal feet or fractional part thereof, excluding
bulkhead returns the fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
42.Editor's Note: See Chapter 14, Building and Housing, for construction fees.
§ 11-4 MANASQUAN CODE § 11-5.4
AO:224
marina or other area where natural earth is moved and water substituted
therefor, in whole or in part, unless and until a construction permit is
obtained for such digging, pumping or construction, including the proper
bulkheading of the basin, facility, lagoon, stream, channel, marina or area,
from the Borough through its Construction Code Official, and which
construction permit shall include the construction of bulkheading as
hereinafter provided.
§ 11-5.5. Standards for Construction. [1972 Code § 54A-5; Ord. No.
1041]
The standards for construction of bulkheads as referred to herein are:
§ 11-5.6. Exemptions. [1972 Code § 54A-7; Ord. No. 1041]
Each subsection and provision of this section shall be considered as a
separate and distinct unit. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
apply to dredging done by or for:
a. All timber used, except as noted below, shall be new and unused
Douglas fir, southern yellow pine, cypress, cedar or oak.
b. Treated piling wales and sheet piling shall be Douglas fir, southern
yellow pine or cypress.
c. The bulkhead piling, wales and sheet piling shall be pressure-treated
with creosote oil and shall retain not less than 12 pounds of oil for
freshwater bulkheads or 16 pounds of oil for saltwater bulkheads per
cubic foot of timber.
d. Sheet piling shall be tongue and groove.
e. Anchor piles and anchor logs may be untreated oak or pine or creosoted
oak or creosoted pine.
f. All hardware used in the construction of bulkheads shall be new,
unused and galvanized.
g. All timber bulkheads shall be erected true to lines and grades shown in
the application for a building permit and in the permit and shall be
properly backfilled so they will remain firm and in place.
h. All timber bulkheads shall be constructed in a thoroughly good
workmanlike manner.
a. The United States government or any of its agencies or departments.
b. The State of New Jersey or any of its departments.
c. The County of Monmouth or any of its departments.
d. The Borough of Manasquan or any of its departments when such
Federal, State, County or municipal dredging is done as a public project
§ 11-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.6
AO:225
Chapter 12
BEACHES AND BEACHFRONT
Editor's Note: For regulations restricting dogs on beaches and the
boardwalk, see Chapter 5, Animal Control, Section 5-3.
Use Regulations
§ 12-1. COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS;
DEFINITIONS.
§ 12-1.1. Compliance Required. [1972 Code § 47-1]
The rules and regulations of this chapter for government, use, maintenance
and policing of the dedicated beachfront, public walk, bathing beaches
and bathing and recreational facilities, safeguards and equipment shall be
observed by persons using the dedicated beachfront, public walk, bathing
and recreational facilities, safeguards and equipment and waters adjacent
thereto in the Borough.
§ 12-1.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 47-20.1]
As used in this chapter, unless another meaning is clearly apparent from
the language or context of any regulation, all references to the emergency
access roadway, beachwalk, access ramps and dedicated beachfront shall
include the access ramps east of First Avenue and the paved area along the
Beachfront from the Manasquan Inlet to Ocean Avenue.
DRONE — An unmanned aircraft that can fly under the control of a remote
pilot or by a geographic positions system ("GPS") guided autopilot
mechanism, and that is equipped with a sensing device or capable of any
data collection.[Added 6-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2291-19]
§ 12-2. BEACH REGISTRATION AND BADGES.
§ 12-2.1. Required. [1972 Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 1160; Ord. No.
1625-94]
Each and every person using the bathing beaches and bathing and
recreational facilities, except children who have not yet reached their 12th
birthday, shall, before using the same and before entering upon the same,
register with the duly authorized agents of the Borough employed for
that purpose. Such person shall supply his or her name and address and
such other information as may be required by the Borough Council or its
authorized representatives.
and for public benefit as contrasted to dredging done by a private
person, firm or corporation for his or its own business and profit.
§ 11-5.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-2.2
AO:226
§ 12-2.2. Display of Badge Required. [1972 Code § 47-1]
Each and every person so registered shall be furnished with a badge, check
or other insignia, which badge, check or other insignia shall be serially
numbered for identification purposes, shall be worn by the registrant
conspicuously, shall be visible at all times and shall be exhibited at all times
on demand to the beach inspectors or Manasquan Police, and the number
of the badge, check or other insignia, at the time of registration, shall be
entered opposite the registrant's name and address so that the registrant
may be readily identified at all times in case of accident, sickness or death.
§ 12-2.3. Reproduction or Imitation of Badges Prohibited. [1972
Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 962]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, make, sell or
exchange any badge or insignia that is a copy, imitation, facsimile or
reproduction of any official beach badge issued by the Borough.
§ 12-2.4. Fees.43 [1972 Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 879; Ord. No. 905; Ord.
No. 939; Ord. No. 1013; Ord. No. 1034; Ord. No. 1107; Ord. No.
1160; Ord. No. 1217; Ord. No. 1234; Ord. No. 1244; Ord. No. 1269;
Ord. No. 1302; Ord. No. 1334; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord.
No. 1439; Ord. No. 1447; Ord. No. 1477; Ord. No. 1496; Ord. No.
1503-90; Ord. No. 1534-91; Ord. No. 1566-9; Ord. No. 1600-93; Ord.
No. 1625-94; Ord. No. 1659-95; Ord. No. 1682-96; Ord. No. 1720-97;
Ord. No. 1745-98; Ord. No. 1814-2000 § 1; Ord. No. 1845-2001 § 2;
Ord. No. 1874-02 §§ 1 — 9; Ord. No. 1945-05 §§ 1 — 5; Ord. No.
1970-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2027-08 § 1; Ord. No. 2067-10 § 1]
The following charges shall be made for badges issued for the summer
season during each calendar year:
a. For each daily weekday badge for persons over the age of 12 years the
fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A "weekday" is defined as
Monday through Friday.
b. For each daily weekend badge for persons over the age of 12 years the
fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A "weekend" is defined as
Saturday and Sunday.
c. For each weekly badge for persons over the age of 12 years the fee shall
be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A "week" is defined as the period from
Saturday through Friday.
d. For each season badge for persons over the age of 16 years the fee shall
be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A season badge is valid for the entire
bathing season.
43.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.7 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 12-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:227
§ 12-2.5. Intent of Fee Revenues. [1972 Code § 47-1]
The charges mentioned in subsection 12-2.4 are made for the purpose
of providing revenue to improve, maintain and police the dedicated
beachfront; for providing bathing beaches, lifeguards, boats, ropes and
other facilities, safeguards and equipment for public bathing and
recreation; to provide for all equipment for the protection and safety of
bathers using the beachfront; and to provide funds to protect the dedicated
beachfront from erosion, encroachment and damage by the sea or
otherwise.
§ 12-3. ADMINISTRATION; BEACH EMPLOYEES.
§ 12-3.1. Authority of Borough Council. [1972 Code § 47-1; Ord. No.
1600-93; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
e. For each season badge for persons 12, 13, 14, 15 or 16 years of age the
fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A season badge is valid for
the entire bathing season.
f. For each season badge for persons over the age of 65 years the fee shall
be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. A season badge is valid for the entire
bathing season.
g. The Borough Council shall have the authority to establish, by
resolution, a discount rate for daily badges and season badges,
provided, however that discount rates for season badges shall apply
only to badges purchased prior to a specific date which shall be
established in the resolution.
h. For each daily weekday badge for persons over the age of 12 years
which is sold on the dedicated beachfront at a location other than a
badge booth or entrance/access area the fee shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
i. For each daily weekend badge for persons over the age of 12 years
which is sold on the dedicated beachfront at a location other than a
badge booth or entrance/access area the fee shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
j. A beach badge issued to a handicapped person shall be sold at 1/2 of
the regular charge established for the particular category of badge to
be issued. A handicapped person shall be a person as defined in N.J.S.A.
39:4-204.
k. Active members of the United States Armed Services and their
dependents shall be allowed free admission to the beach upon
presentation of a valid military status identification card at any beach
entrance.
l. The terms "bathing season" or "summer season" shall mean the period
from May 15th through September 15th of each year.
§ 12-2.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-3.1
AO:228
§ 12-3.2. Department Head of the Beach Department. [1973 Code
§ 47-1; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
§ 12-3.3. Chief Lifeguard. [1972 Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
a. The Borough Council is authorized to employ a Department Head, Chief
Lifeguard and such other employees as may be necessary to carry out
and enforce the provisions of this chapter and to purchase supplies and
materials as may be necessary.
b. The Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
control and regulation of the beachfront and waters adjacent thereto.
a. The Department Head of the Beach Department shall serve yearly at
the pleasure of the Borough Council.
b. The Borough Council shall consider the recommendations from the
Beach Committee and the Department Head's previous year's
performance, if applicable, in considering reemployment of the
Department Head.
c. The Department Head shall be compensated at an annual salary
designated by the Borough Council. The salary shall be divided evenly
for the pay periods during the term of the Department Head's annual
service.
d. The Department Head shall oversee and supervise all Beach
Department operations.
e. The Department Head shall be on duty six days each week, which shall
include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The Department Head shall
be entitled to one day off each week during the period of employment.
f. The Beach Committee may consider special requests by the
Department Head for a holiday or weekend off.
a. The Chief Lifeguard shall serve yearly at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Borough Council for a period not to exceed six months, beginning April
1 and ending September 30 of each year.
b. The Mayor and Borough Council shall consider the recommendations
from the Beach Committee and the Chief Lifeguard's previous year's
performance, if applicable, in considering reemployment of the Chief
Lifeguard.
c. The Chief Lifeguard shall be compensated at an annual salary
designated by the Borough Council. The salary shall be divided evenly
for the pay periods during the term of the Chief Lifeguard's annual
service.
d. The Chief Lifeguard shall be Acting Department Head in the absence of
the Department Head.
§ 12-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.3
AO:229
§ 12-3.4. Beach Employees. [1972 Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 1600-93;
Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
All beach employees, with the exception of the Department Head and Chief
Lifeguard, shall record the start of work, work breaks, and record the
conclusion of the day's work on a time clock provided for that purpose.
§ 12-3.5. Lifeguards. [1972 Code § 47-15; Ord. No. 1600-93]
§ 12-4. CONDUCT AND USE RESTRICTIONS.
§ 12-4.1. Bathing Area Restrictions. [1972 Code § 47-2; Ord. No.
1600-93]
No person or persons shall bathe from the dedicated beachfront except
from the protected bathing beaches where flags or ropes, boats and
lifeguards are provided by the Borough, and only at such times as the
lifeguards are on duty. Separate bathing beaches with flags or ropes, boats
and lifeguards shall be provided on the dedicated beachfront for the
protection of bathers and to prevent congestion at the bathing beaches.
§ 12-4.2. Ball Playing Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-3; Ord. No.
1600-93; Ord. No. 1775-98 § 1; Ord. No. 2027-08 § 2]
No person or persons shall play baseball or engage in any kind of ball
playing, nor shall any person or persons engage in any game or exercise
which involves the throwing or projecting of any object in the area between
the monumented beachfront line and the western toe of the sand dunes,
e. The Chief Lifeguard shall be on duty six days each week, which shall
include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The Chief Lifeguard shall be
entitled to one day off each week during the period of employment.
f. The Beach Committee may consider special requests by the Chief
Lifeguard for a holiday or weekend off.
g. The Chief Lifeguard shall have direct responsibility for the supervisory
lifeguard staff, lifeguards and the first aid and rescue team.
a. Employees shall only record their times of employment and shall not
record times of employment for any other employee.
b. The Department Head shall verify, on a daily basis, the times of
employment of all beach employees who do not have access to the time
clock.
a. Lifeguards shall be maintained on duty at the bathing beaches now or
hereafter established during the bathing hours between 9:00 a.m. and
5:30 p.m. The lifeguards shall have full police power and have full
charge and supervision of the bathing at the respective beaches where
they are stationed.
§ 12-3.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-4.2
AO:230
which area includes the public walk on the dedicated beachfront, except in
areas and periods of time designated for this purpose.
§ 12-4.3. Disrobing Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-4]
No person or persons shall disrobe, dress or undress on the dedicated
beachfront.
§ 12-4.4. Littering Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-5]
No person shall throw any bottles, cans, paper or other refuse upon the
dedicated beachfront, and all such refuse shall be placed in containers
provided therefor.
§ 12-4.5. Dogs Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-6; Ord. No. 1593-93;
Ord. No. 1823-00 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit same to be upon the
dedicated beachfront, beachwalk or municipal property adjacent thereto
between April 1st and October 31st of each year.
The owner of any dog under the control of a leash may utilize the dedicated
beachfront east of the sand dunes, and the approaches and beachwalk for
access only, between November 1st and March 31st of each year.
§ 12-4.6. Bicycles Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-7; Ord. No. 1355]
No person or persons shall ride, walk, carry or park a bicycle or similar
device on the public walk or dedicated beachfront for the period between
the Friday preceding Memorial Day and Labor Day of each year, except
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Bicycle riding is permitted on
the public walk and dedicated beachfront during the remainder of the year.
§ 12-4.7. Fires Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-8]
No fires will be permitted on the dedicated beachfront without the permit
in writing from the Borough Council.
§ 12-4.8. Damaging or Defacing Fences or Structures. [1972 Code
§ 47-9]
No person or persons shall climb, break, damage or deface any fence or
other Borough property on the dedicated beachfront.
§ 12-4.9. Peddling or Vending Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-10; Ord.
No. 2027-08 § 3]
No person or persons shall peddle, vend, sell, distribute or offer for sale any
goods, wares, merchandise or raffle tickets on the dedicated beachfront or
the public walk on the dedicated beachfront.
§ 12-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.10
AO:231
§ 12-4.10. Soliciting Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-11]
No person or persons shall solicit any business on the public walk or
dedicated beachfront.
§ 12-4.11. Selling or Distributing Circulars, Leaflets Prohibited.
[1972 Code § 47-12]
No person or persons shall sell or distribute any leaflets, circulars,
pamphlets or other printed matter upon the dedicated beachfront or on the
public walk.
§ 12-4.12. Tampering with Boats or Lifeguard Equipment. [1972
Code § 47-13]
No person or persons shall use or tamper with any boat or other lifeguard
equipment except in case of emergency, without the permission of the
captain of the lifeguards.
§ 12-4.13. Surf Fishing Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-14]
No person or persons shall engage in surf fishing in the bathing areas
during bathing hours.
§ 12-4.14. Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-16; Ord.
No. 2111-12 § 3]
No person or persons shall bring, possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the public walk or dedicated beachfront. Any person who
violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine in the amount of $400.
§ 12-4.15. Obscene Modeling. [1972 Code § 47-18]
No person shall model any obscene or lewd figures upon such dedicated
beachfront.
§ 12-4.16. Removal of Beach Sand Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-19]
No person shall take or haul any beach sand or soil from the dedicated
beachfront.
§ 12-4.17. Holes in Beach Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-20]
No holes shall be dug in the dedicated beachfront in such a manner as to
leave a depression which creates a safety hazard.
§ 12-4.10 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-4.18
AO:232
§ 12-4.18. Kites Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-20.1; Ord. No. 1355;
Ord. No. 1600-93]
No person shall fly or utilize a kite, toy/model airplane or similar device on
the dedicated beachfront, except in areas and periods of time designated
for this purpose.
§ 12-4.19. Mopeds and Motorcycles Prohibited.44 [1972 Code
§ 47-20.1; Ord. No. 1355; Ord. No. 1600-93]
No person shall ride, walk, carry or park a moped, motor scooter,
motorcycle or other motorized vehicle on the public walk adjacent to the
dedicated beachfront at any time, except authorized employees of the
municipality.
§ 12-4.20. Roller Skates, Roller Blades and Skateboards Restricted.
[1972 Code § 47-20.1]
No person shall use roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, or similar
devices on any public walk, including the access ramps adjacent thereto,
for the period between the Friday preceding Memorial Day and September
30 of each year, except during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Roller
skating, roller blading and skateboarding is permitted on the public walk
during the remainder of the year.
§ 12-4.21. Restrictions on Boats.45 [Ord. No. 2-27-08 § 5]
No person shall cause or permit any type of boat to be placed on the
dedicated beachfront, except that kayaks and canoes can be placed on the
beachfront in areas and within time periods designated for this purpose.
§ 12-4.22. Volleyball Playing Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-20.1; Ord.
No. 1462; Ord. No. 1600-93]
No person shall engage in the activity of playing volleyball on the dedicated
beachfront, except in areas and periods of time designated for this purpose.
§ 12-4.23. Fishermen and Surfers Restricted; Hours Established.
[1972 Code § 47-20.1; Ord. No. 2027-08 §§ 6, 7]
The use of the beach area by fishermen and surfers is restricted. The beach
area between the north jetty of the Manasquan Inlet and the first storm jetty
to the north of the Inlet jetty may be used by surfers at any time. Surfing in
all other areas along the beach between May 15 and September 15 of each
year is permitted only between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 8:30 p.m.
44.Editor's Note: See also Subsection 3-17.1, Use Restriction for Minibikes and Trail Bikes.
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 12-4.21, Surfboards Restricted, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1972 Code § 47-20.1 and Ord. No. 1600-93, was repealed
in its entirety by Ord. No. 2027-28. See Subsection 12-4.23 for restrictions for surfers.
§ 12-4.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.23
AO:233
From May 15 through September 15 of each year, fishermen may only use
the beach area between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. Fishermen
may use all areas of the beach at all times from September 16 through May
14 of each year.
§ 12-4.24. Glass Containers Prohibited. [1972 Code § 47-20.2; Ord.
No. 1600-93]
No person shall take or possess a glass bottle, jar or similar container upon
the dedicated beachfront.
§ 12-4.25. Use of Beach Restricted Between Sunset and Sunrise.
[1972 Code § 47-20.1]
No person shall recline, lie flat, prone or prostrate on the dedicated
beachfront during the period between sunset and sunrise of the following
day.
§ 12-4.26. Rough Surf Management Plan. [Added 6-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 2288-1946]
a. The Chief Lifeguard, with input from the Police Chief, will regulate and
control the beachfront as to determine whether bathing and/or surfing
is to be permitted, restricted or closed after normal operating hours.
Lifeguards will remain on duty under the direction of the Chief
Lifeguard and support of the Police Chief. Beaches can be closed to
bathing and/or surfing completely whereby lifeguards and police would
keep people away from the dangerous surf or have restricted bathing
and/or surfing in designated areas as determined by the Chief
Lifeguard and support from the Police Chief.
b. Under the direction of the Chief Lifeguard, when lifeguards are told to
secure and depart the beachfront, the lifeguards will advise the patrons
that they are going off duty and to not go near the dangerous surf to
swim or surf. The Chief Lifeguard will notify the Borough of Manasquan
Police Department that the lifeguards are off duty. The police will then
monitor the beach, keeping people out of the surf when lifeguards are
not present. Rough Surf Management Plan will remain in effect until
the surf conditions subside and normal beach operating conditions are
in effect.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 3-2-2020 by Ord. No. 2310-20 to correct the
number of the added section.
§ 12-4.23 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-4.27
AO:234
§ 12-4.27. Drones Restricted. [Added 6-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2291-1947]
No person shall fly or utilize a drone or similar device on the dedicated
beachfront area, entire beachwalk and all access ramps that lead to the
beachwalk between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. EST.
§ 12-5. GOGGLE FISHING AND SPEARFISHING.
§ 12-5.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 47-22]
As used in this section:
GOGGLE FISHING or SPEARFISHING — Shall mean attempting to take
or the taking of fish, crabs, or other marine life by means of a spear,
harpoon, dart, arrow, gun or any missile hand-held or hand-propelled by the
fisherman or the taking or the attempting to take of fish, crabs or other
marine life by means of any device which is hand-held or hand-propelled
and projects a missile of any kind.
§ 12-5.2. Prohibited During Certain Times of Year. [1972 Code
§ 47-23; Ord. No. 2027-08 § 8]
No person or persons shall engage in goggle fishing or spearfishing in the
beachfront areas of the Borough during the period from May 15 to October
15 in each year.
§ 12-5.3. Use of Jetties Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-24; Ord. No.
2027-08 § 9]
No person or persons shall engage in goggle fishing or spearfishing from
any jetties bounding the beachfront areas or from any jetty or jetties within
any beachfront areas of the Borough during the period from May 15 to
October 15 in each year.
§ 12-6. SMOKING AND DISPOSAL OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS ON
THE MUNICIPAL BEACHFRONT AREA.
§ 12-6.1. Legislative Statement. [Ord. No. 1882-02 § 1]
The municipal beaches provide an opportunity for residents and visitors to
enjoy Manasquan's seashore environment, breathe the fresh salt air, play
or relax on the sand or in the water, and engage in other healthy and
wholesome recreational or fitness related activities.
The odors caused by persons who smoke tobacco products and the litter
caused by persons who improperly dispose of cigarette butts on the beach
significantly detract from this wholesome and healthy environment and
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 3-2-2020 by Ord. No. 2310-20 to correct the
number of the added section.
§ 12-4.27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.1
AO:235
reduce the enjoyment of the beach for people who want to enjoy a healthy
and wholesome environment free of smoking related pollution.
For many years, volunteer groups performing beach and dune clean-ups
have reported that cigarette butts constitute a significant portion of litter
collected from this area.
Manasquan's beach cleaning equipment is unable to pick up cigarette butts
from the beach, and it is not economically feasible for the municipality to
regularly sift the sand to remove discarded cigarette butts.
Manasquan wants to promote and enhance the healthy and wholesome
environment of its beaches, and safe enjoyment of these facilities by all
individuals, especially children, by prohibiting smoking on its beaches
except in areas specifically designated and suitably equipped for that
purpose.
The creation of smoke-free areas on Manasquan's beaches will reduce
smoking-related litter because designated smoking areas can be better
equipped to facilitate the proper disposal of smoking-related litter. Also, by
reducing the areas where smoking-related litter will be likely to accumulate,
removal of this litter will be more practical.
§ 12-6.2. Litter Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1882-02 § 2; Ord. No. 1886-02
§ 1]
No person shall discard bottles, cans, paper or other refuse, including, but
not limited to, cigarette butts, cigar butts, and other tobacco products, in
the beachfront area. All refuse, paper and litter shall be placed in refuse
containers provided by the municipality.
§ 12-6.3. Smoking Prohibited in Beachfront Areas. [Ord. No.
1882-02 § 3; Ord. No. 1886-02 § 2; Ord. No. 1960-05 § 1; amended
6-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2291-19]
No person shall smoke a cigarette, cigar, electronic smoking device or other
tobacco product in the beachfront area, entire beachwalk and all access
ramps that lead to the beachwalk at any time.
§ 12-6.4. Authorization to Adopt Additional Regulations. [Ord. No.
1882-02 § 4; Ord. No. 1960-05 § 2]
The Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt, by
resolution, such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
proper control and regulation of the beachfront area. For purposes of
this section, the term "beachfront area" shall mean all areas east of the
municipal beachwalk. The "beachfront area" shall include, the beach, beach
jetties, dunes, beach plantings and waters adjacent to such area. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the municipality from enforcing other
applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, New Jersey State Statutes or
other applicable laws.
§ 12-6.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-7
AO:236
§ 12-7. VEHICLES ON WALKWAYS AND RAMPS.
§ 12-7.1. Use of Motor Vehicles, Animal-Driven Vehicles and
Motorized Bicycles.
§ 12-8. (RESERVED)
§ 12-9. BEACH EMERGENCY ACCESS ROADWAY.
§ 12-9.1. Restricted Use. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G]
No motor vehicle, other than a municipally-owned motor vehicle or a vehicle
operated by an authorized agent of the Municipality, shall use the beach
emergency access roadway except as hereinafter provided.
§ 12-9.2. Permit; Application; Deposit. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G; Ord.
No. 1961-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
A person, firm, or corporation seeking permission to use the beach
emergency access roadway shall file a permit application with the Municipal
Clerk. The application shall be made in writing and contain the following
information:
a. No unauthorized person shall operate, drive or propel any motor
vehicle, animal-driven vehicle or motorized bicycle on the walkway at
the beachfront and the ramps or approaches thereto, the walkway at
Stockton Beach Park of the Esplanade at the Inlet on Riverside Drive
unless such person is the holder of a valid beach access permit.48
b. Handicapped persons driving motor vehicles with valid handicapped
license plates are authorized to use the Ocean Avenue beach access
ramp. The north ramp is designated one-way westbound and the south
ramp is designated one-way eastbound.
a. The purpose for which the applicant seeks to use the emergency beach
access roadway.
b. The street address and lot and block number of the property which the
applicant seeks to gain access to by use of the roadway.
c. The type of vehicle(s), full description and color of the vehicle(s)
together with the license plate number of the vehicle(s).
d. The name, address, business telephone number and home telephone
number of the person responsible for the vehicle(s) using the access
roadway.
e. The applicant shall be required to pay a fee as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees, to cover costs incurred by the Borough in the issuance of this
permit and inspection(s) incidental thereto.
48.Editor's Note: See Section 12-9 for Beach Access Permit.
§ 12-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.2
AO:237
§ 12-9.3. Public Utilities; Bonds. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G]
A public utility corporation of the State of New Jersey may post a corporate
bond on a yearly basis in the amount of $5,000 in lieu of a cash deposit. The
corporated bond shall, by its terms, provide for the payment of any damages
by or from the acts of the applicant, its agents, servants or subcontractors
and save the Borough harmless from any suits at law, or otherwise which
may result from damages sustained by any person or property as the
result, directly or indirectly, of the work performed under this permit. Any
utilities authority formed under the provisions of Title 40 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes may, in lieu of posting a corporate bond, file with the
Municipal Clerk a statement that the authority will provide the payment of
any damages by or from its acts, its agents, servants or subcontractors and
save the Borough harmless from any suits at law or otherwise which may
result from damages sustained by any persons or property as the result,
directly or indirectly, of the work performed under this permit.
§ 12-9.4. Notification of Termination of Use; Inspection. [1972 Code
§ 47-20.1G]
The cash deposit, as provided above, shall be retained by the Borough
Treasurer until the applicant has terminated use of the emergency access
roadway. The applicant shall notify the Municipal Clerk, in writing, of the
fact that the use of the access roadway is no longer required. At such
time, the access roadway shall be inspected by the Superintendent of Public
Works to determine if it has been damaged.
§ 12-9.5. Applicant's Responsibility for Damage. [1972 Code
§ 47-20.1G]
The applicant shall be responsible for any damages sustained to any person
or property as a result, directly or indirectly, of the use of the access
roadway and shall save the Borough harmless from any suits at law or
otherwise which may result from such use of the access roadway. The
costs to repair damage to the access roadway shall be charged against the
cash deposit (if applicable) and the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be
returned to the applicant. In the event the cash deposit is insufficient or if
a deposit has not been made to cover the costs incurred in restoring the
access roadway to its former condition, the holder of the permit shall be
responsible for any excess costs incurred by the Borough.
f. (Reserved)
g. If the vehicle(s) to be utilized has a gross vehicle weight of 5,000
pounds or less, no cash deposit is required.
h. If the vehicle(s) to be utilized has a gross vehicle weight exceeding five
5,000 pounds, the applicant shall be required to post a cash deposit or
letter of credit issued by a bank authorized to do business in the State
of New Jersey as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, to ensure that the beach
emergency access roadway is not damaged.
§ 12-9.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-9.6
AO:238
§ 12-9.6. Limited Use; Hours; Time of Year. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G]
The holder of a permit under this regulation shall be limited to utilizing the
access roadway between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. The use of the
access roadway is expressly prohibited on Saturdays, Sundays and for the
entire period from the Saturday before Memorial Day to Labor Day of each
year.
§ 12-9.7. Barriers. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G]
The Chief of Police or his designee may require traffic control devices or
barriers to be erected in order to insure the safety of the public.
§ 12-9.8. Type of Vehicles Restricted. [1972 Code § 47-20.1G]
Use of emergency access roadway shall be limited to vehicles having rubber
tires. No vehicle, such as a backhoe with out-riggers or a track bulldozer,
shall be permitted to use the access roadway.
§ 12-10. PERMITS FOR GROUPS OF TWENTY OR MORE.49
§ 12-10.1. Required. [1972 Code § 47-26; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No.
1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord. No. 1439; Ord. No. 1477;
Ord. No. 1600-93; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
No group of 20 or more people shall be admitted to the bathing beaches
without first having secured a permit from the Department Head.
§ 12-10.2. Application; Time for Filing. [1972 Code § 47-26; Ord.
No. 886; Ord. No. 1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord. No.
1439; Ord. No. 1477; Ord. No. 1600-93; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
Groups of 20 or more people will be issued a permit for use of the bathing
beaches provided that an application for the permit is made at least seven
days prior to the date of the proposed use by such group.
§ 12-10.3. Denial; Revocation. [1972 Code § 47-26; Ord. No. 886;
Ord. No. 1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord. No. 1439; Ord.
No. 1477; Ord. No. 1600-93; Ord. No. 2075-10 § 1]
a. Organizations or groups of 20 or more people may be denied a permit
by the Department Head if the group is too large to be accommodated
by the beach facilities.
b. Organizations or groups may be denied a permit, or a permit may be
revoked, for failure to comply with any of the beach regulations, or with
the lawful orders of municipal officials and employees.
49.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.4 for application fee and security deposit for use of
beachfront facilities for special events.
§ 12-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-10.4
AO:239
§ 12-10.4. Disrobing; Changing of Clothes Restricted. [1972 Code
§ 47-26; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407;
Ord. No. 1439; Ord. No. 1477; Ord. No. 1600-93]
Disrobing or changing of clothes by members of groups of 20 or more
people must be done at bathhouses specifically identified for that purpose
in the beach area.
§ 12-10.5. Parking of Buses Used by Groups. [1972 Code § 47-26;
Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord. No.
1439; Ord. No. 1477; Ord. No. 1600-93; Ord. No. 2180-15]
Any bus or similar conveyance used by groups of 20 or more people must
be parked at a designated municipal parking lot. A parking fee as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees, shall be charged for each bus parking in the municipal
parking lot.
§ 12-10.6. Chaperones Required. [1972 Code § 47-26; Ord. No. 886;
Ord. No. 1336; Ord. No. 1371; Ord. No. 1407; Ord. No. 1439; Ord.
No. 1477; Ord. No. 1600-93]
Chaperones for children shall be provided as follows:
§ 12-11. SEASON PARKING PERMIT.
§ 12-11.1. Parking Permit for Use of Certain Municipal Parking
Lots.50 [Amended by Ord. No. 1745-98 § 2; Ord. No. 1814-2000 § 2;
Ord. No. 1845-2001 § 1; Ord. No. 1874-02 §§ 10 — 13; Ord. No.
1906-03 § 2; Ord. No. 1926-04 § 1; Ord. No. 1970-06 § 3; Ord. No.
1972-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2027-08 §§ 10, 11; Ord.
No. 2173-15; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. One chaperone for each 10 children under the age of 10 years.
b. One chaperone for each 15 children between the age of 10 and 14
years.
a. Fees. No person shall park any motor vehicle in the municipal parking
lots at Second Avenue, Third Avenue, Fourth Avenue, and Pompano
Avenue, without paying the following fees for the privilege of parking a
motor vehicle:
1. The fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, inclusive of sales tax, for
each season parking permit. A season parking permit is valid for
the entire bathing season. The holders of season parking permits
may utilize the municipal parking lots at Second, Third, Fourth and
Pompano Avenues.
50.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 1028,
1373, 1406, 1421, 1430 and 1497. See subsection 2-65.7 for fee exemptions for certain
members of the volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 12-10.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-11.1
AO:240
§ 12-11.2. Sea Watch Beach Season Parking Permit. [Ord. No.
2132-13; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2224-2017 § 1]
Parking permit requirements for Sea Watch Beach Parking Lot:
2. The fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, inclusive of sales tax, for
daily parking Monday through Thursday, inclusive, and continuing
until 9:00 a.m. the following day.
3. The fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, inclusive of sales tax, for
daily parking on Friday, Saturday, Sunday or holidays, and
continuing until 9:00 a.m. the following day.
b. Season Parking Stickers.
1. A season parking ticket shall be valid from May 15 through
September 15 in the year issued.
2. Season parking tickets will be on sale during the period of time
designated by resolution of the Borough Council.
3. The Borough Council shall have the authority to establish, by
resolution, a discount rate for season parking tickets, provided
however, that discount rates for season parking tickets shall apply
only to tickets purchased prior to a specific date which shall be
established in the resolution.
4. Season parking tickets shall be for the exclusive use of the vehicle
for which it was issued.
5. Season parking tickets must be affixed permanently to the vehicle
for which they are registered on the left rear window of the vehicle.
6. Registration forms for season parking stickers shall provide for the
name and address of the owner, a description of the vehicle, the
license plate number of the vehicle and the season parking sticker
number.
7. Daily and season parking stickers shall not be loaned, given away,
sold or transferred. Any person loaning, giving away, selling or
transferring a parking sticker shall forfeit all rights to the sticker or
ticket.
c. Parking Prohibited Certain Hours. No person shall park any motor
vehicle in the municipal parking lots at Second, Third, Fourth and
Pompano Avenues between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. from
October 1 through April 30. No person shall park any motor vehicle in
the municipal parking lot at Third Avenue between the hours of 3:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m. from May 1 to September 30.
a. No person shall park any motor vehicle in the municipal parking lot at
Sea Watch Beach without paying the following fee for the privilege of
parking a motor vehicle:
§ 12-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:241
§ 12-12. SEASONAL LOCKER PERMITS.
§ 12-12.1. Sea Watch Beach Season Locker Permits. [Ord. No.
2132-13; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2224-2017]
§ 12-13. through § 12-19. (RESERVED)
Beach Preservation and Protection
§ 12-20. BEACH AND DUNE PROTECTION.
§ 12-20.1. Findings. [1972 Code § 47-27; Ord. No. 89-1488]
It has been clearly demonstrated that well established and protected sand
dunes, together with properly maintained beach and dune areas, are an
effective protection against high tides and flooding, and against property
damage by the ocean under storm conditions, and provide desirable
protection of the coastal areas adjacent thereto, and the State of New
Jersey, along with its political subdivisions and their inhabitants have an
1. The fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, inclusive of sales tax, for
each parking tag. The parking tag shall display a number which will
correspond with a designated parking space. Vehicles may only be
parked in the designated spaces which match the number on the
parking tag.
2. The Borough Council, by resolution, may adopt additional fees
associated with this section.
b. Season Parking Tags.
1. A season parking permit shall be valid from May 15th through
September 15th in the year issued.
a. Locker permits for Sea Watch Beach.
1. Individuals may purchase a season permit for use of a locker at Sea
Watch Beach and shall be valid from May 15th through September
30th in the year issued. The Borough of Manasquan shall not be
responsible for any personal property of the permit holder. All
personal property must be removed by September 30th in the year
issued. If the permit holder fails to remove their personal property
by that date, then the personal property shall become the property
of the Borough of Manasquan.
(a) The locker permit fees shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
(b) The Borough Council, by resolution, may adopt additional fees
associated with this section.
(c) The locker permit shall be valid from May 15th through
September 15th in the year issued.
§ 12-11.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-20.1
AO:242
interest in the continued protection and preservation thereof, and in the
restoration of them in the event of property damage or destruction.
The developed coastal area of New Jersey, including developed barrier
islands and adjacent shorefront areas, represent a unique and invaluable
social, economic, recreational, and aesthetic resource.
Given the present degree of commercial and residential development in
these areas, given the measurable and intangible benefits that accrue to the
residents of the State of New Jersey and the public at large from the beach,
boating, fishing, and vacation facilities that this diversely developed coastal
area offers and given the present extensive knowledge of the protective and
restorative nature of beach nourishment, dune creation, dune restoration
and other selected coastal engineering programs, it is hereby declared that
it is appropriate, essential, feasible, and in the public interest to preserve,
protect, and enhance these coastal regions in their developed state.
It is the purpose of this section to define the areas so affected and to
establish regulations to assure their continued effectiveness. This section is
declared to be an exercise of the police power in the interest of safety and
welfare and for the protection of persons and property.
§ 12-20.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 47-28; Ord. No. 89-1488]
ACCRETION — Shall include either natural or artificial land. Natural
accretion is the buildup of land, solely by action of the forces of nature, on
a beach by deposition of waterborne or airborne material.
Artificial Accretion is a similar buildup of land by reason of an act of man,
such as the accretion formed by a breakwater or beachfill, deposited by
mechanical means.
BEACH — Shall mean gently sloping, unvegetated areas of sand or other
unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean high water
line to where there is a marked change in the material of physiographic
form i.e., a. dune; or b. beach walkway.
DUNE — Shall mean a wind or wave deposited formation of vegetated
or drifting wind-blown sand, generally parallel and landward between the
inland limit of the beach and the foot of the most inland dune slope,
including primary, secondary, and tertiary dunes where they exist.
Formations of sand immediately adjacent to beaches that are stabilized by
retaining structures, such as snow fences, planted vegetation, and other
measures are considered to be natural dunes, regardless of the degree
of modification of the dune by wind or wave action or disturbance by
development.
A dune shall not include loose, wind-blown sand found in a street, on part
of a structure, or against any structure such as comfort stations, lifeguard
tents, pavilions or the beach walkway, as a result of wind or storm activity.
DUNE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DDD) — Shall mean an area located
seaward of the beach walkway delineating a beach zone presently without
dunes. The width of the DDD district will extend an average of 50 feet
§ 12-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-20.2
AO:243
from the boardwalk line toward the ocean. Placement of fence and planting
of vegetation will be completed in an effort to trap wind-blown sand and
develop a dune. The DDD district is considered to have dynamic boundaries
which moves in response to seasonal winds and storms. Consequently, the
boundaries of the DDD district will be reviewed every 12 months and
following any storm which damages large portions of the district. The
boundary review process will be conducted by the Borough Council,
Department of Public Works and representatives of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal Resources.
EROSION — Shall mean the wearing away of land by the action of natural
forces. On a beach, the carrying away of beach sediments by wave action,
tidal currents, littoral currents and wind.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — Shall mean the 1929 Datum established by the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey or, such other datum as may be
established by the United States Army Corps of Engineers or other properly
authorized agencies.
PERSON — Shall mean natural persons, partnerships, firms, associations,
and any receiver, trustee, conservator, or other officer appointed pursuant
to law or by any Court, State or Federal. "Person" shall also mean the
State of New Jersey, counties, municipalities, authorities, other political
subdivisions, and all departments and agencies within the aforementioned
governmental entities.
SAND FENCE — Shall include the term snowfence and shall mean a
barricade established in a line or pattern to accumulate sand and aid in
the formation of a dune. It shall include, and normally be limited to, the
commercial variety of light, wooden picket fence and held together by wire
and secured by posts.
SHORE FRONT PROTECTION AREA — Shall mean that area which extends
from the mean high water line to the seaward toe of the dune, as
hereinbefore defined.
§ 12-20.3. Prohibited Acts in the Shorefront Protection Areas. [1972
Code § 47-29; Ord. No. 89-1488]
§ 12-20.4. Permitted Uses in the Shorefront Protection Areas. [1972
Code § 47-29; Ord. No. 89-1488]
The following uses may be permitted:
a. Within shorefront protection areas, no person shall undertake or cause
to be undertaken any activity including the construction relocation,
reconstruction, modification, expansion, or demolition of any
temporary, mobile or permanent structure, except, upon the approval of
the Borough Council.
a. Open space, beach or water recreation.
§ 12-20.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-20.4
AO:244
§ 12-20.5. Removal of Wind-Blown Sand on Private Property. [1972
Code § 47-29; Ord. No. 89-1488]
Landward of dune areas, a property owner may remove clean wind-blown
sand which must be deposited eastwardly of his property line and beach
walkway.
§ 12-20.6. Prohibited Acts in the Dune Development District. [1972
Code § 47-29; Ord. No. 89-1488]
Within the "dunes" and "dune development district" areas, the following
activities are prohibited:
b. Beach walkways to permit access across the dunes to the beach,
without damage to the dunes themselves.
c. Sand fences and dunes to encourage the accumulation of sand.
d. Pavilions or similar small platforms less than 400 square feet in area,
provided that they do not have solid walls, are mounted on suitable
pilings, and provided further that it shall be established to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer that the proposed design and
construction methods as applied to the particular site situation and
time will not:
1. Unreasonably disturb the existing dunes.
2. Be likely to create wind currents detrimental to the existing dunes;
or
3. Be likely to create, increase, or prolong any other hazard.
e. Necessary buildings and structures for public safety and convenience,
including infrastructure, first aid stations, lifeguard stations, beach
walkways and attached buildings, comfort stations, piers, dune
walkover structures and related activities.
f. Necessary shorefront protection and stabilization improvements,
including groins, bulkheads, and activities related to beach restoration
projects.
g. The operation of specially permitted and licensed vehicles for public
safety and maintenance purposes only, and any other activities deemed
necessary by the Borough.
a. The operation of any motor vehicle except in designated access ways.
b. The removal of sediment and native vegetation.
c. Placement of nonliving trees, brush, shrubs or other debris.
d. Pedestrian or vehicular traffic on or over dunes or sand fencing, except
in designated access ways.
§ 12-20.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-20.6
AO:245
§ 12-20.7. Permit Required for Regulated Activities. [1972 Code
§ 47-29; Ord. No. 89-1488]
Within the "shore front" protection areas or the Dune Development District,
unless otherwise controlled elsewhere in this section, no person shall
undertake or cause to be undertaken a regulated activity hereinafter
defined until he has applied for and received a permit issued by the
Borough.
§ 12-20.8. Regulated Activities Enumerated. [1972 Code § 47-30;
Ord. No. 89-1488]
e. Removal, mutilation, or destruction of sand or sand fencing unless
removal is part of an authorized dunes maintenance activity.
a. Regulated activities shall mean and include:
1. The construction, relocation, modification, expansion, or
demolition of any temporary, mobile or permanent structure
subject to applicable building standards.
2. The removal, excavation, filing, or deposition of any soil, mud,
sand, gravel, or other material except as noted hereinafter.
3. The construction, reconstruction, or major repair of any public
facilities, including but not limited to roads, sewers, bridges,
electric power, telephone, gas, and water lines.
4. The construction of pipelines and other lineal development.
5. The designation and development of accessways and pedestrian
paths and walkways through dunes.
6. Beach cleaning and various activities of maintenance.
b. Regulated activities shall not mean or include:
1. The operation of motor vehicles by government agencies for public
safety, beach maintenance, and emergency purposes.
2. The operation of motor vehicles outside of beach and dune areas.
3. The repair of any existing structure provided it is authorized by a
construction permit and does not conflict with any ordinance as
herein stated.
4. The removal of sand from designated driveway or accessways
within the shorefront protection area, with the exception of sand
removal from the beach walkway.
5. Any sand deposited by action of wind or water on private and/or
public properties landward of the dune area may be removed but
must be deposited seaward of the bulkhead line and/or beach
walkway.
§ 12-20.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 12-20.8
AO:246
§ 12-20.9. Violations and Penalties. [1972 Code § 47-31; Ord. No.
89-1488]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, the Manasquan
Beach Patrol, Construction Official, Police Department or other duly
authorized officers or employees are hereby empowered to pursue such
legal and equitable relief as may be necessary to abate any violation or
enforce any conditions of Section 12-20.
§ 12-21. through § 12-24. (RESERVED)
§ 12-25. (RESERVED)51
§ 12-26. (RESERVED)52
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 13-1. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 13-1.1. International Property Maintenance Code/2012 Adopted
by Reference. [1972 Code § 82-1; Ord. No. 1204; Ord. No. 1216; Ord.
No. 1609; Ord. No. 2142-13]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 is hereby adopted by
reference and is incorporated as if fully set forth at length herein, except
such portions of the Code as are deleted, modified and/or amended in
subsection 13-1.3.
§ 13-1.2. Copies on File; Available for Purchase. [1972 Code § 82-2;
Ord. No. 1204; Ord. No. 1216; Ord. No. 1609; Ord. No. 2142-13;
Ord. No. 2180-15]
Three copies of the International Property Maintenance Code/2012, have
been and are now filed in the Office of the Code Enforcement Official
of the Borough of Manasquan and will remain on file in such office for
use and examination by the public. Copies of the International Property
Maintenance Code shall be available at the fee as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees.
6. Only those activities conforming with subsection 12-20.4, shall be
approved.
51.Editor's Note: Former Section 12-25, Permits (Storage of Sailboats or Municipal
Beachfront) previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1875-02
and 1970-06 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2027-08.
52.Editor's Note: Former Section 12-26, Rules and Regulations for the Storage and Use of
Sailboats on the Municipal Beachfront, previously codified herein and containing portions
or Ordinance Nos. 1875-02 and 1970-06, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2027-08.
§ 12-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:247
§ 13-1.3. Amendments to Code. [1972 Code § 82-3; Ord. No. 1204;
Ord. No. 1216; Ord. No. 1609; Ord. No. 1632-94; Ord. No. 1633-94;
Ord. No. 1672-95; Ord. No. 1759-98 §§ 1 - 8; Ord. No. 1782-99 §§ 1 -
8; Ord. No. 1789-99 § 1; Ord. No. 1795-99 § 1; Ord. No. 1980-06 § 1;
Ord. No. 2142-13; Ord. No. 2174-15; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012, is amended as follows:
a. Section PM 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
the Borough of Manasquan hereinafter referred to as the "Code".
b. Section PM-106.2 is amended as follows:
Any person, firm, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Property Maintenance Code shall, upon conviction hereof, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Court having
jurisdiction in this matter. The Court shall have the discretion to impose
a term of community service in lieu of imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
c. Section PM-107.1 is amended as follows:
Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation
of this Property Maintenance Code or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person
or persons responsible thereof in a manner prescribed in Sections
PM-107.2 and PM-107.3, except that the Code Official shall not be
required to issue a notice of violation to enforce the provisions of
Sections PM-405.5, PM-405.7, PM-702.1, PM-705.5, PM-705.5.1 or
PM-705.5.3. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply
with Section PM-108.3.
d. Section PM-107.3 is amended as follows:
Notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon a violator if a copy
thereof is: (a) delivered to the violator personally; or (b) delivered at the
usual place of abode of the violator to someone in the family over the
age of 14 years; or (c) delivered to the authorized in-county agent; or (d)
sent by first class mail addressed to the violator at his/her last known
address. If the letter is returned showing that it was not delivered, a
copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
e. Section PM-111.1 is amended to read as follows:
Any person affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or
order issued under this Property Maintenance Code shall have the right
to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written application
§ 13-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-1.3
AO:248
for appeal is served within 14 days after the day the decision, notice or
order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not
fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are not adequately satisfied
by other means.
f. Section PM-111.2 is amended as follows:
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members. Two members shall
be members of the Borough Council who shall serve for a term of one
year. Three members shall be residents of the municipality who shall
serve for a term of two years.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of a
majority of the members of Council present at the meeting, appoint the
members of the Board of Appeals. The Mayor shall vote only in the case
of a tie.
g. Section PM-111.2.1 is hereby deleted.
h. Section PM-111.2.2 is amended as follows:
The Borough Council shall appoint two alternate members who shall
be called by the Board Chairman to hear appeals during the absence
or disqualification of a regular member. Alternate members shall be
residents of the municipality and serve for a term of two years.
h.1. Section PM-111.2.6 is amended as follows:
Members and alternate members of the Board of Appeals shall serve
without compensation.
h.2. Section PM-111.3 is amended as follows:
Regular meetings of the Board shall be scheduled not less than once
a month and shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack
of appeals to process. Special meetings of the Board, at the call of
the Chairman, shall be held on not less than seven days' notice to
its members. All meetings shall be noticed in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
i. New Section PM-111.8 is amended as follows:
The filing fee for an appeal made to the Board of Appeals shall be as
stated in Chapter 16, Fees, per residential, business and/or commercial
unit and the fee must be paid at the time a petition is filed pursuant to
Section PM-111.1. The petition shall be filed with the Board of Appeals
not later than 10 days before any regularly scheduled or special
meeting. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide any appeal filed
with it within 90 days after the filing of the appeal. The failure of
the Board of Appeals to hear and decide the appeal within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application.
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:249
The appeal filed with the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and set
forth specifically: (1) a statement of the requirements of the regulations
from which the appeal is made; (2) a statement of the manner by which
strict compliance with the regulation would result in undue hardship;
(3) a statement of the nature and extent of the undue hardship; and
(4) a statement of feasible alternatives to the requirements of the
regulation which would adequately protect the safety of the occupants,
and the public generally.
i.1. Section PM-111.2.6 is amended as follows:
Members and alternate members of the Board of Appeals shall serve
without compensation.
i.2. Section PM-111.3 is amended as follows:
Regular meetings of the Board shall be scheduled not less than once
a month and shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack
of appeals to process. Special meetings of the Board, at the call of
the Chairman, shall be held on not less than seven days' notice to
its members. All meetings shall be noticed in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
j. Section PM-202.2 is hereby amended to define "Code Official" as
follows:
The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement
of this Property Maintenance Code, including the Code Enforcement
Officer, Construction Official, Building Sub-Code Officials, Health
Officer, Police Officers, or any other duly authorized representative of
the Borough of Manasquan.
k. Section PM-303.3 is amended to read as follows:
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free of
obstructions or from hazardous conditions. Stairs shall comply with the
requirements of Sections PM-304.10 and PM-702.9.
k.1. Section PM-303.7 (Accessory Structures) is amended as follows:
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences,
bulkheads, retaining walls and other walls, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.
k.2. Section PM-304.4 is amended as follows:
All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent
the entry of rats, squirrels, rodents or other non-domestic animals or
birds.
l. Section PM-304.12 is amended to read as follows:
§ 13-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-1.3
AO:250
During the period from May 15th to October 15th, every door, window
and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes
serving any structure containing habitable rooms shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and
every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
m. PM-304.16 Driveway Areas:
All driveway areas shall be: (a) composed of brick, concrete, pavement
and stone cover and (b) outlined by perimeter markings of landscape
ties, bricks or similar materials or planting of a height not less than 12
inches.
No motor vehicle shall be parked or placed on property within any
residential zone unless it is parked or placed upon a driveway area as
defined above. [Ord. No. 2174-15]
n. Section PM-405.3 is amended to read as follows:
For existing structures, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor area, by
two occupants shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor area, by
three occupants shall contain at least 120 square feet of floor area, and
by four occupants shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor area.
New construction or renovation of 50% or greater (commenced after
December 31, 2013) must comply with Section 404.4.1 of Room Area
requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code/2012.
n.1. Section PM-405.8 is amended as follows:
Minimum Ceiling Heights: Habitable spaces, other than kitchens, shall
have a clear ceiling height of not less than six feet 10 inches. Hallways,
corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and kitchens shall
have a clear ceiling height of not less than six feet 10 inches.
Exceptions:
1. Beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and
projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling
height, provided that the minimum clear height is not less than six
feet eight inches.
2. Dropped or furred ceilings over not more than one-half of the
minimum floor area required by this Property Maintenance Code,
provided that no part of such dropped or furred ceiling is less than
six feet 10 inches in height.
3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least six feet 10 inches over not less than onethird
of the required minimum floor area. Applicable for new
construction or renovation of 50% of greater (commenced after
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:251
December 31, 2013). In calculating the floor area of such rooms,
only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of
five feet or more shall be included.
4. Basement rooms in one and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreational purposes, having a
ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less
than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts
and similar obstructions.
o. Section PM-602.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one
or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms,
either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall
supply sufficient heat during the period from October 15th to May 15th
to maintain the room temperature specified in Section PM-602.2 during
the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less
than 60° F. (16° C.) during other hours.
p. Section PM-602.3 is amended to read as follows:
Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient
heat during the period from October 15 to May 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during all working hours:
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
p.1. New Section PM-603.8 (Carbon Monoxide Sensor Device) shall read as
follows:
A minimum of one approved carbon monoxide sensor device shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133.3 in
a building with fewer than three dwelling units.
p.2. Section PM-605.2 is amended as follows:
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate
and remote receptacle outlets. Ground fault interrupter receptacles or
ground fault breaker devices shall be installed in kitchens, bathrooms
and laundry areas in accordance with standards established under the
International Property Maintenance Code/2012 building and electrical
codes.
q. PM-702.1 Emergency Access Route:
A clear and unobstructed path to a residential structure shall be
maintained from the front entrance of the residential structure to the
§ 13-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-1.3
AO:252
§ 13-2. through § 13-3. (RESERVED)
public right-of-way. The path shall be a minimum of four feet in width
and shall be maintained directly to the public right-of-way closest to
the entrance to the residential structure. The beach emergency access
roadway shall be considered a public right-of-way. A gate or similar
device shall not be considered as an obstruction of the emergency
access route.
r. Section PM-702.9 is amended as follows:
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers,
and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than
30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) nor more than 42
inches (1,067 mm) high, measured vertically above the nosing of the
tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces.
Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor
of the landing or balcony. Guards or spindles shall have a maximum
spacing of four inches (102 mm).
s. Section PM-705.4 (Fire Extinguishers) is amended and supplemented
as follows:
All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible, provided with ready
access thereto, and maintained in an efficient and safe operating
condition. Extinguishers shall be of an approved type.
A minimum of one approved portable fire extinguisher shall be installed
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1 in any structure used or
intended for use for residential purposes by not more than two
households.
t. Section PM-705.5 (Smoke Detectors) is amended and supplemented as
follows:
A minimum of one approved single-station or multiple-station smoke
detector shall be installed in each guestroom, suite or sleeping area
in occupancies in Use Groups R-1 and I-1, and in dwelling units in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in occupancies in Use Groups
R-2 and R-3. In all residential occupancies, smoke detectors shall be
required on every story of the dwelling unit, including basements, but
exclusive of garages. In dwelling units with split-levels and without
an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke detector
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level
provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
A structure used or intended for use for residential purposes by not
more than two households shall have installed a smoke-sensitive alarm
device(s) in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52-27D-198.1.
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4
AO:253
§ 13-4. CLEAR VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS; HEIGHT OF BRUSH,
HEDGES AND PLANT LIFE.
§ 13-4.1. Duty of Owner or Tenant to Cut and Trim. [1972 Code
§ 50-1]
The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the limits of the Borough shall
cut and keep cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet, all brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any street and within 25 feet
of the intersection of any two streets, within 10 days after notice from the
Borough to cut the same.
§ 13-4.2. Failure to Comply. [1972 Code § 50-2; New]
If the owner or tenant of any lands lying within the Borough shall refuse or
neglect to cut and keep cut all brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within 25 feet of the intersection of any two streets within 10 days after
notice from the Borough Council to cut same. The Department of Public
Works shall perform all work necessary to correct the violation.
§ 13-4.3. Notices. [1972 Code § 50-3]
Notice to the owner or tenant to cut brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any street and within 25 feet of the intersection
of any two streets may be served upon any such owner or tenant either
personally or by certified mail at the address to which tax bills are sent. If
such lands are unoccupied and the owners are not residents, the notice shall
be mailed to his, her or their last known post office address. If such address
cannot be ascertained with reasonable certainty, then the notice shall be
published at least twice in a newspaper circulating in the Borough before
the work is done by the Borough.
§ 13-4.4. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 50-4; New]
In all cases where brush, hedges and other plant life are cut from any lands
under the provisions of this section as hereinabove provided, the actual cost
of repairs shall be assessed as a lien against the property and shall be due
and payable within 30 days of the time when a written bill is served upon
the property owners at the address listed in the assessment records of the
Borough. This charge shall bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and the same manner
as taxes.
§ 13-5. BRUSH, WEEDS, DEAD TREES; TRASH AND GARBAGE
PROHIBITED ON LANDS.
§ 13-5.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 77-1]
As used in this section:
§ 13-4 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-5.1
AO:254
OWNER — Shall mean any person having any legal or equitable right, title
or interest in and to any lands or any part thereof.
PERSON — Shall mean all natural "persons," all corporate, partnership
or other legal entities, as well as the partners, officers, directors, agents,
servants and employees of such "persons."
TENANT — Shall mean any person in actual or constructive possession of
any lands or any part thereof.
§ 13-5.2. Inspections. [1972 Code § 77-2; New]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or any
other person authorized by the Governing Body to inspect the lands within
the Borough for the purpose of ascertaining whether any lands contain any
brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash or debris; and if upon inspection the Chief of Police, Code
Enforcement Officer, or other person authorized by the Borough Council
finds that any of the above-mentioned items do in fact exist in and upon any
lands, he shall serve a violation notice on the property owner or tenant.
§ 13-5.3. Service of Notice. [1972 Code § 77-3; New]
The Borough Council may, upon the receipt of a report of the Chief of
Police, Code Enforcement Officer, or other person authorized to make such
inspection, and upon any additional investigation or inspection that they
may deem advisable, determine that it is necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a
fire hazard, to remove from such lands all such brush, weeds, dead or dying
trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or debris; and
if they shall so determine, they shall cause a written notice to be served
upon such owner or tenant, or person in charge of such lands, requiring
the owner or tenant, or person in charge of these lands, to remove such
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash or debris from such lands within 10 days after the serving
of the notice to remove the same. In the event that the owner or tenant, or
person in charge of such lands, cannot be found by reason of absence or
removal from the Borough of Manasquan, or for any other reason or cause,
or if such owner, tenant or person in charge resides outside the Borough of
Manasquan, such notice shall be mailed in the post office in the Borough
of Manasquan in an envelope with postage thereon prepaid, addressed to
such owner, tenant or person in charge of the lands at his last known post
office address as shown on the tax duplicate of the Borough of Manasquan,
and if no address of the owner, tenant or person in charge of the lands shall
appear upon the tax duplicate, then such notice shall be posted at some
prominent or conspicuous place upon the lands, and such notice served,
mailed or posted as aforesaid shall be deemed taken to be sufficient service
of notice and the ten-day period for removal shall be computed commencing
on the day following the serving, mailing or posting of such notice.
§ 13-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.4
AO:255
§ 13-5.4. Failure to Comply. [1972 Code § 77-4]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or person in charge of the lands to
fail, refuse or neglect to remove any such items mentioned and enumerated
in subsection 13-5.3 within the time prescribed in the notice given by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 13-5.5. Removal by Borough. [1972 Code § 77-5; New]
In the event that any owner, tenant or person in charge of the lands shall
fail, refuse or neglect to remove any such items mentioned and enumerated
in subsection 13-5.3 within the time prescribed in the notice given by
the Borough Council, the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer, or
such other authorized person upon receiving written authorization from the
Mayor and Council, shall provide for the removal of the items under his
direction.
§ 13-5.6. Cost of Removal Assessed as Lien. [1972 Code § 77-6; New;
Ord. No. 2133-13; Ord. No. 2180-15]
In all cases where the items mentioned and enumerated in subsection
13-5.3 hereof are removed from the lands under the direction of the Chief
of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or other person authorized for that
purpose, the owner, tenant or person in charge of the lands shall be
required to reimburse the Borough for all expenses, fees and costs
associated with the removal of said items. The fee for each Boroughassigned
worker to perform debris removal services shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees. The minimum fee for each Borough-assigned worker to
perform debris removal services shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
The Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer, or other authorized person
shall certify the cost thereof to the Borough Council and the actual cost of
repairs shall be assessed as a lien against and shall be due and payable
within 30 days of the time when a written bill is served upon the property
owner at the address listed in the assessment records of the Borough. This
charge shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes. A
copy of the certificate showing the cost of removal shall be delivered to the
Collector of Taxes.
§ 13-5.7. Accumulation on Private Land; Depositing or Throwing on
Public Places. [1972 Code § 77-7; Ord. No. 884; Ord. No. 891; New]
It shall be unlawful to throw, dump, cast or deposit paper, paper products,
bottles, tin cans, containers, brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or unused, discarded or waste
materials or any other debris in or upon any public street or other public
place, or to accumulate or to permit or suffer the accumulation thereof upon
any private lands within the limits of the Borough; provided that this section
shall not be construed to prohibit the placing of such materials as are
removed from the Borough by the Sanitation Department or by the person
§ 13-5.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-5.7
AO:256
or corporation authorized by the Borough through contract to remove the
same when placed in suitable containers for that purpose, and within 24
hours of the time scheduled for removal.
§ 13-5.8. Abandoned Automobiles, Unused Machinery or Building
Materials. [1972 Code § 77-8]
It shall be unlawful in any residential zone to store, permit or suffer to be
stored upon any lands any automobile which is not capable of being used
or operated, unless garaged, or any unused machinery or building materials
which are not in contemplation of immediate use in the construction, repair
or remodeling of any house, building or other structure on the lands.
§ 13-5.9. Stagnant Water. [1972 Code § 77-9]
It shall be unlawful to allow, permit or suffer any stagnant water or any
mosquito or other pestilence breeding place or condition to remain or exist
upon any lands or property.
§ 13-5.10. Smoke Emission. [1972 Code § 77-10]
It shall be unlawful to make, maintain, suffer or permit any fire which shall
emit smoke causing or producing noxious or objectionable odors.53
§ 13-6. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 13-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Borough of Manasquan so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 13-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number included the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
53.Editor's Note: See also Section 24-1, Air Pollution Control.
§ 13-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6.2
AO:257
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Manasquan or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the oceans and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 13-6.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (except the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 13-6.4. Design Standard. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 13-6.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For the purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection 13-6.4c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid or
floatable materials, or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 13-6.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 13-6.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 13-6.4
AO:258
§ 13-6.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Official of the
Borough of Manasquan.
§ 13-6.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500.
§ 13-6.7. Severability. [Ord. No. 2058-09 § 2]
Each subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this section is declared to
be an independent subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and the finding
or holding of any such portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in the
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges)
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
c. This standard does not apply: 1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees
that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that
could not be practically overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards; 2) Where flows are conveyed
through any device (e.g. end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through one of the following: (1) A rectangular space
4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option does not apply for
outfall netting facilities; or (ii) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5
inches. 3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or 4) Where the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2c, that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
§ 13-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6.7
AO:259
ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this
section.
Chapter 14
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 14-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 14-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established; Subcode Officials
Designated. [1972 Code § 55-1; Ord. No. 1030]
§ 14-1.2. Fees.54 [1972 Code § 55-2; Ord. No. 1030; Ord. No. 1093;
Ord. No. 1183; Ord. No. 1449; Ord. No. 1454; Ord. No. 1473; Ord.
No. 1486-89; Ord. No. 1507-90; Ord. No. 1555-91; Ord. No. 1580-92;
Ord. No. 1596-93; Ord. No. 1708-96; Ord. No. 1787-99 § 1; Ord. No.
1860-01 § 1; Ord. No. 1911-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2023-08 § 1; Ord. No.
2069-10 § 2); Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. There is hereby established, in the Borough, a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire
Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. Plan Review Fee. The fee for plan review shall be as stated in Chapter
16, Fees. The minimum fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
b. Basic Construction Fee. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of
the parts computed on the basis of the volume or the cost of
construction, the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment,
54.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.7 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 13-6.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-1.2
AO:260
the number of electric fixtures and devices and the number of
sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates
provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a basic
construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing, electric
or fire protection work shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, except as
herein provided.
1. Building Volume or Cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be as stated
in Chapter 16, Fees. The minimum fee shall be $150.
(b) Fees for renovations, alterations, and repairs or site
construction associated with premanufactured construction
shall be based on the estimate cost of work. The fees shall be
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
(c) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as new
construction for the added portion. The minimum fee shall be
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
(d) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees calculated separately in
accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) above. The minimum
fee shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
(e) The fee for each fireplace shall be as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees.
2. Plumbing Fixtures and Equipment. The fees shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
3. Electric Fixtures and Devices. The fees shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
4. Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: Sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances not connected to
the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems and flues. The fees
shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
c. Elevators. The fee for a permit to install an elevator shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees, plus the costs charged by the Elevator Safety Unit of
the State of New Jersey.
d. Certificates and Other Permits. The fees shall be as stated in Chapter
16, Fees.
e. Periodic Inspections. Fees for the periodic reinspection of equipment
and facilities granted a certificate of approval for a specified duration in
§ 14-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.2
AO:261
§ 14-1.3. Display of Construction Permits. [Ord. No. 1804-99 §§ 1, 2]
§ 14-1.4. Requiring the Submission of an Application to the Zoning
Officer Prior to Obtaining a Construction Permit and Requiring the
Submission of a Foundation Location Survey, Grading Plan and As-
Built Plans for Certain Buildings and Structures. [Ord. No. 1764-98
§ 1; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 11]
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23 shall be as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees.
f. The fee to reinstate a lapsed construction permit shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
g. In order to provide for training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
Regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect the fees as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
h. All fees shall be rounded to the next dollar.
i. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be promptly remitted to
the Municipal Treasurer.
a. Construction permits issued pursuant to Section 14-1 State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency of the Code of the Borough of
Manasquan shall be prominently displayed on the street side of a
structure or appurtenance to any structure so that the construction
permit is plainly visible on the street adjacent to the property on which
the construction is taking place.
b. The construction permit shall be displayed prior to the commencement
of construction and shall be displayed until a certificate of occupancy or
continued certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Code
Official.
a. Application to Zoning Officer Prior to the Issuance of a Construction
Permit.
1. An application shall be made to the Zoning Officer prior to the
issuance of a construction permit for construction of a new building
or structure or any addition, expansion or alteration, including the
installation of a heating system, to an existing building or
structure.
2. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application complies with
the provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning, of the Municipal Code and
other applicable laws, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning
permit to the applicant. The applicant may then request that the
Construction Official issue a construction permit.
§ 14-1.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-1.4
AO:262
3. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application does not
conform with the provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning, or other
applicable laws, the Zoning Officer shall issue a written denial of
the application and inform the applicant of the procedure to apply
to the Planning Board for relief of the provisions of Chapter 35,
Zoning.
b. Plot Plan. A plot plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to
the commencement of construction of a new building or structure or
construction of an addition to an existing building or structure. The plot
plan shall show all existing and proposed buildings and structures on
the property, and flood elevations levels. After a written determination
is made by the Zoning Officer that the new building or structure or
existing building or structure and proposed addition conforms with
applicable zoning requirements, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning
permit to the applicant. The applicant may then request the
Construction Official issue a construction permit. The applicant must
also submit an affidavit certifying that the plot plan/survey or sketch is
accurate.
c. Grading Plan. A grading plan prepared by a licensed engineer shall be
submitted for the construction of any new building or structure or
construction of an addition having a foundation area in excess of 500
square feet to an existing building or structure. The plan must
demonstrate that surface water does not spill onto neighboring
properties and that the proposed grade elevation will not negatively
impact neighboring properties. The grading plan shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Construction Official and Municipal
Engineer.
d. Foundation Location Survey. A foundation location survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to
the commencement of any above grade level construction of a new
building or structure or construction of an addition having a foundation
area in excess of 500 square feet to an existing building or structure.
After a determination is made by the Zoning Officer that the new
building or structure or an addition to an existing building or structure
conforms with applicable zoning requirements, the applicant may
continue construction of all elements above the foundation of the
building or structure.
e. As-Built Survey. An "as-built" survey shall be submitted with an
application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new
construction of any building or structure or construction of an addition
having a foundation area in excess of 500 square feet to an existing
building or structure. The "as-built" survey shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed land surveyor and shall show the location of all
buildings and structures and the existing finished surface elevations at
all lot corners, house corners and all other locations necessary to show
conformity with the grading plan.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2
AO:263
§ 14-2. UNSAFE AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
§ 14-2.1. Construction Official's Report. [1972 Code § 53-1]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to make report in writing
to the Borough Council, of any and all buildings, walls or structures in the
Borough that are or may become unsafe and dangerous to life or health
or which may tend to extend a conflagration, and if the buildings, walls or
structures can be so repaired, strengthened, altered or fireproofed as to
remove the danger, the Construction Official may include in his report a
specification of such repairs or alterations.
§ 14-2.2. Referrals by Fire Inspector. [1972 Code § 5-3.2]
Upon the Fire Inspector making a report that any building, wall or structure
in the Borough is of such a character or situation as might tend to extend
a conflagration, the matter shall be referred to the Construction Official for
his examination and report to the Borough Council.
§ 14-2.3. Hearing; Notice. [1972 Code § 53-3]
Upon the filing of a report by the Construction Official or by any other
person that a building, wall or structure in the Borough is unsafe and
dangerous to life or health or that the same may tend to extend a
conflagration, the Borough Council shall hold a hearing to determine
whether such building, wall or structure is dangerous to life or health or
whether the same might tend to extend a conflagration, and shall cause
notice in writing of the time and place of the hearing to be served upon
the owner or owners of such building, wall or structure, in the manner
hereinafter set forth. Such notice shall be served at least 10 days prior to
the day fixed for such hearing, shall contain the statement that at such
hearing the Borough Council shall inquire into and determine whether the
building, wall or structure therein described is or may become dangerous to
life or health or might tend to extend a conflagration, and also the statement
that in case it shall be determined to be necessary to remove or destroy
such building, wall or structure, an inquiry and determination will be made
as to the manner such removal or destruction is to be carried out, and shall
contain a description of the property affected, sufficiently definite in terms
to identify the same.
§ 14-2.4. Notice of Hearing Determination. [1972 Code § 53-4]
If the Borough Council shall determine after the termination of such
hearing, that such building, wall or structure is or may become dangerous
to life or health or is of such character as might tend to extend a
conflagration, the Borough Council shall also determine the manner in
which the removal or destruction of the building, wall or structure shall be
carried out, and shall cause notice in writing to be served upon the owner
or owners of such building, wall or structure of such determination and
shall thereby also give notice that unless such building, wall or structure
§ 14-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-2.4
AO:264
is removed or destroyed within 30 days after the service of such notice,
the Borough will proceed with such removal or destruction or cause the
same to be proceeded with, and that the cost thereof shall be assessed as a
municipal lien against the premises.
§ 14-2.5. Service of Notices. [1972 Code § 53-5]
The notices mentioned in this chapter may be served upon the owner or
owners resident in the Borough, in person or by leaving the same at their
usual place of residence with a member of their family above the age of 14
years; in case any such owner shall not reside in the Borough, notice may
be served upon such owner personally or mailed to such owner's last known
post office address, or it may be served upon the occupant of the property
or upon the agent of the owner in charge thereof; in case the owner of
any such property is unknown or service cannot for any reason be made
as above directed, notice thereof shall be published at least once not less
than 30 days before the proposed removal or destruction, in a newspaper
circulating in the Borough; there may be inserted in the advertisement
notice to the owner or owners of several different parcels of land. Notice to
infant owners, or owner or owners of unsound mind, shall be served upon
their guardians. Where lands are held in trust, service shall be made upon
the trustee. Where lands are held by two or more joint tenants, tenants in
common or tenants by the entirety, service upon one of such owners shall
be sufficient and shall be deemed and taken as notice to all.
§ 14-2.6. Proof of Service of Notice. [1972 Code § 53-6]
Proof of service of notice shall be filed within 10 days thereafter with the
officer having charge of the record of tax liens in the Borough, but failure
to file the same shall not invalidate the proceedings if service has actually
been made as herein provided.
§ 14-2.7. Costs of Removal or Destruction by Borough; Records.
[1972 Code § 53-7]
When any such removal or destruction shall have been undertaken and
completed by the Borough, an accurate account of the cost and expense
thereof shall be kept, and a true statement under oath or affirmation
shall be filed by the Construction Official, who shall be in charge of such
removal or destruction, with the Municipal Clerk. The Borough Council shall
examine the same and, if the same is properly made, shall confirm it and file
such report with the Municipal Clerk who shall record the same in a book
to be kept for that purpose.
§ 14-2.8. Cost to Become Lien Upon Property. [1972 Code § 53-8]
The cost of such repairs, alterations, fireproofing, removal or destruction
shall be assessed as a municipal lien against the premises. The assessment
shall be made upon notice by the same officer or officers who are authorized
by law to make assessments, and in the same manner as assessments for
§ 14-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.8
AO:265
improvements are now made. After the costs shall be assessed according to
law, the amount thereof shall be a municipal lien against the premises.
§ 14-2.9. Construction Official to Supervise Work. [1972 Code
§ 53-9]
All work in connection with the repairing, altering, fireproofing, removing
or destroying of any building, wall or structure pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall be in the charge of the Construction Official, with the approval
and authorization of the Borough Council.
§ 14-2.10. Conditions Constituting Unfit Buildings. [1972 Code
§ 53-10]
The Construction Official may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Borough. Such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing
the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural
defects; uncleanliness; bad conditions of its walls; overload of floors.
§ 14-2.11. Emergency Work. [1972 Code § 53-11]
If there shall be, in the opinion of the Construction Official, actual and
immediate danger of falling of a building or structure or part thereof so
as to endanger public safety, life or property, he shall cause the necessary
work to be done to render the building or structure or any part thereof
temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed by this section for
unsafe buildings and structures has been instituted or not. Such work shall
be done at the owner's expense, and the amount thereof shall become a lien
upon the property affected.
§ 14-3. MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
§ 14-3.1. Moving of Buildings Restricted; Permits. [1972 Code
§ 54-1]
a. No building or structure shall be moved from one location to another
into or out of the Borough from any place beyond the limits of the
Borough without first obtaining a permit.
b. Moving Buildings.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to move an
existing building or structure from one location to another in the
Borough shall file a complete set of plans in detail showing the
nature and manner of the construction in the building as it
presently exists. The plans of the building must disclose that the
§ 14-2.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-3.1
AO:266
§ 14-3.2. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 54-2]
The chapter shall be enforced as hereinafter provided and by the
Construction Official.
§ 14-3.3. Temporary Relocation of Buildings and Structures onto
Borough Property; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2134-13]
building meets all of the ordinances controlling the construction
and erection of buildings in the Borough and that the use to which
the building will be put complies with the Zoning Ordinances of
the Borough, and until the building complies with all the Building
Ordinances of the Borough, no permit shall issue for the moving of
the building.
2. All applications for moving permits, together with the plans, shall
forthwith be submitted to the Mayor and Borough Council for final
approval of the moving permit.
3. All moving permits shall be limited to a period of one month, after
which date the permit shall expire.
a. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection 14-3.1, any
person, partnership or corporation seeking to temporarily move an
existing building or structure onto Borough property for the purpose of
raising and/or altering the building or structure shall submit an
application to the Mayor and Council satisfying the following
requirements in order to receive a permit:
1. The start and end date for construction and relocation of any
structure must be specified;
2. The applicant must post a bond with the Borough in an amount to
be determined by the Borough Engineer in an amount no less than
$20,000;
3. The applicant must provide an insurance certificate naming the
Borough of Manasquan as an additional insured;
4. The applicant must provide a list of all vehicles and the weight of
each vehicle that will be used on Borough property;
5. All structures must be removed from Borough property no later
than April 31st of each year this provision is in effect;
6. No vehicle may be parked on the Beach Emergency Access Way at
any time;
7. The applicant must submit a "hold harmless" agreement to the
Borough for review by the Borough Attorney and must be executed
prior to commencement of work;
§ 14-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.3
AO:267
§ 14-4. (RESERVED)
§ 14-5. ROOMING HOUSES, HOTELS AND MOTELS.
§ 14-5.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 83-1]
As used in this section:
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean any building, including hotels and motels,
to be used for housing purposes in which any person or persons are roomed
or lodged for consideration.
§ 14-5.2. License Required. [1972 Code § 83-2]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of conducting,
operating or maintaining a rooming house, as herein defined, unless the
person, firm or corporation shall have first secured a license to engage in
said business.
§ 14-5.3. Application for Licenses. [1972 Code § 83-3]
8. All use of the Beach Emergency Access Way must cease no later
than May 22nd of each year this provision is in effect;
9. The structure must be secured with a fence which shall be no less
than six feet in height.
10. The applicant must complete and submit to the Municipal Clerk the
"Application to Use the Beach Emergency Access."
b. The temporary relocation of buildings and structures onto Borough
property shall only be permitted between October 15th and April 30th
and shall no longer be permitted under any circumstances after
December 31, 2014 unless further legislative action is taken to extend
the provisions of this Section.
c. Any person, partnership or corporation who fails to obtain a permit
before relocating any building or structure onto Borough property will
be subject to a fine of $500 per day that the building or structure
remains on Borough property.
a. Applications for original licenses shall be made in writing, to the Code
Enforcement Department and shall set forth the following information:
1. Full name and address of proprietor or operator of such rooming
house and the name of the owner of the premises whereon such
rooming house is situate.
2. Location of the premises to be licensed.
3. The portions of the building intended to be used as a rooming
house.
§ 14-3.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-5.3
AO:268
§ 14-5.4. License Fees. [1972 Code § 83-4; Ord. No. 987; New; Ord.
No. 2069-10 § 3; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The annual fee for the license to engage in the business of conducting,
operating or maintaining a rooming house shall be the sum of the fees
stated in Chapter 16, Fees, for each room used for sleeping purposes. The
license shall be for the calendar year or fraction thereof and shall terminate
on December 31 of the year issuance.55
§ 14-5.5. Inspections. [New]
Inspections shall be made pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et
seq. or N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.
§ 14-5.6. Issuance of License. [1972 Code § 83-6]
4. Number and location of bedrooms of rooming house.
5. Square foot floor area and cubic foot content of each room.
6. Statement showing that sanitary facilities are available to, in and
upon the premises to be licensed.
7. Such other information as the Mayor and Council shall require on
applications, to be adopted by resolution from time to time.
b. Applications for renewals of existing licenses need state only that no
changes have been made in the premises or operating thereof as
originally licensed.
a. Any application for a license to operate or maintain a rooming house,
including applications for renewals of existing licenses, shall be
referred to the Inspector, and the Inspector shall make an inspection of
the premises to be licensed in which the business is to be conducted to
ascertain if the building thereon is suitable for said purpose and if the
building complies with the provisions of this section and any and all
ordinances and regulations of the Borough and with the laws of the
State of New Jersey. The Inspector shall report in writing the result of
his examination, and if the report of the Inspector discloses that the
premises for which the license is sought complies with the provisions of
this section and with all other ordinances and regulations of the
Borough and with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the Code
Enforcement Department shall issue a license to operate and maintain
the business of a rooming house in these premises.
b. If the Inspector shall determine upon inspection of premises which the
license is applied for that the building thereon does not comply with
this section and with all other ordinances and regulations of the
55.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.8 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 14-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:269
§ 14-5.7. Occupancy Restriction; Exit Requirements. [1972 Code
§ 83-7]
No room in any licensed premises shall be used or occupied by more than
four persons. No room shall be used as a sleeping room which does not open
to the outside of the building on street or alley side or to a yard or court,
and each sleeping room shall have at least one door and one escape window
which shall be not less than eight square feet in area.
§ 14-5.8. Sleeping Room Restrictions. [1972 Code § 83-8]
No kitchen, garage, lobby, hallway, barn or porch, other than a sleeping
porch above the first floor, shall be used or occupied as a sleeping room.
§ 14-5.9. Compliance with Fire Prevention Standards. [1972 Code
§ 83-9]
Every licensed premises providing accommodation for rooming or lodging
purposes shall comply with the State Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 14-5.10. Guest Register Required. [1972 Code § 83-10]
Every rooming house shall keep a register setting forth the following
information:
§ 14-5.11. Cooking Appliances Prohibited in Sleeping Rooms. [1972
Code § 83-11]
It shall be unlawful for the lessee, proprietor or operator of any rooming
house other than a hotel or motel as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, to let,
underlet, rent or permit any licensed premises or any part thereof for the
purpose of being occupied by any person or persons with the privilege of
installing in any room which is occupied or intended, arranged or designed
Borough and with the laws of the State of New Jersey, then and in that
event no license shall be granted to conduct such business.
c. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Chief of Police or the Fire
Inspector, Board of Health, Construction Official from inspecting or
investigating the premises to determine whether or not the ordinances
and regulations of the Borough and State are being complied with by
the applicant.
a. Date of arrival.
b. Name and address of all persons occupying premises.
c. Number of room to be occupied.
d. Checkout date.
e. Car license number.
§ 14-5.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-5.11
AO:270
to be occupied as a sleeping room any gas, electric range or stove or any
other apparatus or appliance to be used for the purpose of cooking, storing
or preparing food.
§ 14-5.12. Storing or Preparation of Food Prohibited. [1972 Code
§ 83-12]
It shall be unlawful for the lessee or occupant of any rooming house, other
than a hotel or motel, as defined in N.J.S.A. 13A-3, to store foodstuffs or
to cook or otherwise prepare food in any room in a licensed premises,
which room or rooms are occupied or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied as a sleeping room or rooms.
§ 14-5.13. Posting of License. [1972 Code § 83-13]
The license required by this section, together with a copy of this section,
which shall be furnished by the Borough, shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the lobby or main entrance hall of every licensed premises.
§ 14-5.14. Fire Escapes; Fire Extinguishers. [1972 Code § 83-14]
§ 14-5.15. Revocation or Suspension of License. [1972 Code
§ 83-15]
Any license granted under the provisions of this section may be revoked or
suspended by the Mayor and Council in the event that any of the provisions
of this section or any other ordinances of the Borough or any law of the
State of New Jersey are violated by the licensee or in the event any licensee
suffers any of the above referred to ordinances, regulations or laws to be
violated on the licensed premises.
§ 14-6. through § 14-8. (RESERVED)
a. Every licensed premises in the Borough providing housing
accommodations on or above the third floor thereof shall be provided in
each room above the second floor with some means of escape in the
event of fire other than the usual single stairway leading to such
accommodations. Other means of escape shall be one of the following:
1. A regulation metal fire escape leading directly to the ground.
2. A fireproof chain ladder long enough to reach the ground, bolted
through the entire wall below the sill.
3. A metal ladder attached to outside of building at windowsill height,
to reach to the first floor roof.
b. Portable fire extinguishers shall be available on every floor at suitable
locations. Such extinguishers shall bear the approval of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters or the Underwriters' Laboratories.
§ 14-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9
AO:271
§ 14-9. HOUSE NUMBERS.
§ 14-9.1. Numbering Required. [1972 Code § 92-1]
All lands abutting on any public street shall be numbered on a basis of one
number for each 25 feet of street frontage.
§ 14-9.2. Numbering of Easterly and Westerly Streets. [1972 Code
§ 92-2]
The numbering on every public street running easterly and westerly shall
begin at the dividing line between the Township of Wall and the Borough of
Manasquan, or at the westerly terminus of such street. The northerly side of
every such street shall be numbered with even numbers and the southerly
side thereof with odd numbers.
§ 14-9.3. Numbering of Northerly and Southerly Streets Crossing
Main Street. [1972 Code § 92-3]
The numbering on every public street running northerly and southerly to
or across Main Street shall begin at Main Street, and the easterly side of
every such street shall be numbered with even numbers and the westerly
side thereof with odd numbers. The section of every such street crossing
Main Street lying to the north thereof shall be designated by the name of
such street preceded by the word "North," and the section of such street
crossing Main Street lying to the south of Main Street shall be designated
by the name of such street preceded by the word "South."
§ 14-9.4. Numbering of Northerly and Southerly Streets Not
Crossing Main Street. [1972 Code § 92-4]
The numbering on every public street running northerly and southerly and
not extending to or across Main Street shall begin at the southerly terminus
of such street if it lies north of Main Street, and at the northerly terminus
of such street if it lies south of Main Street. The easterly side of every such
street shall be numbered with even numbers and the westerly side thereof
shall be numbered with odd numbers.
§ 14-9.5. Display of Numbers. [1972 Code § 92-5]
The owner of every building fronting on any street shall at all times
conspicuously display on the front thereof a street number, determined in
accordance with the provisions of this section, of such size as may be plainly
visible from the street.
§ 14-9.6. Issuance of Numbers. [1972 Code § 92-6]
The Borough Tax Assessor shall furnish to any persons applying therefor the
correct number or numbers of any lands.
§ 14-10. SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 14-9 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-10.1
AO:272
§ 14-10.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 96-1]
As used in this section:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean artificially constructed
swimming pools or tanks, plastic or otherwise, established or maintained
upon any premises by an individual for his own or his family's use or the use
of guests of his household, that are one 100 square feet in area or more.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CLUB SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean either outdoor
or indoor pools which are artificially constructed to provide recreation
facilities for swimming, bathing or wading. It shall not include private
swimming or wading pools, as hereinabove defined, or bathing facilities
installed as an integral part of a dwelling.
§ 14-10.2. Permit Required; Application; Fees.56 [1972 Code § 96-2;
Ord. No. 1046; Ord. No. 2180-15]
No swimming pool shall be constructed within the Borough unless the
owner or the person in possession of the lands on which the swimming pool
is to be constructed shall first obtain from the Construction Official, prior to
the commencement of construction, a construction permit therefor.
a. The application for approval must be submitted in writing to the
Construction Official, together with a plan, and must be accompanied
by a filing fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, of pool capacity.
b. The plan submitted with each application must contain the following:
1. Size of the pool.
2. Position of the pool showing clearly and accurately its relation to
property lines and building lines.
3. The material to be used in construction.
4. Plumbing features.
5. Safety features (for the public pools, lifeguards, etc.).
6. Type of pool (general public, club or private).
7. Waste disposal facilities.
8. Pool water treatment facilities and capacities.
9. Specifications showing all detailed plans.
c. The Construction Official, upon receipt of a proper application and after
examination thereof and inspection of the proposed location, if satisfied
that all requirements under this section will be satisfactorily met, shall
issue a construction permit for such pool.
56.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.8 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 14-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10.3
AO:273
§ 14-10.3. Construction Materials. [1972 Code § 96-4]
All materials used in the construction of a swimming pool shall be
waterproof and easily cleaned.
§ 14-10.4. Sanitary Requirements. [1972 Code § 96-5]
§ 14-10.5. Fence Requirements; Ladder Exit; Paint Restriction.
[1972 Code § 96-6]
a. There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply system and pool at a point below the maximum
flow line of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system of the pool
unless such physical connection is so installed and operated that no
pool water can be discharged or siphoned into potable water supply
system.
b. Every swimming pool shall have a complete recirculating purifying
system which shall have a capacity for recirculating the pool content
within 24 hours.
c. Physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of water shall comply at all
times with the latest recommendations made by the American Public
Health Association and by the New Jersey State Department of Health.
d. The construction, maintenance and operation of all public or private
club pools shall be in accordance with Sections III to XV inclusive of the
Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955), and the sections are hereby
adopted, a copy of the sections being annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text thereof. Three copies of the
Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955) have been placed on file in
the Office of the Municipal Clerk upon the introduction of this section
and will remain on file in the office for use and examination of the
public.
e. The disposal or discharge of water from any swimming pool shall be
accomplished without causing health hazard and/or nuisance.
a. Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a substantial fence or wall or
an enclosure comparable to such fence or wall of not less than four feet
in height and so constructed as to prevent, within reason, any person
from gaining access through or beneath the fence, wall or enclosure
and shall have a similarly substantial gate or gates of the same height
which must be bolted at its maximum height when the swimming pool is
not in use. The dwelling house or accessory building may be used as
part of the enclosure.
b. All swimming pools must have at least one staircase or rigid ladder to
permit easy exit from the pool.
c. No aluminum paint shall be used in or around any swimming pool.
§ 14-10.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-10.6
AO:274
§ 14-10.6. Maintenance; Lighting; Inspections. [1972 Code § 96-7;
Ord. No. 1046]
§ 14-10.7. License Fees. [1972 Code § 96-8; Ord. No. 2069-10 § 4;
Ord. No. 2180-15]
No license fees shall be paid for private swimming pools. An owner or
person in possession of a public or private club swimming pool shall pay a
license fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees annually, which license shall expire
on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted, together with the required fee, prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 14-11. REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER PERMIT.
§ 14-11.1. When Required. [1972 Code § 80C-1]
No person, firm or corporation shall convey, grant or otherwise transfer
title to real property with a residential, business or commercial structure or
improvement thereon or permit the same to be sold without first obtaining
a real property transfer permit; nor shall any person, firm or corporation
purchasing real property with a residential, business or commercial
structure or improvement thereon purchase or occupy the real property
without first securing a real property transfer permit from the Code
a. All areas surrounding a swimming pool shall be made and kept neat and
attractive so as to be in conformity with surrounding property. No
rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in
or about the pool.
b. Lights used to illuminate a swimming pool shall be so arranged and
shaded as to reflect light away from any and all adjoining premises. All
electrical wiring, fixtures and apparatus used in connection with the
pool and whether above or below grade shall be properly insulated and
enclosed in waterproof conduits or compartments.
c. Each swimming pool shall be maintained and operated so it does not
cause noise, nuisance or annoyance to neighboring property owners or
citizens and residents of the Borough.
d. An owner or person in possession of a swimming pool shall allow the
Health Inspector or Construction Official and other authorized Borough
officials access to the premises to inspect the pool and appurtenances
and to ascertain compliance with this section at any time it may be
deemed necessary and/or required.
e. All public or private club swimming pools existing at the time of the
passage of this section shall be made to conform to the provisions of
this section within 30 days of the adoption and approval thereof.
f. All private swimming pools existing at the time of the passage of this
section shall be made to conform to the provisions of this section within
60 days of the adoption and approval thereof.
§ 14-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-11.1
AO:275
Enforcement Official. This provision shall not apply to a newly constructed
structure for which a certificate of occupancy is issued under the Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 14-11.2. Issuance; Standard Requirements. [1972 Code § 80C-2;
New; Ord. No. 1930-04 § 1; Ord. No. 1980-06 § 2]
a. A real property transfer permit shall be issued to the applicant upon a
determination being made that the structure or improvement is fit for
human habitation or occupancy according to ordinances adopted by the
Borough and standards of Chapter 13, Property Maintenance Code.
Further, the Code Enforcement Official shall ascertain that the
following facilities are provided:
1. In the case of a residential structure, adequate toilet and bathing
facilities shall be provided within the structure.
2. In the case of a business or commercial structure, adequate toilet
facilities shall be provided within the structure.
3. In the case of a residential structure, fireproofing shall be provided
for any door leading between the dwelling unit and the garage.
4. In the case of a residential unit adjoining a garage or located above
a garage, the garage shall be adequately protected with 1/2 inch of
Fire Code sheetrock where the existing garage is sheetrocked or 5/
8 inch of Fire Code sheetrock in a garage which currently does not
contain sheetrock.
5. No fire hazards shall exist in the structure.
6. No electrical hazards shall exist in the structure.
7. Smoke detectors capable of sensing visible and invisible particles
of combustion shall be required on each floor and the basement
area in all principal structures on a lot. The smoke detectors shall
be approved, listed and labeled by Underwriter's Laboratories,
Inc., and shall be installed in a manner and location consistent with
the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
and approved by the Municipal Fire Subcode Official. The smoke
detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupant of
the structure when actuated by the presence of smoke therein.
Smoke detectors shall be installed as required by the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1.
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be required in all principal
structures which contain fuel-burning appliances or have an
attached garage. Standard NFPA-720 requires only one detector
per sleeping area. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be approved,
listed and labeled by Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. and shall be
installed in a manner and location consistent with the requirements
of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. The carbon monoxide
§ 14-11.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-11.2
AO:276
§ 14-11.3. Application Requirements. [1972 Code § 80C-3; New]
detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupant of
the structure when actuated by the presence of carbon monoxide
therein. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed as required
by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133.3.
Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1.
8. Sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs shall be in good repair and
in a safe condition.
b. The report of the Code Enforcement Official shall include the following
information:
1. The number of water meters and remote reading devices
monitoring the water supply to the structure.
2. The number of individual residential, business or commercial units
on the property.
3. The existence of any sump pump and the place where water is
discharged from the pump.
4. The number of kitchen or kitchen facilities contained in the
structure.
5. Any physical barriers, walls or doorways that could be used for the
separation of a unit or units into additional dwelling units.
a. An application for a Real Property Transfer Permit shall be made, in
writing, to the Code Enforcement Official and shall contain the
following information:
1. The names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner of the
property.
2. A description of the property and the residential, business or
commercial structures being sold.
3. The name, address and phone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, appointed by the owner as a representative with
respect to the sale.
4. The name, address and phone numbers of the proposed purchaser
of the property.
5. In the case of a residential structure, the number of persons who
shall occupy the dwelling unit if the sale is consummated.
6. The total sales price of the real estate, exclusive of any sum paid for
personal property which may be included in the sale.
§ 14-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-11.3
AO:277
§ 14-11.4. Fees.57 [1972 Code § 80C-4; Ord. No. 1930-04 § 2; Ord.
No. 2063-10 § 5; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The application fee for a real property transfer permit shall be paid at the
time the application is filed and shall not be refundable. A separate fee
shall be paid for each residential, business or commercial unit on the real
property. The fees shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 14-11.5. Issuance or Denial; Temporary Permit. [1972 Code
§ 80C-5]
§ 14-11.6. Notification of Seller and Buyer. [1972 Code § 80C-6]
Any real estate broker or salesperson who negotiates the sale of any real
property with a residential, business or commercial structure or
improvement thereon shall, within 10 days of the execution of an agreement
of sale, notify the seller and buyer, in writing, of the necessity of obtaining
a real property transfer permit pursuant to this section.
§ 14-12. LICENSE REQUIRED FOR PLUMBING.
7. The consent of the owner to any necessary inspection of the
premises being made by the Code Enforcement Official or any
other agent of the municipality required to fulfill the intent and
purpose of this chapter.
b. The transfer permit application shall be in the form of an affidavit to
insure the accuracy of the information supplied by the applicant.
a. Within 10 days of the receipt of a complete application, application fee
and the Code Enforcement Official being able to schedule an inspection
or reinspection of the property, a real property transfer permit or a
denial of the request for a permit shall be issued. In the event of a
denial, the Code Enforcement Official shall list, in writing, the reasons
for the denial.
b. The Code Enforcement Official shall have the discretion to issue a
temporary real property transfer permit for a period not to exceed 90
days if the structure substantially complies with the criteria established
in this section. In such event, the temporary permit shall be conditioned
upon the completion of work within a time period established by the
Code Enforcement Official. A temporary permit shall be void if all
necessary items are not completed within the required time period. The
failure to comply with the conditions contained in a temporary permit
within the required time period shall require the structure to be
vacated. Continued occupancy of a structure once required to be
vacated shall be a violation of this section.
57.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.8 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 14-11.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-12.1
AO:278
§ 14-12.1. License Required. [1972 Code § 80A-1: Ord. No. 1388]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of contracting
and rendering plumbing services within the Borough unless such person,
firm or corporation is licensed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
45:14C-1 et seq.
§ 14-13. CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND ZONING PERMIT. [Ord. No.
1710-96 § 1; Ord. No. 1922-04 § 1; Ord. No. 1996-07 § 2; Ord. No.
2069-10 § 5; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2234-2017]
a. No Construction Permit shall be issued until a Zoning Permit has been
issued.
b. No building or structure shall be erected, expanded or structurally
altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the Construction
Official. Applications for a Construction Permit shall be made in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code.
c. No building or structure shall be occupied until a Certificate of
Occupancy is issued by the Construction Official and Zoning Officer.
d. No person shall erect, alter, modify or expand a sign until a permit has
been issued by the Zoning Officer; provided however, no permit shall be
required for exempt signs or for conforming modifications of the
graphic content of the sign.
e. A Zoning Permit shall be secured from the Zoning Officer prior to:
1. Application for or issuance of a Construction Permit, except for
minor work or ordinary repairs as defined in the Uniform
Construction Code;
2. Construction, alteration, repair, remodeling or conversion of any
building or structure;
3. Construction of a new sign and expanding or relocating an existing
sign;
4. Construction of a new fence or relocating an existing fence;
5. Construction of any site improvement either above or below
ground;
6. Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy where a Construction Permit
was not previously required.
f. Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made in writing by the property
owner or his authorized agent on a form prepared by the Zoning Officer
and shall include the following:
1. A statement of the use or the intended use of the building,
structure or land;
§ 14-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-13
AO:279
Chapter 15
2. An elevation drawn to scale of the building or structure to be
constructed including the proposed location of signs and their
content and manner of construction;
3. A plan to scale showing all proposed or existing buildings, signs,
parking areas, setbacks and front, side and rear yard setback
distances in exact relation to the street and lot lines;
4. The percentage of existing and proposed lot coverage;
5. The percentage of existing and proposed impervious surfaces; and
6. The location of any wetlands, wetlands transition areas, easements,
floodplains or slopes of 10% or greater.
g. The Zoning Officer shall process a complete application for a Zoning
Permit within 10 days of its submission.
h. Prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit, the applicant shall obtain, all other
required permits and provide such proof of the issuance of these
permits to the Zoning Officer.
i. Zoning Permits for signs:
1. Application shall be made to the Zoning Officer for the issuance of a
Zoning Permit by any person proposing to erect, alter, modify or
expand any sign except an "exempt sign."
2. If the Zoning Officer determines that a sign requires the issuance of
a Zoning Permit, and; is not part of an application to the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment; is permitted as an accessory
structure; and meets all zoning requirements, a permit shall be
issued. The applicant shall also be required to apply for a
Construction Permit and any other related permits.
3. If the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed sign is part of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use application or does not
comply with applicable zoning regulations, the Zoning Officer shall
refer the applicant to the appropriate Development Board for
approval.
4. The graphic content of a sign may be modified without obtaining a
Zoning Permit provided that the proposed graphic content
complies with all zoning requirements.
j. Fees for Zoning Permit. Fees for zoning permits shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
k. A zoning permit shall expire in nine months from the date of the final
approval.
§ 14-13 MANASQUAN CODE § 14-13
AO:280
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 15-1. RENTAL PERMIT.
§ 15-1.1. Required; Application. [1972 Code 81A-1; Ord. No.
1610-93]
The owner of any residential rental structure or unit, as defined herein, who
intends to rent or lease all or any part thereof as a residential rental unit
shall make application to the Code Enforcement Official for issuance of a
rental permit on such form and provide such information as may be required
by the Code Enforcement Official. The application shall be filed with the
Code Enforcement Official not later than 10 days of the date on which the
owner of the residential rental unit shall execute a lease or enter into a
binding agreement to lease the rental unit.
The application shall have attached to it either of the following:
§ 15-1.2. Inspections; Application Fees.58 [1972 Code 81A-1; Ord.
No. 1610-93; Ord. No. 1898-02 § 1; Ord. No. 1931-04 § 2; Ord. No.
2063-10 § 4; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2192-15]
The owner of any residential rental structure or unit shall be obligated
to make the residential rental unit available for inspection by the Code
Enforcement Official immediately subsequent to the filing of an application
for the issuance or reissuance of a rental permit or any reinspection
required in connection with such application. The Code Enforcement
Official shall conduct the initial inspection or any reinspection within 10
days of the date of the filing of a complete application for a rental permit
and being able to schedule an inspection or reinspection of the property
with the owner.
Upon filing an application with the Code Enforcement Official for a rental
permit, the Code Enforcement Official and/or his duly authorized agents
shall conduct an inspection of the rental residential unit to determine
a. A true copy of the lease agreement setting forth the name, permanent
address and telephone number of each tenant.
b. An abstract of the lease agreement, setting forth the name, permanent
address, and telephone number of each tenant, and the period for
which the unit is being leased to such tenant. The abstract of the lease
shall be verified by an affidavit signed by the landlord or an authorized
agent of the landlord.
In the event a rental permit is applied for before the landlord enters a
lease, the landlord shall file the lease or an abstract of the lease as set
forth above within 10 days of the date of the lease agreement.
58.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-65.8 for fee exemptions for certain members of the
volunteer fire companies and first aid squad.
§ 14-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.2
AO:281
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 13, Property Maintenance and all
other applicable municipal ordinances.
Inspection and reinspection fees for each rental unit shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 15-1.3. Notice of Violation; Reinspection. [1972 Code § 81A-1;
Ord. No. 1610-93]
Notice of any violations as a result of an inspection shall be provided
in accordance with Section PM-107 of the Property Maintenance Code
adopted under Chapter 13. Upon correction of the violation, the applicant
shall notify the Code Enforcement Official, and a reinspection shall be made
upon payment of the appropriate fee.
§ 15-1.4. Issuance of Permits; Terms; Temporary Permits. [1972
Code § 81A-1; Ord. No. 1610-93]
Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection, the Code Enforcement
Official shall forthwith issue a rental permit. In the case of summer seasonal
occupancy, the rental permit will be in force for a period between May 1
and September 30 following the date of issuance. If such unit is leased
between October 1 and May 1 of the following year, the owner of the rental
residential unit will be required to obtain a rental permit to cover that
period. In all other cases, a rental permit will be in force until a change in
tenant occupancy occurs, or for a term of three years, whichever is sooner.
The Code Enforcement Official shall have the discretion to issue a
temporary rental permit for a period not to exceed 90 days if the structure
substantially complies with the provisions of Chapter 13 and all other
applicable Borough ordinances. In such event, the temporary rental permit
shall be conditioned upon the completion of work within a time period
established by the Code Enforcement Official. A temporary rental permit
shall be void if all necessary items are not completed within the required
time period. The failure to comply with the conditions contained in the
temporary rental permit within the required time period shall require the
structure to be vacated. Continued occupancy of a structure once required
to be vacated shall be a violation of this section.
§ 15-1.5. Revocation of Permit. [1972 Code § 81A-1; Ord. No.
1610-93]
If subsequent to the issuance of a rental permit, the Code Enforcement
Official or his duly authorized agents have cause to believe a violation of
1. Permit Card Replacement:
In order to offset the cost to the Borough of Manasquan and its
Department of Code Enforcement to process the replacement of permit
cards for each annual rental unit, the owner of the rental unit shall pay
a fee of $65.
§ 15-1.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 15-1.5
AO:282
this section or the Property Maintenance Code exists, an inspection shall be
made of the subject premises. If a violation is found to exist, the provisions
of Section PM-107 of the Property Maintenance Code shall apply. In addition
thereto, if cited violations are not abated within 10 days from the service of
notice, the rental permit shall be revoked by the Code Enforcement Official
by mailing a notice of revocation by certified mail to the owner and tenant
of the premises. Thereafter, the premises shall be immediately vacated,
providing, however, the Code Enforcement Official shall have the discretion
to allow a longer period of time for the correction of violations if warranted
and reasonable under the circumstances.
§ 15-1.6. Definitions. [1972 Code 81A-1; Ord. No. 1610-93]
As used in this section:
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE OR UNIT — Shall mean any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure permitted to be possessed
or occupied by a person who shall be the legal owner, equitable owner or
party in actual control of said unit, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease,
agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded contract for
the sale of land for all or any part of a year.
§ 15-1.7. Display of Rental Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No.
2091-11 § 1]
The Rental Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the interior of the rental unit certifying the maximum number of persons
who may occupy each rental unit. The Certificate shall remain posted
at all times during which the premises are occupied. No person shall
remove, alter or deface any Rental Certificate of Occupancy, nor shall any
person continue to occupy any premises from which a Rental Certificate of
Occupancy has been removed or after same has been altered or defaced.
§ 15-2. PROCEDURE TO HANDLE COMPLAINTS AGAINST RENTAL
PROPERTY OWNERS.
§ 15-2.1. Findings. [1972 Code § 82A-1; Ord. No. 1617-93]
The Borough Council finds, determines and declares that:
a. Manasquan is a resort community and its citizens have experienced
disturbances, damage and public expense resulting from carelessly
granted and inadequately supervised seasonal rentals to irresponsible
vacationers by inept or indifferent landlords.
b. This section is enacted to preserve the peace and tranquility of the
community for its permanent residents, and to maintain the
municipality as a viable vacation resort for all persons and families
availing themselves of the facilities in the community.
§ 15-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2.1
AO:283
§ 15-2.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 82A-2; Ord. No. 1617-93]
As used in this section:
HEARING OFFICER — Shall mean a licensed attorney of the State of
New Jersey appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of
the Borough Council. The hearing officer shall not own or lease any real
property within the Borough, nor hold any interest in the assets of or profits
arising from the ownership of such property.
LANDLORD — Shall mean the person or persons who own or purport to
own any building in which there is rented or offered for rent housing space
for living or dwelling under either a written or oral lease, including but not
limited to any building subject to the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,"
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and owner-occupied two-unit
premises. In the case of a mobile home park, "landlord" shall mean the
owner of an individual dwelling unit within the mobile home park.
SEASONAL RENTAL — Shall mean any rental of residential
accommodations for a term of less than one year and including any part of
the period extending from May 15 to September 15.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — Shall mean an act of disorderly, indecent,
tumultuous or riotous conduct upon or in proximity to any seasonal rental
premises, and attributable to the acts or incitements of any of the tenants
of those premises which have been substantiated by prosecution and
conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 15-2.3. Hearing, Posting of Bond. [1972 Code § 82A-3; Ord. No.
1617-93; Ord. No. 2101-11]
c. The enactment of this section is necessary and desirable to provide a
means to curb and discourage those occasional excesses arising from
irresponsible seasonal rentals.
d. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey enacted N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n
et seq. to enable certain communities to take effective action to assure
that excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated, and that
landlords offering seasonal rentals be held to sufficient standards of
responsibility.
a. If in any one year, three complaints, on separate occasions, of
disorderly, indecent, tumultuous or riotous conduct upon or in
proximity to any seasonal rental premises, and attributable to the acts
or incitements of any of the tenants of those premises, have been
substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of competent
jurisdiction, the Borough Council or any officer or employee of the
Borough so designated by the Borough Council for this purpose, may
institute proceedings to require the landlord of the seasonal rental
premises to post a bond against the consequences of future incidents of
the same character.
§ 15-2.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 15-2.3
AO:284
b. The Borough Council or any officer or employee designated by the
Borough Council shall cause to be served upon the landlord, in person
or by certified mail, to the address appearing on the tax records of the
municipality, notice advising of the institution of such proceedings,
together with particulars of the substantiated complaint upon which
those proceedings are based, and of the time and place at which the
hearing will be held in the matter, which shall be in the Municipal
Building, Municipal Court or such other public place as designated by
the Borough Council, and which shall be no sooner than 30 days from
the date upon which the notice is served or mailed.
c. At the hearing convened pursuant to paragraph b above, the hearing
officer shall give full hearing to both the complaint of the municipality
and to any evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the landlord, if
present or represented and offering such evidence, may present. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether
the landlord shall be required to post a bond in accordance with the
terms of this section.
d. Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the hearing officer, in light of the nature and extent of the
offenses indicated in the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based, to be adequate in the case of subsequent
offenses to make reparation for:
1. Damages likely to be caused to public or private property and
damages consequent upon disruption of affected residents' rights
of fair use and quiet enjoyment of their premises; and
2. Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for
such offenses; and
3. Compensating the municipality for the costs of repressing and
prosecuting such incidents of disorderly behavior; provided
however, no such bond shall be in an amount less than $500 nor
more than $5,000. The municipality may enforce a bond thus
required by action in the Superior Court, and shall be entitled to an
injunction prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing any
lease of the affected premises for residential purposes until that
bond or equivalent security, in satisfactory form and amount, has
been deposited with the municipality.
e. Any bond or other security deposited in compliance with paragraph d
above shall remain in force for a period of four years. Upon the lapse of
the four-year period, the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge of
the bond, unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a
forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have
been had under subsection 15-2.4 below, in which case the security
shall be renewed in an amount and for a period that shall be specified
by the hearing officer. A transfer of ownership or control of the property
shall not void a requirement for security imposed under this section.
§ 15-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2.3
AO:285
§ 15-2.4. Bond Forfeiture, Extension. [1972 Code § 82A-4; Ord. No.
1617-93]
§ 15-2.5. Hearing Officer. [1972 Code § 82A-5; Ord. No. 1617-93]
The hearing officer shall be a person or persons appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the advice and consent of the Borough Council. A hearing officer
shall not own or lease any real property within the Borough, nor hold any
interest in the assets of or profits arising from the ownership or lease of
such property.
Chapter 16
FEES
§ 16-1. SCHEDULE OF FEES.
The person or persons to whom ownership or control is transferred
shall maintain that security, and shall be subject to injunctive
proceedings as authorized by paragraph d above in the same manner
as the landlord upon which the requirement was originally imposed;
provided however, the Borough Council may by resolution shorten the
period for which security is required to not less than one year from
the date of the transfer of ownership or control, if during that year no
substantiated complaints are recorded with respect to the property in
question.
a. If during the period for which a landlord is required to give security
pursuant to subsection 15-2.3 above, a substantiated complaint is
recorded against the property in question, the Borough Council or its
designee may institute proceedings against the landlord for the
forfeiture or partial forfeiture of the security, for an extension as
provided in subsection 15-2.3e above, of the period for which the
security is required, or for increase in the amount of security required,
or for any or all of those purposes.
b. Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by
the hearing officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed
necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in
subsection 15-2.3d above. Any decision by the hearing officer to
increase the amount or extend the period of the required security shall
be determined in light of the same factors set forth in subsection
15-2.3d above, and shall be taken only to the extent that the nature of
the substantiated complaint or complaints out of which proceedings
arise under this section indicates the appropriateness of such change in
order to effectually carry out the purposes of this section. The decision
of the hearing officer in such circumstances shall be enforceable in the
same manner as provided in subsection 15-2.3d above.
§ 15-2.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:286
§ 16-1.1. Fee Schedule Established. [Amended by Ord. No. 2200-15;
Ord. No. 2205-2016; Ord. No. 2206-2016; Ord. No. 2209-2016; Ord.
No. 2217-2016; Ord. No. 2218-2016; Ord. No. 2220-2016; Ord. No.
2225-2017; Ord. No. 2268-18; Ord. No. 2272-18; Ord. No. 2276-19;
7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2293-19; 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2294-19;
10-21-2019 by Ord. No. 2298-19; 12-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2305-19;
2-3-2020 by Ord. No. 2307-20; 3-2-2020 by Ord. No. 2315-20]
The following fee schedule is hereby established with respect to licenses,
permits and activities required or regulated under the provisions of various
chapters of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of Manasquan.
Applications for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be
subject to the provisions of the specific chapter of the Revised General
Ordinances which is indicated for each type of license or permit. The
business, activity or operation for which the license or permit is required
shall be subject to all regulations set forth in the chapter to which reference
is made.
Schedule of Fees
CHAPTER 2 ADMINISTRATION
Section Subsection Fee
2-15 MUNICIPAL
PUBLIC DEFENDER
2-15.8 Request for
Representation by the Municipal
Public Defender; Fee
b. Application fee $200
2-64 PAYMENT OF
TAXES,
ASSESSMENTS AND
MUNICIPAL
CHARGES REQUIRED
PRIOR TO PAYMENT
OF FIRE INSURANCE
CLAIMS
2-64.1 Conditions for the
Payment of Fire Insurance
Proceeds
a. Maximum payment by
insurance company for fire
damage claim
$2,500
2-65 FEES CHARGED
FOR MUNICIPAL
SERVICES
2-65.2 Fees for Photocopying of
Public Records; Designation of
Custodian and Deputy Custodian
of Government Records
a. Letter size (or smaller) $0.05 per
page
Legal size (or larger) $0.07 per
page
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:287
CHAPTER 2 ADMINISTRATION
Section Subsection Fee
Electronic records (i.e.,
email or facsimile)
No charge
Computer disc, DVD, CDROM,
etc.
Actual cost
Actual cost to produce the paper
copies if the costs exceed $0.05
and $0.07 rates
Actual cost
2-65.3 Payments by Check by
Phone; Returned Check Service
Charge
a. Payment by check by phone $15
b. Returned check service
charge
$20
2-65.4 Application Fee and
Security Deposit for Use of
Municipal Beachfront Facilities
a. Application fee $150
Security deposit $400
If application approved $150 per
event, per day
c. Wedding or civil union at
the beachfront
$150
2-65.5 Fee for Manufacturing
Park Benches by the Department
of Public Works
$1,000
2-65.6 Fee for the Temporary
Storage for Parking of
Commercial Trailers, Trailers
Carrying Modular Homes or
Similar Vehicles in Municipal
Parking Lots
a. Temporary storage or
parking fee
$100
Security deposit $500
2-65.8 Exemption from the
Payment of Permit Fees for
Certain Members of the
Manasquan First Aid Squad and
Manasquan Fire Companies
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:288
CHAPTER 2 ADMINISTRATION
Section Subsection Fee
a. Maximum amount of
exemption per year
$500
2-65.9 Charging Electric
Vehicles at Borough-Owned
Charging Stations. [Ord. No.
2205-2016; Ord. No.
2206-2016]
$0.15 per
minute not to
exceed 2
hours
CHAPTER 3 POLICE REGULATIONS
3-16 VEHICLES WITH
OUTSTANDING
WARRANTS;
IMPOUNDMENT.
3-16.3 Reclamation; Payment
of Fees.
Established by
contract
CHAPTER 4 GENERAL LICENSING
4-1 ALARM SYSTEMS. 4-1.6 Response Requirement
Failure to respond within time
limit
$25
4-1.7 False Alarms.
b. Administrative Fees for false
alarms
6th to 7th false alarms $25 per alarm
8th to 9th false alarms $50 per alarm
10th or more false alarms $100 per
alarm
4-3 AMUSEMENT
GAMES AND
DEVICES.
4-3.5 Fees
a. Licenses:
1. Games of skill or chance
subject to Chapter 109,
P.L. 1959:
(a) Stop and go $1,200
(b) Arcade games - each
50 units or part
thereof
$1,000
(c) Other games $1,100
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:289
CHAPTER 4 GENERAL LICENSING
2. Games of skill or chance
not subject to Chapter
109, P.L. 1959: for each
amusement game or
device
$150
Games described in
subsection 4-3.1, for each
unit of 25 devices or any
part thereof
$500
4-5 DOOR-TO-DOOR
COMMERCIAL
SOLICITATION
4-5.5 Application for Permit.
f. Solicitation permit $50
4-6 HAWKERS AND
PEDDLERS
4-6.4 Fee and License Term.
License - 3 months $100
4-7 MASSAGE
THERAPY.
4-7.4 Inspection; Fees. (Massage
Establishments)
b. Permit fee $200
4-7.7 Change in Location. $25
4-9 ENCUMBRANCES
ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY
4-9.2 Liability; Fees; Term of
License.
Each encumbrance Calculated by
Tax Assessor
b 4-10.5 Liability; Fees; Term of
Permit.
b. Permit $25 first
newsrack
$20 each
additional
4-11 PRIVATELYOWNED
OPEN-AIR
PARKING LOTS
4-11.7 License Fee.
Annual license fee Number of
square feet by
0.0050,
Minimum $50
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:290
CHAPTER 4 GENERAL LICENSING
4-14 TOWING AND
STORAGE
[Ord. No. 2209-2016
§ 2; Ord. No.
2225-2017 § 2]
4-14.5 Towing and Storage Fees
and Charges.
a. Towing fees and charges
1. Class I vehicle (up to
8,600 pounds)
(a) Show up fee $40
(b) Hook up fee without
towing
$60
(c) Full towing charge Impound -
$100
MVA - $125
2. Class II vehicle (8,601 to
15,000 pounds)
(a) Show up fee $40
(b) Hook up fee without
towing
$60
(c) Full towing charge Impound -
$150
MVA - $175
3. Class III vehicle (over
15,000 pounds)
(a) Show up fee $100
(b) Hook up fee without
towing
$100
(c) Full towing charge $450
b. Storage fees:
1. Storage $35 per day
c. Additional charges
1. Lockout/Disconnect
Linkage/Go Jacks
$25 (1 fee
even if all 3
required)
2. Clean Up Fee MVA $35 (first bag
of speedy dry
is free, each
additional bag
is $10)
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:291
CHAPTER 4 GENERAL LICENSING
3. Off Road Recovery and
Stand by time
$125 an hour
4-15 GARAGE
SALES.59
4-15.2 Permit Required;
Application.
$10
CHAPTER 5 ANIMAL CONTROL
5-1 LICENSING 5-1.4 Fees; Exemptions.
a. Dogs
Spayed or neutered dog $12
Non-spayed, non-neutered
dog
$15
Late fee $5 per month
d. Duplicate license $1
5-9 VACCINATIONS
AND LICENSING
5-9.2 License Required.
g. Cats
Unneutered cat $7
Neutered/spayed $5
Late fee $5 per month
i. Loss of License Duplicate $1
CHAPTER 6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
6-3.6 License Fees;
Maximum Number
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$2,500
Plenary Retail Consumption
License Hotel/Motel
$2,500
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$2,160
Club License $150
CHAPTER 10 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
10-3 PERMITS FOR
SPECIAL EVENTS
1 No fee
59.Editor's Note: Former § 4-16, Taxicabs, Autocabs, which immediately followed this entry,
was repealed 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2276-19.
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:292
CHAPTER 11 DOCKS AND BULKHEADS
11-1 BOROUGHOWNED
DOCKS
11-1.3 Rental Fees. [Ord. No.
2218-2016 § 3; amended
12-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2305-19]
a. Perrine Boulevard
1. Boat slips 13-1/2 feet by
30 feet
$3,350
2. Boat slips 12-1/2 feet by
26 feet
$2,690
b. Fourth Avenue
Boat slips 9 feet by 25 feet $1,870
Up to 20-foot boat permitted
(new)
Boat slips 9 feet by 25 feet $1,630
Up to 20-foot boat permitted
(old)
c. Cedar Avenue
Boat slips 11 feet by 24 feet $2,238
d. Euclid Avenue
Boat slips 8 1/2 feet by 20
feet
$1,870
g. Dry storage fee
Length of boat - 20 feet or
less
$300
Additional per foot over 20
feet
$20 per foot
11-3 FEES FOR THE
REMOVAL AND
STORAGE OF BOATS
AND VESSELS
MOORED IN
MUNICIPAL SLIPS OR
LOCATED ON
MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY
11-3.4 Recovery of Vessel;
Storage Fee
Removal/recovery of boat and/or
storage
$50 per day
11-5 CONSTRUCTION
OF BULKHEADS
11-5.2 Permit Fees
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:293
CHAPTER 11 DOCKS AND BULKHEADS
a. First 50 linear feet or
fractional part thereof,
excluding bulkhead returns
$50
b. Each additional 50 linear feet
or fractional part thereof,
excluding bulkhead returns
$10
CHAPTER 12 BEACHES AND BEACHFRONT
12-2 BEACH
REGISTRATION AND
BADGES
12-2.4 Fees
a. Daily, weekday, over 12 $10
b. Daily weekend, over 12 $10
c. Weekly badge over 12 $45
d. Seasonal badge, over 16 $85
e. Seasonal badge ages 12, 13,
14, 15 and 16
$40
f. Seasonal, over 65 $30
h. Daily, weekday, over 12 - sold
on beachfront or other
location
$25
i. Daily, weekend, over 12 -
sold on beachfront or other
location
$25
12-9 BEACH
EMERGENCY ACCESS
ROADWAY
12-9.2 Permit; Application;
Deposit
e. All vehicles - permit fee $25
h. Cash deposit or letter of
credit, over 5,000 pounds
$10,000
12-10 PERMITS FOR
GROUPS OF 20 OR
MORE
12-10.5 Parking of Buses Used by
Groups
Parking for bus of 20 or more
people
$30
12-11 SEASON
PARKING PERMIT
12-11.1 Parking Permit for Use of
Certain Municipal Parking Lots
a. Fees
1. Seasonal $100
2. Daily, Monday - Thursday $10
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:294
CHAPTER 12 BEACHES AND BEACHFRONT
3. Friday, Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
$15
12-11.2 Sea Watch Beach season
parking permit
$400
12-12 SEASONAL
LOCKER PERMITS
12-12.1 Sea Watch Beach Season
Locker Permits
a. Locker permits for Sea
Watch Beach
1. Seasonal locker permit
21 x 31 $170
21 x 64 $325
22 x 78 $325
35 x 87 $410
CHAPTER 13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
13-1 PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE
CODE
13-1.2 Copies on File; Available
for Purchase.
Copy of the International
Property Maintenance Code
$25
13-1.3
i. The filing fee for an appeal
made to the Board of
Appeals
$50
13-5 BRUSH, WEEDS,
DEAD TREES; TRASH
AND GARBAGE
PROHIBITED ON
LANDS
13-5.6 Cost of Removal Assessed
as Lien.
Performance of work by Borough $75 per hour,
per worker,
Minimum 1
hour or $75
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:295
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
14-1 STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY
14-1 STATE
UNIFORM
CONSTRUCTION
CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY
14-1.2 Fees.
a. Plan Review Fee. The fee for
plan review shall be 25% of
the amount to be charged for
a construction permit. The
minimum fee shall be $50.
b. Basic Construction Fee. The
basic construction fee shall
be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the
volume or the cost of
construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces
of equipment, the number of
electric fixtures and devices
and the number of sprinklers,
standpipes and detectors
(smoke and heat) at the unit
rates provided herein plus
any special fees. The
minimum fee for a basic
construction permit covering
any or all of building,
plumbing, electric or fire
protection work shall be $60,
except as herein provided.
1. Building Volume or Cost.
The fees for new
construction or alteration
are as follows:
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:296
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
(a) Fees for new
construction shall be
based upon the
volume of the
structure. Volume
shall be computed in
accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
The new construction
fee shall be $0.027
per cubic foot of
volume for buildings
and structures of all
use groups and types
of construction. The
minimum fee shall be
$150.
(b) Fees for renovations,
alterations, and
repairs or site
construction
associated with premanufactured
construction shall be
based on the estimate
cost of work. The fee
shall be $25 per
$1,000 or fraction
thereof, up to a limit
of $50,000 From
$50,001 to and
including $100,000,
the additional fee
shall be in the amount
of $20 per $1,000 of
the estimated cost
above $50,000. For
amounts above
$100,000, the
additional fee shall be
in the amount of $15
per $1,000 of
estimated cost above
$100,000.
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:297
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
(c) Fees for additions
shall be computed on
the same basis as new
construction for the
added portion. The
minimum fee shall be
$100.
(d) Fees for combination
renovations and
additions shall be
computed as the sum
of the fees calculated
separately in
accordance with
paragraphs (b) and (c)
above. The minimum
fee shall be $100.
(e) The fee for each
fireplace shall be $60.
2. Plumbing Fixtures and
Equipment
The fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The fee shall be $20
per fixture connected
to the plumbing
system for all fixtures
and appliances except
as listed below.
(b) The fee shall be $65
per special device for
the following:
Grease traps
Water utility
connections
Sewer utility
connections
Active solar systems
Interceptors
Oil separators
Air-conditioning units
Backflow preventors
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:298
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
Gas piping
Sewer pumps
(c) The fee shall be $65
for the installation of
the backflow
preventors for lawn
sprinklers.
(d) The fee shall be $65
for the installation of
a boiler (hot water or
steam).
3. Electric Fixtures and
Devices
The fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The fees for outlets
(including lighting,
wall switches,
fluorescent fixtures,
convenience
receptacles or similar
fixtures, and motors
or devices of less than
1 horsepower or 1
kilowatt) shall be as
follows:
Outlets 1 to 50
devices
$75
Each additional 25
devices
$15
(b) The fees for service
panels shall be as
follows:
0 to 200 amps $50
201 to 1,000 amps $100
More than 1,001
amps
$500
(c) The fees for
transformers or
generators shall be as
follows:
1 kw to 10 kw $15
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:299
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
11 kw to 45 kw $50
46 kw to 112.5 kw $100
More than 112.5 kw $500
(d) The fees for motors,
except those in plugin
appliances shall be
counted, including
control equipment,
generators,
transformers and all
heating, cooking or
other devices
consuming or
generating electric
current shall be as
follows:
1 hp to 10 hp $15
11 hp to 50 hp $50
51 to 100 hp $100
More than 100 hp $500
(e) The fee for inground
swimming pools,
outdoor spas, outdoor
hot tubs, or outdoor
fountains shall be:
$150; the fee for
aboveground
swimming pools,
outdoor spas, outdoor
hot tubs, or outdoor
fountains shall be:
$100.
(f) The fee for each of
the following items
shall be $20:
Electric heater
Surface units
Dishwasher
Heat pump
Indoor hot tubs/
jacuzzi
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:300
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
Gas/oil heaters
Electric dryer
Hot water heater
Range
Commercial exhaust
fans
Oven
(g) The fee for the annual
electric inspection of
all public swimming
pools shall be $50 for
the first pool and $25
for each additional
pool, spa or hot tub.
(h) The fees for air
conditioner feeders
and disconnects shall
be $35.
4. Fire protection and other
hazardous equipment:
Sprinklers, standpipes,
detectors (smoke and
heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas
and oil fired appliances
not connected to the
plumbing system, kitchen
exhaust systems and flues:
(a) The fee for sprinkler
heads or detectors
shall be as follows:
1 to 10 devices $60
11 to 20 devices $100
21 to 100 devices $125
101 to 200 devices $250
More than 200
devices
$750
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:301
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
In computing fees for
heads and detectors,
the number shall be
counted separately
and 2 fees, 1 for
heads and 1 for
detectors shall be
charged.
(b) The fee for each
standpipe shall be
$250.
(c) The fee for each
independent preengineered
system
shall be $125.
(d) The fee for each gas
or oil fired appliance
which is not
connected to the
plumbing system shall
be $60.
(e) The fee for each
kitchen exhaust
system shall be $100.
(f) The fee for the
installation of fuel
tanks shall be:
Capacity under 600
gallons
$65
Capacity over 600
gallons
$125
c. Elevators.
The fee for a permit to install
an elevator shall be $60 per
unit, plus the costs charged
by the Elevator Safety Unit of
the State of New Jersey.
d. Certificates and Other
Permits.
The fees are as follows:
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:302
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
1. The fee for a demolition
permit of a one- or twofamily
dwelling shall be
$75; for the demolition of
a garage or shed or other
accessory use, the fee
shall be $35; and for the
demolition of all other
structures, the fee shall be
$135.
(a) The fee for a
demolition permit for
any structure may be
waived if the
applicant for the
permit allows the
Manasquan Police
Department, Fire
Department or First
Aid Squad to utilize
the structure to be
demolished for
training purposes,
and the Police
Department, Fire
Department or First
Aid Squad files a
notice in writing
indicating its intent to
use the structure for
training purposes. In
such event, the
applicant must agree
to adequately secure
the structure after the
training exercise and
demolish the
structure within 15
calendar days of the
date on which the
exercise is conducted.
2. The fee for the removal or
abandonment of a fuel
storage tank (inground or
aboveground) shall be
$75.
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:303
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
3. The fee for a permit to
move a building or
structure from 1 lot to
another or to a new
location on the same lot
shall be $60 plus the cost
of the new foundation and
alterations to the building
or structure for
replacement in a
completed condition shall
be computed as required
for renovations,
alterations and repairs in
paragraph b1(b).
4. The fee for a permit to
install a swimming pool
shall be as follows:
Inground $150
Aboveground $100
5. The fee to construct a sign
which is greater than 25
square feet in surface area
(1 side) and more than 6
feet in height shall be $60.
6. The fee to erect a fence 6
feet or greater in height or
surrounding a swimming
pool shall be $60.
7. The fee for an asbestos
removal permit shall be
$85; and the fee for a
certificate of occupancy
after asbestos removal
shall be $20.
8. The fee for a certificate of
occupancy shall be $65.
9. The fee for a certificate of
occupancy granted
pursuant to a change of
use group shall be $65.
10.The fee for a continued
certificate of occupancy
shall be $50.
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:304
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
11.The fee for a Temporary
Certificate of Occupancy:
No charge for first; $60
each additional.
12.The fee for an application
for a variation in
accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $65.
The fee for resubmission
of an application for a
variation shall be $35.
e. Periodic Inspections.
Fees for the periodic
reinspection of equipment
and facilities granted a
certificate of approval for a
specified duration in
accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23 shall be as follows:
1. For cross connections and
backflow preventors that
are subject to testing
requiring reinspection
every 12 months, the fee
shall be $55 for each
device plus costs charged
by an on-site inspection
agency.
f. The fee to reinstate a lapsed
construction permit shall be
10% of the cost of the
original permit but in no case
less than $55.
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:305
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
g. In order to provide for
training, certification and
technical support programs
required by the Uniform
Construction Code Act and
the Regulations, the
enforcing agency shall
collect, in addition to the
fees, a surcharge fee of
$0.0016 per cubic foot of
volume of new buildings and
additions. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for
all other construction shall be
$0.80 per $1,000 of value of
construction. The surcharge
fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a
quarterly basis for the fiscal
quarters ending September
30, December 31, March 31
and June 30, not later than 1
month next succeeding the
end of the quarter for which
it is due.
h. All fees shall be rounded to
the next dollar.
i. All fees collected pursuant to
this chapter shall be promptly
remitted to the Municipal
Treasurer.
14-5 ROOMING
HOUSES, HOTELS
AND MOTELS, BED &
BREAKFASTS
14-5.4 License Fees.
1-5 rooms $10 each
room
6 and over $5 each room
14-10 SWIMMING
POOLS
14-10.2 Permit Required;
Application; Fees
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:306
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
a. Application for approval $0.0025 per
gallon, $25
minimum
14-10.7 License Fees.
Public or private swimming pool
license
$75
14-11 REAL
PROPERTY
TRANSFER PERMIT
14-11.4 Fees
a Initial inspection applied for
at least 10 days prior to
issuance of a transfer permit
$175 single
unit, $175
multi-unit
plus $5 for
each
additional
unit
b Initial inspection applied for
at least 3 days prior to
issuance of a transfer permit
$200 single
unit, $200
multi-unit
plus $5 for
each
additional
unit
c Reinspection fee applied for
at least 10 days prior to
issuance of a transfer permit
$200 single
unit, $200
multi-unit
plus $10 for
each
additional
unit
14-13
CONSTRUCTION
PERMIT AND
ZONING PERMIT
i. Zoning permits for signs (See
§ 35-7 for zoning permit fee)
j. Fees for zoning permit
1. Shed, sign, hot tub,
sidewalk, curb, apron and
driveway construction
$20
2. Swimming pool
construction
$75
3. Addition of 500 square
feet or less to an existing
residential home
$75
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:307
CHAPTER 14 BUILDING AND HOUSING
4. Addition in excess of 500
square feet to an existing
residential home
$125
5. New residential home
construction
$125
6. Addition to or new
construction of a
commercial building
$175
7. Review of minor
subdivision plan
$125
8. Review of major
subdivision plan
$225
9. Review of site plan $175
CHAPTER 15 RENTAL PROPERTY
15-1 RENTAL
PERMIT
15-1.2 Inspections; Application
Fees
Inspection and reinspection fees
for each rental unit
a. Fees:
1. Summer rentals (May 1 to
Sept. 30): initial inspection
applied for 10 days prior
to issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
$175
2. Winter rentals (Oct. 1 to
April 30): initial inspection
applied for 10 days prior
to issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
$175
3. Annual rentals (3 years or
change of tenant): initial
inspection applied for at
least 10 days before the
issuance of the rental
certificate of occupancy
$200
4. Initial inspection applied
for 3 days prior to
issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
for summer, winter and
annual rentals
$200
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:308
CHAPTER 15 RENTAL PROPERTY
5. Initial inspection applied
for 3 days prior to
issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
for annual rentals
$225
6. Reinspection applied for
prior to issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
for summer, winter and
annual rentals
$200
7. Reinspection applied for
prior to issuance of rental
certificate of occupancy
for annual rentals
$250
8. Permit card replacement
To process the
replacement of permit
cards for each annual
rental unit, the owner of
the rental unit shall pay a
fee
$65
b. Winter rentals where there
was no previous summer
rental
Same as
summer rental
schedule
c. Annual rental; inspection
following 3-year term; change
of tenant occupancy
Same as
summer rental
schedule
CHAPTER 18 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
18-5 ADDITIONAL
REQUIRED
INSPECTIONS
18-5 ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
b. Annual inspection fee
Type Use
Square
Footage
Total Gross Required Fees
Type 6 0 - 1,000 $45
Type 7 1,001 to
2,000
$55
Type 8 2,001 to
2,500
$70
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:309
CHAPTER 18 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Type 9 2,501 to
3,000
$75
Type 10 3,001 to
3,500
$90
Type 11 3,501 to
4,000
$100
Type 12 4,001 to
4,500
$110
Type 13 4,501 to
5,000
$120
Type 14 5,000 to
5,500
$130
Type 15 5,501 to
6,000
$140
Type 16 6,000 and
over
$140 for first
6,000 square
feet then $20
for each
additional or
part of 1,000
square feet
over
Common areas $40
18-6 SITE PLANS 18-6 SITE PLANS.
b. Review of any site or subdivision plans
Type Fees
Minor site plan $75
Major site plan $100
Minor subdivision $50
Major subdivision $125
Abridged $35
Re-review $25, only after the initial
application and 1 review of
the same has been undertaken
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:310
CHAPTER 20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
20-2 EXCAVATIONS
OF STREETS
[Amended 10-21-2019
by Ord. No. 2298-19]
20-2.2 Application for Permit (street excavation).
b. Permit application fees
SCHEDULE A PERMIT APPLICATION FEE
Fee Extent of Excavation or Disturbance
$125 The first 50 square feet or portion thereof
$100 Each and every additional 50 square feet
or portion thereof
INSPECTION FEE
$250 For every separate or individual
excavation or disturbance
c. Cash or Surety bond
SCHEDULE B CASH DEPOSIT OR SURETY
BOND
(a) Opening in new or existing street
improvements constructed of cement,
concrete or bituminous concrete
Pavement Disturbance Cost per Square
Foot
1 to 20 Square Feet $20
21 to 40 Square Feet $19
41 to 60 Square Feet $18
61 to 80 Square Feet $17
81 to 120 Square Feet $16
121 to 160 Square Feet $15
161 to 200 Square Feet $14
201 to 240 Square Feet $13
241 to 280 Square Feet $12
281 to 320 Square Feet $11
321 to 360 Square Feet $10
361 to 400 Square Feet $9
401 to 440 Square Feet $8
441 to 480 Square Feet $7
481 to 600 Square Feet $6
601 to 700 Square Feet $5.50
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:311
CHAPTER 20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
701 to 900 Square Feet $5
901 to 1,000 Square Feet $4.50
1,001 to 5,000 Square
Feet
$4
5,001 to — Square Feet $3
(b) Opening(s) in streets not constructed of
concrete or bituminous concrete:
Pavement Disturbance Cost per Square
Foot
1 to 149 Square Feet $1.50
150 to 999 Square Feet $1.25
1,000 to 4,999 Square
Feet
$1
5,000 to — Square Feet $0.75
(c) Minimum cash deposit or surety bond:
$3,500.
20-3 STANDARDS
FOR
CONSTRUCTION,
REPLACEMENT,
REPAIR AND
MAINTENANCE OF
SIDEWALKS,
DRIVEWAY APRONS
AND CURBS
20-3.3 Fees (sidewalks, driveways, curbs).
Permit application fee $20
CHAPTER 21 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
21-2 REFUSE
CONTAINERS and
DUMPSTERS
21-2.3 Prohibited Conduct;
Application; Fee. [Amended
8-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2294-19]
c. Dumpster application fee $150
Security deposit $1,000
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:312
CHAPTER 22 WATER AND SEWER UTILITY
22-2 BASE WATER
AND SEWER SERVICE
RATE [Ord. No.
2200-15 § 1; Ord. No.
2220-2016 § 1; Ord.
No. 2272-18 § 1]
Base water and sewer service
rates:
a. Base water and sewer rate -
residential and
nonresidential user
Quarterly installments
$581.44 per
year, $145.36
quarterly
installments
b. Residential and
nonresidential users not
connected to both the
municipal water and sewer
systems:
1. Base water service rate -
residential and
nonresidential user
$290.72 per
year, $72.68
quarterly
installments
2. Base sewer service rate -
residential and
nonresidential user
$290.72 per
year, $72.68
quarterly
installments
22-3 WATER AND
SEWER USAGE
CHARGE [Ord. No.
2200-15 § 2; Ord. No.
2220-2016 § 2; Ord.
No. 2272-18 § 2]
22-3 Water and sewer usage
charges
a. Water and sewer usage (per
1,000 gallons or part
thereof)
$4.34 per
1,000 gallons
b. Water usage only (per 1,000
gallons or part thereof)
$2.17 per
1,000 gallons
c. Sewer usage only (per 1,000
gallons or part thereof)
$2.17 per
1,000 gallons
d. Water and sewer usage
shall be measured by the
number of gallons of water
use shown on the water
meter.
e. Water service that is not
being metered
$2.17 per day
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:313
CHAPTER 22 WATER AND SEWER UTILITY
22-6 BULK WATER
SUPPLY FOR SPECIAL
OPERATIONS
a. Bulk water supplied -
special event or operation
(per 1,000 gallons or part
thereof)
$5 per 1,000
gallons
b. Bulk water supplied for use
during construction
$50 per unit
22-7 WATER AND
SEWER TAP
CHARGES
a. Water taps:
Size of Tap Charge
3/4 inch or
less
$375
1 inch $637
1 1/2 inch $900
2 inch $1,275
4 inch $1,650
6 inch $2,100
8 inch $2,550
b. $400 - each sewer
connection
22-7.1 CUT AND CAP 22-7.1 Cut and Cap Water.
Fee to cut and cap the water
supply
$125
22-9 CHARGES FOR
TURNING WATER ON
OR OFF
a. Discontinuing water service
for delinquent accounts
weekdays between 7:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
weekdays
1. Turn off water $75
2. Turn on water $75
b. Discontinuing water service
for delinquent accounts
before 7:00 a.m. or after
3:00 p.m. weekdays,
Saturdays, Sundays or
holidays
1. Turn off municipal water
supply
$150
2. Turn on municipal water
supply
$150
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:314
CHAPTER 22 WATER AND SEWER UTILITY
c. Emergency call, service call
or any other work
performed before 7:00 a.m.
or after 3:00 p.m. weekdays,
or on a Saturdays, Sundays
or a holidays
1. After hours call $150
2. Turn off municipal water
supply
$150
3. Turn on municipal water
supply
$150
4. Emergency call for
broken or leaking service
whether or not service is
disconnected - First
service call
$150
5. Emergency call - Second
call within 12 months
$200
6. Emergency call - Third
service call within 12
months
$300
7. Emergency call - Fourth
service call within 12
months
$500
22-32 FIRE HYDRANT
CONNECTION FEES
Fire hydrant connections for the
use of water for pile driving,
jetting work or the like
$100 per 8
hour day, per
connection
22-57.1 METER
READING FEE [Ord.
No. 2217-2016 § 4;
Ord. No. 2268-18 § 4]
a. Meter Reading for Final
Balance Due (except
disputed balance)
$25
b. Meter Reading for meters
read after December 31,
2016 through December 31,
2018 which were not
installed pursuant to the HD
Supply Waterworks, LTD
and Borough of Manasquan
contract dated June 1, 2016
(1 time fee)
$500
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:315
CHAPTER 22 WATER AND SEWER UTILITY
c. Meter readings read as
January 1, 2019 which were
not installed pursuant to the
HD Supply Waterworks,
LTD and Borough of
Manasquan contract dated
June 1, 2016 (each time
meter is read for quarterly
billing)
$500
22-58 TEST FEE [Ord.
No. 2217-2016 § 5;
Ord. No. 2268-18 § 5]
Test for meter recording
correctly
$200
CHAPTER 23 SHADE TREES
23-2 REMOVAL OF
TREES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY;
MUNICIPAL TREE
ESCROW FUND
23-2.7 Planting Requirements.
Contribution in lieu of
replacement tree
$500 per tree
CHAPTER 30 SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
30-1 SOIL AND SAND
EXCAVATION
30-1.2 Application; Fee.
Application and permit
$20
CHAPTER 31 PLANNING BOARD
31-19 FEES a. Fees for the Review of
Development Applications
1. Variance Applications
(a) Applications made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a)
$200
(b) Applications made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(b)
$200
(c) Applications made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c)
$400
(d) Applications made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)
$700
2. Subdivision Applications
(a) Minor subdivision $500
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:316
CHAPTER 31 PLANNING BOARD
(b) Preliminary major
subdivision
$750
(c) Final major
subdivision
$250
3. Site Plan and Conditional
Use Applications
(a) Preliminary Site Plan $500
(b) Final Site Plan $300
(c) Site Plan - minor
modification
$300
(d) Conditional use $300
4. Modification of a prior
development approval
$300
When an application
involves more than 1 of
the above categories, the
application fee shall be
the sum of all fees for
each category involved in
the application
b. More than 2 hearings or
special meeting
$1,000
c. Initial deposits
1. Application made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c) - not
requiring an engineering
review per Technical
Review Committee
$1,000
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) -
requiring an engineering
review per Technical
Review Committee
$1,700
2. Application made
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)
$1,700
3. Minor Subdivision
Application
$1,700
4. Preliminary Major
Subdivision Application
$1,700
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:317
CHAPTER 31 PLANNING BOARD
5. Final Major Subdivision
Application
$500
6. Preliminary Site Plan
Application
$1,700
7. Final Site Plan
Application
$500
8. Modification of a Site
Plan
$1,700
g. Tax Map Maintenance Fee
1.
Type of
Application
Fee
Minor
Subdivision (2
lots)
$200
Final Major
Subdivisions:
Up to 6 lots $300
7 or more lots $400 +
$25 per
lot
Consolidation
subdivision
$150
Site Plan for
condominiums,
townhouses or
similar units
$400 +
$25 per
unit
31-22 LIST OF
PROPERTY OWNERS
FURNISHED
Certified list of the names and
addresses of owners to whom an
applicant is required to give
notice
$10 or $0.25
per name -
whichever is
greater
31-26A TECHNICAL
REVIEW
COMMITTEE
Review $200
Expedited processing $200
§ 16-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 16-1.1
AO:318
CHAPTER 32 LAND SUBDIVISION
32-8 SUBMISSION
OF APPLICATION
FOR MINOR
SUBDIVISION
32-8.2 Preapplication
Conference. Preapplication
conference fee. Minor
subdivision
$125
32-10 PRELIMINARY
APPROVAL
PROCEDURE FOR
MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS
32-10.6 Notice to Property
Owners. Certified list of property
owners
$10 or $0.25
per name -
whichever is
greater
CHAPTER 35 ZONING
35-5 USE
REGULATIONS
APPLICABLE TO
EACH ZONE
35-5.2j Personal On Demand
Storage Units (PODS®)
Application fee
$20
35-7 USE
REGULATIONS
35-7.5 Walls and Fences.
e. Zoning permit for fence $30
35-34
REQUIREMENTS
FOR USE OF
SATELLITE DISH
ANTENNAS
I. Permit fee $15
35-35 MANDATORY
AFFORDABLE
HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT
FEES
See Chapter 35 for specific fees
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1972
Code §§ 65-4, 66-11-66-4, 66-6, 99-8, 99-11 — 99-14 and Ordinance
Nos. 927, 1239, 1354 and 1512-90.
§ 18-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
Sections 18-1 through 18-10 shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of
the Borough of Manasquan."
§ 16-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2
AO:319
§ 18-2. ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE. [Ord. No. 2040-08
§ 2]
The New Jersey Uniform Code, N.J.A.C. 5:7, 5:71, 5:72, 5:73 and 5:75
et seq., and all amendments and supplements thereto, is adopted by the
Borough of Manasquan ("Borough") for the purpose of establishing a system
for the enforcement of minimum fire safety standards throughout the
Borough as mandated by the State of New Jersey, so as to improve the safety
of the public by promoting the control of fire hazards. The standards, rules
and regulations set forth in the Code shall be and the same are hereby
incorporated in this chapter, three copies of which have been and are now
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
The Borough shall recognize and hereby adopts the standards of the
National Fire Protection Association Code and supplements and
amendments thereto, which the Bureau of Fire Prevention may refer to
in the enforcement of this chapter. The above- referenced codes are
incorporated herein as if set forth in length.
§ 18-3. ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE
PREVENTION. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
Pursuant to Section 203 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-203), this chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Manasquan Fire District #1, County of Monmouth and
State of New Jersey, which shall be known for the purposes of the Act as
the Bureau of Fire Prevention. A Bureau of Fire Prevention shall herein be
established within the Board to enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations under it in all buildings, structures and premises
within the Borough of Manasquan, other than owner-occupied one-family
and two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements
of the Uniform Fire Code. In addition, the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
be charged with the duties and enforcement of such other ordinances
and rules and regulations that pertain to fire prevention and control. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall carry out periodic inspections of life-hazard
uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of
Community Affairs. The Bureau shall be under the supervision and control
of the Board of Fire Commissioners of Manasquan Fire District #1 or
such other officers as they may designate. Funds that may be necessary
to support the operation of the Bureau, shall be raised by the Board of
Fire Commissioners in the manner prescribed by law. Pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Code, the Bureau shall be operated by a Fire Official herein
known as the "Fire Official," and enforcement and support personnel under
his/her supervision having the minimum qualifications and certifications
set forth under the Uniform Fire Code. The salary of the Fire Official,
Fire Prevention Specialists and other personnel employed by the Bureau
shall be to the extent permitted by law, established by the Board of Fire
Commissioners. The annual budget for the operation of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be established by the Board of Fire Commissioners. The Board
of Fire Commissioners shall have the authority to appoint, promote and
§ 18-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-3
AO:320
terminate personnel within the Bureau, but each person so terminated,
shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by the Commissioners,
consistent with recognized standards of due process.
§ 18-4. PERMITS REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
It shall be unlawful to engage in any business activity involving the
handling, storage or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices;
or to maintain, store or handle materials; to conduct processes which
produce conditions hazardous to life or property; to install equipment used
in connection with such activities; or to establish a place of assembly
without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Official. Permits shall be
obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention for any of those activities listed
in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.27 and any amendments or supplements thereto. The fee
for said permits shall be established in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c)
and any amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 18-5. ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INSPECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2040-08
§ 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the Department of Community
Affairs, the following registration, inspection and fees shall be required.
All required fees shall be paid by the business owner.
b. For the purpose of this chapter, all business, mercantile, storage,
factory, or industrial uses shall be defined pursuant to the current
edition of the International Building Code and New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code adopted by the State of New Jersey, and shall be subject to
inspection and annual fee as outlined yearly. The fees shall be as stated
in Chapter 16, Fees.
c. For all uses defined as business under this chapter wherein there are
two or more utilizing common areas or facilities within the building, the
owner of the building shall be subject to a fee for the common area.
d. Where two or more of the same uses or different uses exist at the same
building or on the same premises, each use shall be considered as
separate and distinct for purpose of this chapter and shall be registered
pursuant thereto, with the exception that, where two or more of the
same uses or different uses exist at the same building or on the same
premises, all of which are under common ownership, the highest same
or different uses shall be registered at full fee with the other use
registered at 1/2 the scheduled fee per use.
e. All multiple family dwellings where as herein defined shall be classified
as Type 8 use and shall be subject to registration and fees as set forth
herein with the exception that the full fee shall be paid for only one
structure, with the remaining structures subject to a fee of 1/2 of that
set forth for other Type 8 uses. Inspections of multiple family dwellings
shall include, but not limited to, common areas, basements, laundry
§ 18-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-5
AO:321
§ 18-6. SITE PLANS. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 18-7. FIRE ZONES AND FIRE LANES. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
rooms, corridors, vestibules which are accessible to occupants, with the
exclusion of the dwelling units therein. The buildings' owner shall be
responsible for payment of all fees.
f. All uses as set forth under this section shall be inspected annually and
subject to the registration and fees set forth herein.
a. The Bureau shall review any site or subdivision plan for the purpose of
fire prevention, as to the location and size of fire lanes, zones and areas,
water mains, drafting locations, fire hydrants, and any other such
information as the Board of Fire Commissioners and/or their designated
agents may deem necessary or be required. The submission of plans to
the Bureau shall include any plans submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment for the development, construction or
improvement of properties in the Borough of Manasquan. The reviews
shall include, but not limited to, any construction or improvement of
any use group, as defined in Chapter 3 of the latest edition of the
International Building Code adopted by the State of New Jersey, as
amended. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the above
projects must receive Bureau approval.
b. Each applicant shall pay the fees as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention for review of any site or subdivision plans.
a. Whenever it is deemed necessary for public safety, the Bureau and/or
their designated agents may require the owners or operators of any
uses in Sections 18-5 and 18-6, all life-hazard uses or other similar uses,
to designate fire zones at entrances, loading doors or access ways to
said premises and fire lanes in driveways leading from the street to the
fire zones, as well as drafting locations. The size of the fire zone, fire
lanes and/or drafting locations shall be set at the discretion of the
Bureau and/or its designated agents based upon the size of property
and other such facts as the Bureau deems necessary. A diagram
demonstrating the proper manner of painting and lettering of fire zones
and fire lanes shall be made available by the Bureau or its designated
agents. All line striping and lettering shall be legible at all times. A
metal fire zone or fire lane sign shall be provided, erected, and
maintained by the owner or operator of the property and shall be placed
and directed by the Bureau and/or its designated agents. A diagram of a
fire zone or fire land shall be made available by the Bureau and/or its
designated agents.
b. No person shall, at any time, park a motor vehicle, locate a garbage
dumpster or in any other manner obstruct a fire zone or fire lane,
drafting locations of fire area or park within 10 feet of a fire hydrant,
whether or not that motor vehicle is occupied or the motor running. If
at any time, due to weather conditions, vandalism or any extenuating
§ 18-5 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-7
AO:322
§ 18-8. AMENDMENTS TO STATE FIRE PREVENTION CODE
PURSUANT TO N.J.A.C. 5:71-28. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
circumstances, one of the following fire zone or fire lane signs or
fire zone or fire lane surface markings are not visible, the remaining
markings or signs visible shall be deemed sufficient to provide notice
of the existence of such fire zone or fire lane. If the Bureau determines
that existing fire zone, fire lane and/or drafting locations signs have not
been properly marked or delineated and/or proper documentation of
said markings is not on file, new markings as outlined in this section
may be required. All drafting locations as required hereunder shall be
constructed, designated and maintained as per the diagram available
from the Bureau.
c. The Bureau of Fire Prevention and/or its designated agents are
authorized to tow motor vehicles and remove all obstructions from any
fire zone, fire lane, fire area or drafting locations. The Bureau and/or its
designated agents are also authorized to tow motor vehicles and
remove obstructions parked or standing within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
All motor vehicles and other obstructions which are removed pursuant
to this section may be stored in a storage area approved by the Bureau,
its designated agents or the Manasquan Police Department. The cost of
removal and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle or
other obstruction, and the charge shall be paid prior to release of said
vehicle or obstruction. The Bureau and/or its designated agents shall
give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle or obstruction, if the
owner can be identified, within 24 hours after removal of the vehicle or
obstruction.
d. The Fire Prevention Bureau Fire Official, Fire Prevention Specialists
and the Manasquan Police Department shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the section of this chapter. For
any summons issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, the fines shall be
dedicated to the Bureau of Fire Prevention by an interlocal service
agreement for the enforcement of the code, and court costs associated
and dedicated to the Manasquan Municipal Court. The fees are to be
reimbursed to the Bureau on a quarterly basis.
e. In the event that a designated fire lane, fire zone or fire area has been
previously approved and marked accordingly and properly documented
as existing, the area shall be deemed as having met the intent of the
code and shall be subject to the penalties section of this chapter, if
otherwise not maintained or obstructed.
a. Rapid Entry System Required. The Fire Official shall require a key box
to be installed in an accessible location where immediate access is
necessary to verify the existence of a fire or other emergency in
buildings equipped with or required to be equipped with fire detection
and/or fire suppression systems or elevator equipment. The building's
owner shall be responsible for compliance. The key box will be of a U.L.
§ 18-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-8
AO:323
§ 18-9. VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
type (Knox-Box®) and shall contain keys necessary to access areas,
and shall be installed in a manner approved by the Manasquan Fire
Prevention Bureau's Fire Official. Compliance shall be required within
60 days of written notice of violation. Control of the master key release
for the key boxes shall be placed in the control of the Manasquan Police
Department.
b. False Alarms.
1. (F-504.1). Any property containing a fire sprinkler alarm or a fire
alarm system shall not have activated more than three false fire
alarms in any one calendar year. Any activations of four or more
false alarms in said calendar year shall be deemed to have violated
this section and shall be subject to penalties and additional action
as required.
2. False fire alarms; definition (F-502.1). An alarm which results in
notification to the Fire Department for causes other than those for
which the system was designated or intended to react. The alarm
shall not be considered to be false if caused by a power or
telephone line interruption.
a. Anyone who obstructs a fire zone, fire lane, fire area, drafting or
pumping station or fire hydrant with a motor vehicle in violation of
Section 18-7 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100
for each offense.
b. The owner of a garbage dumpster or other obstruction located in a
designated fire zone, fire lane, fire area, or drafting/pumping locations
within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, in violation of 18-7 A, B and C of this
chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 per day.
c. Any person or corporation violating any other provision of this chapter,
failing to comply with any order made pursuant to this chapter or
building in violation of plans and specifications submitted to the Fire
Prevention Bureau and/or its designated agents and approved pursuant
to the terms of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 per day.
d. Any penalties under the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:57-1) shall be
adopted for the purpose of enforcement against any person or persons,
firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
code other than the violation of fire zone, fire lane, and fire area
regulations as herein set forth except the sanctions specified in
paragraph c above.
§ 18-8 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-10
AO:324
§ 18-10. APPEALS. [Ord. No. 2040-08 § 2]
Any owner or operator of a building or property affected by the provisions
issued pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code, who shall disagree with the
determination of the Fire Prevention Bureau and/or its designated agents
shall have the right of appeal in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19 entitled
"Appeals."
Fire District Established
§ 18-11. FIRE DISTRICT NO. 1.
§ 18-11.1. Legislative Findings. [1972 Code § 11-36.1A; Ord. No.
1482]
§ 18-11.2. Creation; Boundaries of District. [1972 Code § 11-36.1B;
Ord. No. 1482]
There is hereby created Fire District No. 1, the boundaries of which shall
consist of all of the property within the corporate limits of the Borough.
§ 18-11.3. Fire Commissioners; Duties. [1972 Code § 11-36.1C; Ord.
No. 1482]
The Commissioners and their successors shall be a corporate body known
as "The Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 in the Borough of Manasquan,
County of Monmouth." This body corporate shall have the power to acquire,
hold, lease, sell or otherwise convey in its corporate name, such real and
personal property as the purposes of the corporation shall require. All sales
and leases of real and personal property shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the "Local Lands and Buildings Law," N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.
This body corporate shall have the authority to adopt and use a corporate
seal, sue or be sued, and shall have such powers, duties and functions as
are usual and necessary for its purposes.
§ 18-12. through § 18-14. (RESERVED)
Establishment of the Fire Department
Editor's Note: See subsections 2-65.7 and 2-65.8 for exemptions
from certain fees for certain members of the volunteer fire
companies and first aid squad.
a. The Borough is presently served by two volunteer fire companies,
Manasquan Hook and Ladder Company No. 1 and Volunteer Engineer
Company No. 2.
b. A petition signed by at least 5% of the registered voters of the
municipality has been served upon the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70. The purpose of this section is to designate a
territorial location for use as a fire district as required by Statute.
§ 18-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-15
AO:325
§ 18-15. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 18-15.1. Supervision and Control of Department. [1972 Code
§ 11-2]
The Fire Department, its officers and members shall be under the
supervision and control of this Council.
§ 18-15.2. Composition. [1972 Code § 11-3]
The Fire Department shall consist of one Fire Chief, one Assistant Fire
Chief, the fire companies already organized and accepted by Council, and
as many engine, hose and hook and ladder companies as the Council may
deem necessary.
§ 18-15.3. Companies. [1972 Code § 114; Ord. No. 902]
The fire companies already organized and accepted under this section are
as follows:
§ 18-15.4. Additional Companies. [1972 Code § 11-5]
Additional companies shall be organized whenever Council shall deem it
necessary; provided, however, that no company shall be organized without
having first obtained the consent of Council thereto.
§ 18-15.5. Eligibility for Membership. [1972 Code § 11-6; Ord. No.
1392]
No person shall be eligible for active membership in the Fire Department
unless he is 18 years of age or over and capable of performing active service
in the Department.
§ 18-16. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.
§ 18-16.1. Legislative Findings. [1972 Code § 11-41; Ord. No. 1614]
a. Manasquan Hook and Ladder Company No. 1, which shall consist of not
more than 60 active members.
b. Volunteer Engine Company No. 2, which shall consist of not more than
60 active members.
a. Manasquan Hook and Ladder Company No. 1 and Volunteer Engine
Company No. 2 accept persons for membership subject to compliance
with established criteria.
b. N.J.S.A. 15:8-1.1 provides that persons convicted of certain offenses are
ineligible for membership in a volunteer fire company.
c. In the course of firefighters performing their duties, they have access to
homes and businesses in the community.
§ 18-15 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-16.1
AO:326
§ 18-16.2. Purpose. [1972 Code § 11-42; Ord. No. 1614]
This section is enacted pursuant to Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes to
promote the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Manasquan and to
implement the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15:8-1.1.
§ 18-16.3. Definition of Membership. [1972 Code § 11-43; Ord. No.
1614]
For the purpose of this section, membership in a volunteer fire company
means membership organized pursuant to Title 15 or 15A of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, membership in a volunteer company
or similar organization constituted in a fire district pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-70.1, membership in a junior firefighter's auxiliary established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95, or nonpaid membership in a part-time fire
department or force established pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes.
§ 18-16.4. Application for Membership; Contents. [1972 Code
§ 11-44; Ord. No. 1614]
Any person desiring membership in a volunteer fire company shall complete
an application, in writing, and file it with the volunteer fire company. The
following information shall be provided by the applicant:
d. Volunteer fire companies need to have access to State criminal history
records from the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification
in order to implement and administer their duties.
a. Name;
b. Permanent address;
c. Date of birth;
d. Social Security number;
e. Any conviction of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1 (aggravated arson,
arson, failure to control or report a dangerous fire, or directly or
indirectly paying or accepting any form of consideration for the purpose
of starting a fire or explosion);
f. Any conviction of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 (causing a false public
alarm);
g. Any conviction or a violation of any other crime or disorderly persons
violation;
h. All other information the volunteer fire company deems relevant except
such information which does not have to be disclosed as a matter of law.
§ 18-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-16.5
AO:327
§ 18-16.5. Copy of Application to Chief of Police. [1972 Code
§ 11-45; Ord. No. 1614]
The volunteer fire company shall provide a copy of the application to the
Chief of Police who shall conduct an investigation to ascertain the truth
of the statements made by the applicant and such other information as
the Chief of Police deems necessary for the protection of the community.
If the investigation determines that the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1a, b, c or d, N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 or any other crime
or disorderly persons violation, or the investigation reveals information
indicating the applicant may be a threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the community, the Chief of Police shall report this information to the
volunteer fire company.
§ 18-16.6. Fingerprinting. [1972 Code § 11-46; Ord. No. 1614]
The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting as part of the background
investigation, and the Chief of Police is authorized to submit the applicant's
fingerprint card and receive State criminal history record information from
the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification.
§ 18-16.7. Volunteer Fire Company to Be Authorized Agency. [1972
Code § 11-47; Ord. No. 1614]
This section is intended to make the volunteer fire company an authorized
agency as defined by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1.
§ 18-16.8. Investigation; Time Limits. [1972 Code § 11-48; Ord. No.
1614]
The investigation by the Chief of Police shall be completed within 30 days of
receipt of the application and the fingerprinting of applicant.
§ 18-16.9. Investigation of Applicants. [1972 Code § 11-36]
All persons applying for active membership in the fire companies of this
Department shall be investigated by the trustees of the company to which
they apply or a committee of three chosen by the President of the Company.
It shall be the duty of the committee to report its findings and
recommendation to a general membership of the company at a regular
meeting. If a majority of the members present vote in favor of an applicant's
admission, he shall be admitted as a probationary fireman for a period of
one year. During this probationary period, the applicant shall be observed
by one active member and two line officers chosen by the President, who
shall, at the end of the probationary period, recommend to the membership
whether or not the applicant shall be admitted as a full and active member.
If a majority of the members present at a regular meeting vote for the
applicant's admission as a regular active member, he shall thereafter serve
as such. All applicants for membership in the Fire Department shall be
fingerprinted and photographed and shall carry an identification card at all
times while on duty as fireman or probationary fireman.
§ 18-16.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-17
AO:328
§ 18-17. MANAGEMENT AND PROCEDURES OF THE
DEPARTMENT.
§ 18-17.1. Record of Newly Elected Active Members. [1972 Code
§ 11-7]
Upon the election of any person to active membership in any of the
companies mentioned, the Secretary of such company shall transmit to the
Council at its first meeting in each month the name of such newly elected
member, accompanied by a certificate signed by such member stating that:
§ 18-17.2. Filing of List of Members with Municipal Clerk. [1972
Code § 11-8]
On or before the first day of January of each year, the Secretary of each
company shall furnish to the Fire Chief a correct list of all members of his
company, which list the Fire Chief shall file with the Municipal Clerk before
the next ensuing meeting of Council.
§ 18-17.3. Management of Different Companies Subject to Fire
Department Regulations. [1972 Code § 11-8]
The management of the different companies shall be according to the rules
and bylaws adopted by them, subject, however, to such rules as may be
passed by the Council for the government of the Fire Department.
§ 18-17.4. Management of Fire Department.60 [1972 Code § 11-10]
The management and control of the Fire Department shall be under the Fire
Chief.
§ 18-17.5. Apparatus Leaving Borough. [1972 Code § 11-11]
No apparatus belonging to the Fire Department shall be removed from or
permitted to leave the Borough without the consent either of the Fire Chief
or the Assistant Fire Chief, or, in their absence, the next line officer, in
a. The member is a legal voter of the Borough;
b. Is capable of performing active service in the Fire Department;
c. Will faithfully perform the duties imposed upon him as a firefighter to
the best of his ability; and
d. Will obey his superior officers and in all respects conduct himself as
becomes a firefighter while on duty; and
e. If the same be approved by Council, it shall be entered in a book to be
kept for that purpose, which book shall contain the name of the person
elected and the date of his admission.
60.Editor's Note: For provisions regarding Fire District No. 1 established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-70, see Section 18-10, "Fire District No. 1."
§ 18-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-17.5
AO:329
response to a call for aid at a fire in a neighboring community and for other
events. The officer in charge of the Department shall have the power to
assign the equipment in response to calls for outside aid. However, at all
times at least one pumper truck and one other fire truck must remain in the
Borough.
§ 18-17.6. Terms of Office of Officers. [1972 Code § 11-12]
The Fire Chief and one Assistant Fire Chief shall be elected for a two year
term by a plurality of votes of all duly qualified firemen. Such election shall
be held in the place of meeting of the joint companies belonging to the
Fire Department on the second Monday of December, except when the date
falls on a legal holiday, the election shall be held on the following Monday,
the polls opening at 8:00 p.m. and closing at 9:00 p.m., and a statement
of the results of such election, with a list of names of the members of the
company who voted at such election, properly certified by the President
and Secretary, shall be delivered to the Borough Council at its next regular
meeting held after election, and the Council shall canvass the returns of
the election and declare the result and the persons so declared to be
elected as Fire Chief and Assistant Chief, who shall hold office for two years
commencing on the first day of January next following their election.
§ 18-17.7. Eligibility for Office. [1972 Code § 11-13]
No person shall be eligible for the Office of Fire Chief or of Assistant Fire
Chief who has not served as an active firefighter in this Department for five
years next preceding his appointment.
§ 18-17.8. Control at Fires. [1972 Code § 11-14; New]
The Fire Chief shall in all cases of fire have sole and absolute control
and command over the Assistant Fire Chief and other persons of the Fire
Department, and it shall be his duty to direct the other officers to take
proper measures that the several fire apparatus be arranged in
advantageous situations and be duly worked for the effectual
extinguishment of fires. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Assistant Fire
Chief shall perform the duties of the Fire Chief, and in the absence of the
Assistant Fire Chief, the captain or foreman first present shall perform the
duties of the Fire Chief, until the arrival of a superior officer, to the intent
that the superior officer present shall always be in command. The Fire Chief
shall examine quarterly the fire engines, hose carts, trucks, ladders, fire
buckets and all other property belonging to the Fire Department and when
any part thereof shall need to be repaired or replaced, he shall report the
fact immediately to the Fire Commissioners.
§ 18-17.9. Orders for Drill, Inspections and Care of Apparatus.
[1972 Code § 11-15]
The Fire Chief shall order and cause the several fire companies or such
member or members thereof as he may designate to work and wash the fire
§ 18-17.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-17.9
AO:330
apparatus, drill or appear for inspection at such time and place as he may
designate and whenever he may deem it necessary for the efficiency of the
Fire Department.
§ 18-17.10. Power to Suspend; Appeals. [1972 Code § 11-16]
The Fire Chief shall have power to suspend from duty for such time as
he shall adjudge proper, not to exceed more than one year, any officer
or member of the fire company for disobedience of his orders or of the
orders of any officers in command when on duty or for any neglect of duty
or violation of this chapter. Such notice of suspension shall be in writing
and be served upon the person or persons so removed, and such notice of
suspension shall contain a statement of the charges or causes of suspension.
§ 18-17.11. Appointment of Fire Patrol or Police. [1972 Code
§ 11-17; Ord. No. 1131]
The Fire Chief shall annually appoint members from each company as a
fire patrol or police, which persons, when certified to the Council and by
it duly accepted and invested with authority therefor, shall, in addition to
such other duties as may be required of them, preserve order and protect
property from pillage and wanton destruction during the time of a fire and
prevent unauthorized persons from trespassing upon burning premises and
from interfering in any way with the firemen and fire service, and any
such fire patrol or police shall have power to arrest during the time of
a fire and detain in custody any person found committing depredation or
interfering by action with the firemen when on duty or with the fire service
or apparatus, and, in the performance of their duties, they shall act in
conjunction with the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chief and the duly
authorized Police Officers of the Borough.
§ 18-17.12. Attendance at Fires by Chiefs; Duties, Right of Entry.
[1972 Code § 11-18]
The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall attend all fires within the
corporate limits and are hereby empowered and required to take charge of
any building or buildings which may be on fire, to admit only so many and
such persons not firemen to such building or buildings as they shall think
necessary, to aid in the extinguishment of the fire and preservation of all
goods and to give orders for and to superintend the removal of all goods
and the preservation of all endangered property. They may lawfully enter
and examine any building, place, vehicle or vessel where any gunpowder or
other explosive or inflammable material may be lodged. The Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief may direct the removal or securing of any such material
or materials, and in case the possessor or possessors of same neglect or
refuse to comply with such directions, the party or parties so refusing or
neglecting shall, on due conviction thereof, be punished for a violation of
this section as hereinafter provided.
§ 18-17.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-17.13
AO:331
§ 18-17.13. Reports of Accidents at Fires; Annual Report to
Borough Council. [1972 Code § 11-19]
The Fire Chief shall report in writing to the Borough Council all accidents
at fires that may happen in the Borough, with causes thereof as well as can
be ascertained, and the numbers and description of the buildings destroyed
or injured, with the names of the owners thereof. The Fire Chief shall
also annually report in writing to the Borough Council all fires of every
description.
§ 18-17.14. Transferring Keys: Suspension. [1972 Code § 11-20]
Any member of the Fire Department transferring the keys of the building
in which the apparatus is kept shall be suspended from the Department
for one year. During the period of such suspension, the party shall not be
permitted to enter any building under the control of the Fire Department.
§ 18-17.15. Duty of Officers and Members at Fires. [1972 Code
§ 11-21]
It shall be the duty of the officers and members of the several companies,
whenever a fire shall break out within the limits of the Borough, to repair
forthwith to their respective apparatus and convey same in a safe and
orderly manner to the place where the fire may be and, in conformity to
the direction of the officer in command, exert themselves in performing
every duty required of them by the officer and, upon the permission of the
officer, shall, in an orderly and quiet manner, return the apparatus to their
respective places of deposit.
§ 18-17.16. Members Relocating from Borough. [1972 Code
§ 11-22]
Any officer or member of the Department who shall move from the Borough
shall thereupon be reported to the Council. Any such officer or member so
moving shall cease to be a member.
§ 18-17.17. Reports and Communications, Requisitions. [1972 Code
§ 11-24]
All reports and communications to the Borough Council and all requisitions
shall be made through the Fire Chief.
§ 18-17.18. Duty to Report Violations. [1972 Code § 11-27]
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Department to promptly report any
violation of this section to the Fire Chief.
§ 18-17.13 MANASQUAN CODE § 18-17.19
AO:332
§ 18-17.19. Examination and Investigation of Fires. [1972 Code
§ 11-30]
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, either personally or through those
acting under and for him, to investigate and examine into the cause,
circumstance and reason of any fire by which any building, vessel or other
property shall be burned, either wholly or partially. Upon evidence of
incendiarism, the Fire Chief shall reduce his findings to writing and shall
submit such report, together with the names and addresses of any
witnesses, to the Chief of Police.
§ 18-18. DRILLS AND INSTRUCTION.
§ 18-18.1. Bureau of Instruction Established. [1972 Code § 11-37]
§ 18-18.2. Drills: Supervision; Notification. [1972 Code § 11-38]
a. A Bureau of Instruction in the Fire Department is hereby established.
b. The Chief and Assistant Chief of the Fire Department of the Borough
shall be the Chief and Assistant Chief, respectively, of the Bureau of
Instruction. The Foreman and the Chief Engineer of each company of
the Fire Department shall be the instructors of the Bureau of
Instruction.
c. The Chief, Assistant Chief and instructors of the Bureau shall receive no
compensation for their services as such.
a. The Chief of the Bureau shall cause to be held drills for all members of
the Fire Department at least once in each month and more often when
he deems necessary for the purpose of instructing firefighters in the use
and handling of firefighting equipment and the prevention and
extinguishment of fires.
b. The Assistant Chief and Instructors of the Bureau shall assist the Chief
and act under his direction in the instruction of firefighters. In the
absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief of the Bureau shall assume all
the duties of the Chief.
c. All members of the Fire Department shall attend to the best of their
ability and when in attendance shall be obedient to the Chief and the
Instructors and exert their best efforts in becoming familiar with their
duties as firefighters.
d. The Chief of the Bureau shall notify in writing the proper officer of each
company of the Fire Department, at least five days in advance, of the
time and place of each drill. The officer receiving such notice shall
transmit such notice to all members of his company, allowing ample
time for each member to arrange to be present at the drills. All such
notices may be made by post office mail.
§ 18-17.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-18.2
AO:333
§ 18-18.3. Instruction. [1972 Code § 11-39; Ord. No. 802]
Instruction of members of the Fire Department shall include all such
subjects as will render them an increased familiarity with the purpose and
use of firefighting apparatus and appliances, enable them to handle and lay
hose in a rapid and efficient manner, the quick raising and moving of hose,
handling of streams of water, the use of and proper handling of siamese
connections, and the handling and use of ladders. Instructions shall include
the changing of hose (2 1/2 inches) on the trucks once in each year and the
running of water through all hose at least once in every two months. All
other subjects shall be included as the Chief of the Bureau deems advisable
to keep members familiar with modern fire-fighting methods.
§ 18-18.4. Attendance Requirements. [1972 Code § 11-40; Ord. No.
636A]
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
Chapter 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-1. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS.
§ 20-1.1. Duties of Owners, Occupants or Tenants. [1972 Code
§ 89A-1; Ord. No. 1359]
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon
any street in the Borough shall remove snow and ice from the abutting
e. The Chief of the Bureau shall keep an accurate record of all drills and
enter the same in the record of the Fire Department. He shall also keep
a detailed record of attendance of members at drills and enter such
upon his annual report on members.
f. The Chief of the Bureau shall report in writing, for action, to the proper
officer of their respective company, any insubordination of any physical
condition of members which may render them unfit for service as
firefighters.
a. Active exempt members of the Fire Department who do not attend 10%
of fires, regular drills or meetings of their respective companies shall be
put on an inactive list.
b. Active members who do not attend 30% of fires, regular drills or
meetings of their respective companies shall be automatically dropped
from their respective companies and the Council of this Borough shall
be so notified.
§ 18-18.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-1.1
AO:334
sidewalks of such streets in order to create a two foot path or, in the case of
ice which may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, shall cause
the same to be thoroughly covered with sand, salt or other suitable abrasive
within 16 daylight hours after the same shall fall or be formed thereon. In
the case the building is occupied by more than one family or business unit,
then the tenant or occupant of the first floor or story thereof is required to
remove all snow and ice from such portion of the sidewalks or, in the case
of ice which it is impracticable to remove, shall cover the same with sand,
salt or other suitable abrasive within 16 daylight hours after the same shall
be formed or fall thereon.
§ 20-1.2. Casting of Snow or Ice. [1972 Code § 89A-2; Ord. No.
1359]
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street
shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street in
the Borough. It is the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all
persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulates within the private property belonging to such persons upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Borough.
§ 20-2. EXCAVATIONS OF STREETS.61
§ 20-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; amended
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
a. No person, business, corporation or other entity (from now on called
"person") shall dig up, break, tunnel, undermine, disturb or in any
manner excavate any municipal street, road, right-of-way, or public
easement, or make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the
aforementioned areas for any purpose or place, or deposit, or leave in
any of the aforementioned areas any earth or other excavated material
obstructing or interfering with the free use of same unless such person
shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the
Municipal Clerk. Openings may be made without the necessity of filing
a written application and obtaining an excavation permit only in
emergencies, such as a broken or frozen water main, gas leak or other
happening which would endanger public life, health and safety;
provided, however, that notice thereof shall be immediately given
verbally to the Superintendent of Public Works or Police Department
and written application in accordance with this chapter shall be made
within 48 hours.
b. No permit will be issued for an opening in excess of 10 square yards in
area, except for emergency openings or openings required by law,
during the period from the 1st day of December to the 15th day of
March.
61.Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1972 Code §§ 93-1 — 93-6 and
Ordinance Nos. 1242, 1320, 1377, 1440, 1445, 1478 and 1716-97.
§ 20-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.2
AO:335
§ 20-2.2. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; Ord. No.
2180-15; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
No excavation permit under this section shall be issued until the person
seeking such permit shall have first done the following:
a. Made a written application for the issuance of such permit submitted to
the Municipal Clerk, signed by the person making the application or by
a duly authorized agent, and containing the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the person for whom the
work is to be performed.
2. Name, address and telephone number of the person performing the
work.
3. Location of the work area, including a map or sketch.
4. An outline or plan describing the work to be performed.
5. Number of square feet of surface to be opened.
6. Cubic yard content of material to be excavated.
7. Type of surface to be removed or disturbed.
8. Cubic yard content of material to be burrowed.
9. Date and time of commencement and estimated date of completion
with an agreement by the applicant to refill or resurface the
opening or excavation so that the street surface shall be restored to
the same condition, or better, in which it was before the proposed
work.
10. The types of proposed traffic control devices and procedures to be
utilized for the project, which devices and procedures shall be in
conformity with the guidelines set forth in the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, current edition (the "Manual").
11. The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons
responsible on a twenty-four-hour-call basis to handle emergency
repairs for the applicant.
12. Plans to accompany application: The application shall be
accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed
excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing
ground prior to the excavation and of the proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work, preconstruction color
photographs of the excavation area and surrounding area
submitted electronically or by hard copy and such other
information as may be prescribed by the Borough Engineer,
including the complete plan, profile and details of any proposed
curb, sidewalk, pavements or other proposed improvements.
§ 20-2.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.2
AO:336
§ 20-2.3. Conditions of Permit. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; amended
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
b. A nonrefundable permit application fee shall be paid to the Borough of
Manasquan prior to the issuance of any permit. In no case shall a
permit be issued until the required fees and deposits have been paid.
The fee schedule for the nonrefundable permit application fee is
established in Schedule A as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
c. The applicant must furnish to the municipality a cash or surety bond of
$3,500 minimum and not to exceed $8,000 to guarantee that the
opening or trench made by the permittee will be closed properly. The
amount of the cash deposit or surety bond is established in Schedule B
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees. Upon completion of the work in a
satisfactory manner, the bond or cash surety will be released in return
for a maintenance bond or cash guarantee that the road, street, or
highway over the same will remain in good condition for at least one
year after the closing by the permittee. The minimum amount of each
maintenance bond shall be $2,500. A utility company may, in lieu of
giving a separate maintenance bond on each project, annually, once in
January of each year, give the municipality such a bond for $10,000;
provided that when the total square footage of openings or trenches
made by the utility company reached 5,000 square feet, such utility
company may give either an additional bond or deposit cash security in
an amount equivalent to $3 per square foot of additional openings or
trenches it desires to make in that calendar year.
The failure to carry out all required work and properly close the area of
the road opening shall require the forfeiture of any cash or surety bond
guaranteeing the work, or alternatively, require the surety company
to complete all required work in an acceptable manner; provided,
however, the cash or surety bond shall not limit the amount of damages
incurred by the municipality. The municipality reserves the right to
pursue additional claims against the permittee for all damages in
excess of the amount of the cash and/or surety bond. [Amended
10-21-2019 by Ord. No. 2298-19]
d. Deliver to the municipality satisfactory proof of insurance in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per person, and $3,000,000 per
occurrence, insuring the permittee and the municipality against liability
for injury or loss sustained by any person or persons as a result of the
acts of commission or omission of the permittee, or any servants, agents
or employees of the permittee.
a. In the case of all openings larger than 16 square feet and four feet deep,
the application is subject to review by the Superintendent of Public
Works as to whether or not a permit should be issued. If it is
recommended by the Superintendent of Public Works that a permit be
issued, the Municipal Clerk shall issue the permit and forward all
monies collected to the Municipal Treasurer for deposit. If the permit is
denied, then the municipality shall retain the application fee and notify
§ 20-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.3
AO:337
§ 20-2.4. Notice of Street Paving by Municipality. [Ord. No. 1985-06
§ 2; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
When the municipality shall improve or pave any street, the Municipal
Clerk (or designee) shall give notice by regular mail to all persons owning
property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved, and to
all public utilities and authorities operating in the municipality. All such
persons, utilities, and authorities shall make all connections as well as any
repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation or disturbance of the
the applicant in writing not later than five days after the action denying
the application.
b. Except in emergent conditions, the permittee shall give a minimum of
48 hours' notice of the proposed opening and/or excavation to all
persons owning property abutting on the street about to be opened or
excavated. Notice shall be given by personal service or by regular mail
upon all persons entitled to such service.
c. All openings, excavations, backfilling or grading shall be done by the
person to whom the permit is issued. Such person shall give at least 72
hours' written notice to the Superintendent of Public Works prior to the
commencement of any work.
d. The area of the road opening shall be left in a broom clean condition.
e. All work shall be performed and completed in such a manner as to
cause a minimum of interference with travel on the street affected. No
street shall be closed to traffic unless the closing is approved by the
Chief of Police. Street and/or traffic lanes approved for closure to traffic
must be closed and then reopened at the times specified in the
application, with no deviations permitted. The Police Department shall
be informed in writing of all street closings at least 24 hours in advance,
except where the work is of an emergency nature, in which case notice
shall be given to the Police Department when work commences.
f. Construction work will be permitted only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday. The Mayor and Council, Municipal
Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works must approve emergency
situations or work required beyond permitted time.
g. The Municipal Clerk shall provide each permittee with a suitable
placard plainly written or printed in letters at least one inch high with
the following notice: "Borough of Manasquan, Permit No. __________,
Expires _____." In the first blank space, there shall be inserted the
number of the permit and after the word "Expires" shall be stated the
date when the permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee to
keep the placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the
excavation work. If shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such
placard at or about an excavation not covered by the permit, or to
misrepresent the number or date of expiration of the permit.
§ 20-2.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.4
AO:338
street, within 45 days from the provision of such notice. The time may be
extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the Mayor
and Council (or designee).
§ 20-2.5. Permits Not to Be Issued on Streets Improved Within Five
Years. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
2278-19]
§ 20-2.6. Construction Operations. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; amended
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
a. No permit shall be issued to any person which would allow an
excavation or opening in a street surface which was paved or improved
less than five years prior to the date of the application, unless the
applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health or safety requires
that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition
exists. For streets that have been resurfaced or reconstructed within
five years of the date of the street opening, the seams of the surface
pavement repair shall be blended with the existing pavement surface
utilizing an infrared pavement restoration process.
b. In such cases, the applicant shall make the request for a waiver of the
permit moratorium in writing to the attention of the Superintendent of
Public Works (or designee).
a. Whenever an opening is made in a paved road, the surface pavement
shall be cut with a pavement cutter no wider than one foot outside of
the proposed excavation. Where paved sidewalks and gutters or
curbing are to be crossed, they shall in no case be removed, but the
work shall be done by tunneling beneath them. The work shall be so
conducted as to not interfere with the water, sewer or gas mains or any
connections with any building or structure until permission of the
proper authorities shall have been obtained. All rock within five feet of
any water, sewer or gas main or other pipe, which may be damaged
thereby, shall be removed without blasting. No excavation that will
result in damaged trees or shrubbery shall be made without the
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.
b. In the event of a snow or ice storm, the permittee will be required to
take whatever steps the Superintendent of Public Works (or designee)
deems necessary to secure the traveled way for snow removal
operations. At the first sign of precipitation, all work on the shoulders
and traveled way shall stop and they shall be cleared of all dirt, etc., and
then backfilled so as not to interfere with snow removal operations until
the weather permits resumption of work.
c. The permittee shall maintain the trench and regrade the subgrade as
required until final paving is installed. In case the work has not been
completed before the day of expiration as shown in the permit and the
permittee has not requested an extension of time, the Superintendent
of Public Works may, if deemed to be advisable and necessary, take
§ 20-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.6
AO:339
steps to backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over
the opening for which the permit has been issued, and if any extension
of time beyond said date is needed for the completion of work, a new
application must be filed if required by the Superintendent of Public
Works (or designee).
d. The restoration of the opening or trench shall be maintained for one
year after completion.
e. In the event that the proposed excavation or opening is to extend across
the entire width of a public street, no more than 1/2 of the traveled road
surface shall be opened at any one time and such half shall be backfilled
before the other half is opened. No excavation within and/or
immediately adjacent to roadways available to traffic shall remain open
after the hour of 6:00 p.m. nor over any weekend or holiday, unless
special permission has been granted by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
f. All excavations shall be properly barricaded at all times and during the
hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This
regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other
precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property. If the Chief of Police (or designee) determines the work site is
not properly barricaded or provided with warning lights, the permittee
shall correct this condition within four hours of receiving such verbal
communication.
g. The excavation of all piles of excavated material or any stored material
to be used in the work to be performed shall be carefully marked with
barriers complete with appropriate warning devices that shall conform
to the Manual. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure
that, during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions
shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the
public and to the occupants of the adjoining property, and to assure the
passage of emergency vehicles including first aid, fire and police. If the
Chief of Police (or designee) determines the work site is not properly
marked with barriers and appropriate warning devices, the permittee
shall correct this condition within four hours of receiving such verbal
communication.
h. During the hours of actual operation, construction, excavation or other
work at the site, the permittee shall maintain and have in attendance at
least one flagman, or a uniformed police officer if deemed necessary by
the Chief of Police for the safety of the general public, who shall be
responsible for the flow of traffic to assure safe passage of vehicles in
both directions and to avoid traffic hazards during the use of heavy
equipment. When traffic conditions permit, the Chief of Police (or
designee) may by written approval permit the closing of municipal
streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by the Chief, if in the
Chief's opinion it is necessary. Such written approval shall require that
the permittee give notification to all public agencies, first aid and fire
§ 20-2.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.6
AO:340
companies, and to the general public. The written approval shall not
be valid until such notice is given. Warning signs shall be placed far
enough in advance of the street opening and cones or other approved
devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the
instructions of the Chief of Police (or designee).
i. The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of traffic at all
intersections where possible, and safe crossings for pedestrians at
intervals not more than 300 feet.
j. No work may commence before markout by the appropriate agencies.
Right-of-way or property monuments and/or markers, traffic control
devices and other public-entity-maintained devices in the right-of-way
shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing by the Superintendent of Public Works.
k. No person shall divert or pump surface or other waters onto or across
municipal roads or do any act upon property abutting municipal roads
resulting in the flow or spill of water from the property across the
municipal roads. No dewatering equipment, well, points, or piping shall
occupy the traveled portions of roadways unless specifically approved
and adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Public Works.
l. Effluent from dewatering systems shall be discharged in such a manner
that erodible soils are not adversely affected. All silt and sediments
being carried in the dewatering effluent must be intercepted prior to
effluent discharge into any drainage system through use of a
sedimentation basin designed to allow retention of discharge for
sufficient time to render such waters free of suspended silt and
sediments. The use of screening devices in lieu of a sedimentation basin
must receive specific approval and be employed only for minor flows.
m. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the utility owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate
an existing utility, this shall be done by the owner. No utility owned by
the municipality shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless
the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving a
privately owned utility shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless
it makes other arrangements with the person or persons owning the
utility. The permittee shall support and protect, by methods approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works or Municipal Engineer, all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires and other apparatus which may be in any way
affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along and across the
work. The permittee shall secure approval of method of support and
protection from the owner of the utility in case any of the pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this
purpose pipe coating or other encasement of devices are to be
considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged utilities shall be repaired by the
§ 20-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.6
AO:341
§ 20-2.7. Placement of Excavated Materials and Backfilling. [Ord.
No. 1985-06 § 2; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall
be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this subsection that
the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to utilities and
any resulting damage to or injury to anyone because of such utility
damage and such assumption of liability of a contractual obligation
of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where
damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The
municipality shall not be made a party to any action because of this
section.
a. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or
in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area
being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated
material beside the trench, the Superintendent of Public Works or
Municipal Engineer shall have the authority to require that the
permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul
it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangements for all required storage sites. If material
requires disposal, the permittee shall dispose of all excavated materials
at an approved location for this purpose. In its application, the
permittee shall also describe in detail the location where any and all
excavated materials shall be disposed of and provide written
documentation that the proposed location for disposal is an approved
location for this purpose. If said location is a landfill, the permittee shall
provide proof that said landfill is registered and licensed to accept such
material.
b. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified
by the Superintendent of Public Works or Municipal Engineer.
Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate
the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the
Superintendent of Public Works or Municipal Engineer to prevent the
spreading of dirt into traffic lanes. Further, no person shall place any
material on or along any municipal road, gutter, or shoulder resulting in
any stoppage of drainage along the road or roads or place material in a
manner to cause it to drain into the stormwater management system.
c. Any and all material excavated and stored or piled at or near any
intersection, driveway or other access roads or alleys shall be so stored
and piled as to provide an adequate line of site for those persons
§ 20-2.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.7
AO:342
§ 20-2.8. Restoration of Surface. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2; amended
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2278-19]
entering and exiting the intersections, alleys or driveways, which line
of sight shall provide a minimum of 150-foot visibility.
d. The permittee shall completely backfill the excavation as much as
possible of the material excavated, compacting it by flushing, tamping
or other suitable means, and supply additional material where there is a
deficiency. Whenever the Superintendent of Public Works or Municipal
Engineer shall deem the material unsatisfactory for backfill, the
permittee shall backfill the trench with sand, or other acceptable
material compressed as required, and shall remove all excess material
from the premises. If tamping alone is employed, the material shall be
placed in layers not exceeding six inches in thickness, moistened as
directed, and each layer adequately tamped until thoroughly
compacted.
e. Where excavations are made in tunnels beneath concrete pavement or
beneath a pavement having a concrete base, the tunnel shall be
backfilled with rammed concrete composed of one part of cement, two
parts of sand, and five parts of broken stone or washed gravel, or
another approved material, tamped into place so that the cavity is
completely filled.
f. As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly
cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting
from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and
shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public
Works. From time to time, as may be ordered by the Superintendent of
Public Works, and in any event immediately after completion of the
work, the permittee shall, at its own expense, clean up and remove all
refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work, and
upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so
by the Superintendent of Public Works, the work may be done by the
Superintendent of Public Works and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee. The permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under
the surety provided hereunder.
g. The methods of construction for excavation and backfill shall be in
accordance with Division 200 of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation (NJDOT) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and such other provisions as are included
herein and as may be added in the special conditions. No road opening
or excavation of a cross trench shall extend beyond the center line of
the road before being backfilled, compacted and the surface of the
roadway temporarily restored.
a. Requirements to restore surface. The permittee shall restore the
surface of all the streets, driveways, sidewalks, aprons, grassed or
§ 20-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.8
AO:343
other right-of-way areas broken into or damaged as a result of the
excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the
specifications of the Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal
Engineer.
b. Criteria for repairs.
1. Within grassed areas, the top four inches of the trench and any
other areas damaged during construction shall be backfilled with
topsoil as defined in Division 800 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
Then, all of the newly placed topsoil shall be fertilized and seeded
per these specifications.
2. Within the limits of gravel areas or any other nondecorative gravel
surface, the top of the trench shall be backfilled with eight inches
of dense graded aggregate (DGA) base course as defined in
Division 300 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
3. Within asphalt roadways, all trenches shall be brought up to 12
inches below the surface as required in the backfilling sections
listed previously. The remaining void shall be backfilled with a
temporary repair of six inches of DGA base course as defined in
Division 300 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications and six inches
of hot mix asphalt (HMA) 19M64 base course as defined in Division
400 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(a) The temporary pavement shall remain in place for a period of
at least three months and no longer than four months to allow
for residual settlement to take place. During this time, the
permittee shall assure maintenance of the pavement surface.
Manholes, valve boxes or other physical utility obstructions
shall have feathered approaches not to exceed a 5% slope
where necessary and temporary pavement striping shall be
restored by the permittee for adequate traffic control.
(b) The final asphalt paving will depend on the size of the trench:
(1) Where 20% or more of the existing surface width and/or a
distance parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line
of 25 feet or more has been disturbed, the permittee shall
mill the entire pavement surface from edge to edge or curb
to curb and the full length of the trench plus five feet each
side at a minimum depth of two inches. All milling and
disposal of millings shall be done in accordance with
Division 400 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications. The
permittee shall clean and sweep the milled surface and
apply tack coat in preparation for immediate paving. The
area will then be paved with two inches of HMA 9.5M64
surface course in accordance with Division 400 of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications. The Borough will require
that the terminal ends of the paving be keyed and cut
§ 20-2.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.8
AO:344
vertical to provide a smooth transition to the existing
asphalt surface. Feathering will not be allowed.
(2) Where less than 20% of the existing surface and a distance
parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line of less
than 25 feet has been disturbed, the permittee shall
sawcut the existing surface course two inches deep at a
location 12 inches beyond the trench surface, and remove
the existing pavement to the same depth. Pavement
removal shall be done by milling or another method as
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works or the
Municipal Engineer. The permittee shall clean and sweep
the milled surface and apply tack coat in preparation for
immediate paving. The area will then be paved with two
inches of HMA9.5M64 surface course in accordance with
Division 400 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications. The
Borough will require that the terminal ends of the paving
be keyed and cut vertical to provide a smooth transition to
the existing asphalt surface. Feathering will not be
allowed.
4. Within limits of portland cement concrete roadways, all trench
openings shall be backfilled and compacted as previously required,
a satisfactory foundation prepared, the reinforcement restored and
the concrete pavement equal in thickness to that in place in the
roadway replaced with concrete as determined in Division 400 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
5. Within sidewalk areas, all trench openings shall be backfilled and
compacted as previously required, and finished with a concrete
sidewalk, four inches thick and at least four feet wide with
compressive strength of not less than 4,000 psi after 28 days. The
sidewalk shall be broom finished with striations perpendicular to
walking traffic. Troweled joints shall be installed not less than
every four feet (or distance equal to the sidewalk width) and
bituminous joints installed every 20 feet. At points of vehicular
crossings, the sidewalk shall be increased to six inches thick and
one row of welded wire fabric (six-inch-by-six-inch pattern,
W2.1:x2.1 gauge) shall be added at the mid-depth of the concrete.
6. Road openings and/or trenches involving unusual or special
conditions including attachment to bridges shall be restored in
accordance with and pursuant to the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal Engineer.
c. Temporary surface restoration in traffic lanes. The permittee may be
required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved
traffic lanes. Except when the permanent replacement pavement is to
be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the
bottom of the paving slab shall be tamped into place, and this fill shall
be topped with a minimum of at least two inches of bituminous mixture
§ 20-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.8
AO:345
§ 20-2.9. Revocation of a Permit. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2]
The Municipality may, at any time, revoke or annul any permit, or extension
endorsed thereon for cause, or for performing work not in accordance
with the permit granted, or for failure or neglect to pursue the work in
accordance with such permit or for any conditions which might prove to be
dangerous or injurious to any person or interests of the Municipality. Every
person receiving a permit or any extension thereof shall accept the same
subject to the foregoing provisions and conditions, without any liability or
responsibility attaching to the Municipality for any loss or damage that
might result by reason of such revocation.
§ 20-2.10. Municipality Exempted from Permit. [Ord. No. 1985-06
§ 2]
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any opening or excavation by
the Municipality.
which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until
permanent restoration can be made. The crown of the temporary
restoration shall not exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement.
The permittee shall exercise special care in making such temporary
restorations and must maintain such restorations in safe travelling
condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. The
asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with the specifications of
the Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal Engineer. If, in
the judgement of the Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal
Engineer, it is not expedient to replace the pavement over any cut or
excavation made in the street upon completion of the work allowed
under such permit by reason of the looseness of the earth or weather
conditions, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement
of steel plate or other suitable material designated by him over the cut
or excavation to remain until such time as the repair of the original
pavement may be properly made.
d. Permanent street restoration. Permanent restoration of the street may
be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications
prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal
Engineer to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as
near as may be. When, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Public
Works or the Municipal Engineer, the full width overlay will present a
hazardous condition and jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of
the general public, the Superintendent of Public Works or the Municipal
Engineer shall direct the permittee the method of restoration of the
roadway surface.
§ 20-2.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-2.11
AO:346
§ 20-2.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall be convicted of a violation of
a provision of this section shall, upon conviction whereof by any court
authorized by law to hear and determine the matter, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
Nothing in this section shall be construed by any permittee or other person
to absolve any permittee or its employees, agents or contractors of any
responsibility for any damage done to any person or property in opening or
digging a trench in any public road, street, or highway.
§ 20-2.12. Municipality Saved Harmless. [Ord. No. 1985 § 2]
The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the Municipality, its
officers, agents and employees from any loss, injury or damage resulting
from any negligence or fault of the permittee, its agents, servants or
employees or contractors in connection with the performance of any of the
work covered by the permit. The terms and provisions of this section shall
be deemed a covenant by such permittee to so indemnify and save harmless
the Municipality.
§ 20-2.13. Severability. [Ord. No. 1985-06 § 2]
In the event that any sentence, subsection or clause of this section shall
be declared illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
this declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions hereof as long as same permits the enforcement of the
spirit and intent of this section.
§ 20-3. STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION, REPLACEMENT,
REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAY APRONS
AND CURBS.62
§ 20-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
Prior to construction, alteration or removal of any sidewalk, driveway apron
or curb or any part thereof within a public right-of-way, a property owner
shall obtain a permit to be issued by the Zoning Officer.
§ 20-3.2. Application. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
Application for a permit to construct, alter or remove any sidewalk,
driveway apron or curb or any part thereof within a public right-of-way shall
be made to the Zoning Officer. The application, on form to be provided by
the Zoning Officer, shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
62.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1709-96 and
1852-01.
§ 20-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.2
AO:347
§ 20-3.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3; Ord. No. 1996-07 § 3; Ord. No.
2180-15]
A fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be submitted with the application
for a permit.
§ 20-3.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
A permit is not required for the following:
§ 20-3.5. Specifications. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
b. Name and address of person performing the proposed work;
c. Location, by tax map block and lot and street address, of the property
where the work is to be performed;
d. Estimated cost of the work;
e. Detailed drawing showing: the exact location of the proposed work in
relation to the nearest street intersection; the proposed width and
relationship to the grade of the street and adjacent properties; and, in
the case of a driveway apron, its slope or pitch;
f. Other information required by the Zoning Officer in order to determine
that the work is performed in accordance with this section.
a. Initial installation of a sidewalk, driveway apron or curb in a subdivision
where the work is covered by a performance guarantee required by the
Planning Board; or
b. Repair or replacement of less than eight lineal feet of an existing
sidewalk, driveway apron or curb.
a. All materials and work shall be in accordance with specifications on file
in the office of the Zoning Officer.
b. Any sidewalk, driveway apron or curb which is removed shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with municipal specifications.
c. No concrete sidewalk, driveway apron or curb shall be replaced or
covered with asphalt.
d. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb or curb and driveway depression shall be
removed and replaced. Breaking and capping of curbing is prohibited.
e. Any new or reconstructed curb shall be 18 inches high. The base shall
be eight inches wide, the top shall be six inches wide, and the face shall
be six inches above the street or gutter adjacent to the curb. If, in the
opinion of the Zoning Officer, the existing street profile does not allow
conformance with these specifications, the Zoning Officer may provide
alternate specifications.
§ 20-3.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-3.5
AO:348
§ 20-3.6. Notice. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
An applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer at least 24 hours prior to
pouring or laying any sidewalk, driveway apron or curb so that
arrangements may be made for inspection and testing.
§ 20-3.7. Inspections. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
The Code Enforcement Official shall conduct inspections and determine
if existing sidewalks, driveway aprons or curbs are in need of repair or
replacement. The Code Enforcement Official shall make recommendations
concerning this work based on the standards contained in this section.
§ 20-3.8. Costs of Repair. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
Where the Municipality is unable to locate a property owner or the property
owner fails to complete the required work, the Municipality may undertake
all necessary work.
§ 20-3.9. Cost as Lien. [Ord. No. 1896-02 § 3]
Upon the completion of the work, the Code Enforcement Official shall
certify the cost of the work to the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall
adopt a resolution confirming the cost of the work, which shall become a
lien upon the property on or adjacent to where the work was performed.
The amount of this lien shall be collected in the manner provided by law
for the collection of assessments and shall bear interest at the same rate.
Additionally, the Municipality may institute litigation to recover the amount
of the lien against the property owner.
f. Curbs shall be constructed with concrete; provided however, slate or
Belgian block may be utilized if the adjoining curb is constructed of the
same material.
g. Any new or reconstructed sidewalk or driveway apron shall be
constructed with concrete. Existing sidewalks or driveway aprons
composed of slate, brick or other similar materials may be replaced
with such identical materials.
a. A written notice shall be sent to a property owner explaining the work
to be undertaken. The notice shall require that the work be performed
within 60 days of the date of the notice;
b. Written notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the property owner's
last known post office address;
c. If the property owner's post office address cannot be ascertained, a
notice shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in an
official newspaper of the Municipality.
§ 20-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.10
AO:349
§ 20-3.10. Jurisdiction over Construction, Replacement, Repair and
Maintenance of Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons and Curbs. [Ord. No.
1896-02 § 3]
§ 20-3.11. (Reserved)63
§ 20-4. DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS.
§ 20-4.1. Driveways and Curb Cuts in Residential Zone Districts.
[1972 Code § 94-5; Ord. No. 1634-94; Ord. No. 1776-98 § 2; Ord. No.
1852-01 § 4; Ord. No. 2174-15; Ord. No. 2208-2016; Ord. No.
2227-2017]
a. Construction and Replacement. The Zoning Officer shall have
jurisdiction relating to the construction and replacement of sidewalks,
driveway aprons and curbs.
b. Repair and Maintenance. The Code Enforcement Official shall have the
jurisdiction relating to the repair and maintenance of sidewalks,
driveway aprons and curbs.
a. A driveway exclusive of curb return radii shall not exceed 12 feet in
width at the curbline; provided however, if a property contains a twocar
garage facing a street, the driveway exclusive of curb return radii
shall not exceed 20 feet in width at the curbline.
Notwithstanding the above provision, an existing driveway exclusive
of curb return radii may be replaced or reconstructed for its existing
width; provided however, no repaired or reconstructed driveway
exclusive of curb return radii shall exceed 20 feet in width at the
curbline.
b. A curb return radius from a driveway at its entrance to a public street
shall be a minimum of five feet.
c. The width of a driveway exclusive of curb return radii shall not exceed
20 feet.
d. A maximum of one curb cut is permitted for each building lot.
e. The outer edge of the driveway must be setback at least one foot from
the side property line.
f. In the R-1 and R-2 Zones a driveway may be expanded to the width of
the two-car garage provided that the maximum width of the driveway at
the property line does not exceed 20 feet.
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 20-3.11, Assessment Cost Formula for the Construction
or Reconstruction of Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons or Curbs Undertaken by the Municipality
as a Local Improvement Project, Ord. No. 2005-07 § 9, was repealed 6-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2292-19.
§ 20-3.10 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-4.1
AO:350
§ 20-4.2. Curb Cuts in All Zone Districts. [1972 Code § 94-6; Ord.
No. 1634-94 § 1]
The following regulation shall apply in all zone districts: at the intersection
of two streets, a curb cut shall be set back not less than 25 feet from the
intersection of the two curbs. A minimum separation of 50 feet shall be
maintained between curb cuts serving the same property.
§ 20-4.3. Administrative Appeal Process. [1972 Code § 94-7; Ord.
No. 1671-95; Ord. No. 1852-01 § 5]
A property owner may appeal for a waiver of the provisions or regulations
under subsections 20-4.1 and 20-4.2 within 15 days of receipt of the
issuance of a notice of violation of these regulations or the denial of an
application for a permit to authorize construction of a curb, curb cut, apron
and/or driveway. A written appeal shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer and set forth specifically: (1) a statement of the requirements of the
regulation from which the appeal is made; (2) a statement of the manner
by which strict compliance with the regulations would result in undue
hardship; (3) a statement of the nature and extent of the undue hardship;
and (4) a statement of feasible alternatives to the requirements of the
regulation.
The written appeal of the property owner shall be considered by the Code
Enforcement Official, Zoning Officer and at least two members of the Law
and Ordinance Committee. The reviewing authority shall review and decide
any appeal filed with it within 30 days after the filing of the appeal. The
failure of the reviewing authority to decide the appeal within the period
prescribed shall constitute an affirmance of the decision of the Code
Enforcement Official. Waivers may be granted for reasons of hardship
related to physical conditions such as inability to gain access to a rear yard
area; prohibition of on-street parking; existence of multiple units exceeding
the allowable driveway capacity; existence of common driveways and other
similar conditions. Financial ability to comply with these regulations shall
not be considered when determining if a hardship exists.
§ 20-5. (RESERVED)64
§ 20-6. APPLICATION TO ZONING OFFICER PRIOR TO INSTALLING
OR CONSTRUCTING ANY IMPROVEMENT HAVING AN
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.
g. In the R-1 and R-2 Zones, a driveway may be expanded to the width of a
two-car garage provided that the maximum width of the driveway at the
property line does not exceed 20 feet within six feet of the garage
structure as long as the driveway material conforms to lot coverage.
64.Editor's Note: Former Section 20-5, Standards for Construction and Maintenance of
Sidewalks, Driveway Aprons and Curbs, previously codified herein and containing portions
of Ordinance No. 1769-98 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1896-02. See
Section 20-3 for construction and maintenance of sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs.
§ 20-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-6.1
AO:351
§ 20-6.1. Procedure to Obtain Permit Before Installing Impervious
Surface. [Ord. No. 1810-2000 § 1]
§ 20-6.2. Plot Plan. [Ord. No. 1810-2000 § 1; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 10]
A plot plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to the
commencement of construction or installation of any improvement on real
property having an impervious surface. The plot plan shall show all existing
and proposed buildings, structures and improvements having an impervious
surface on the real property. If a plot plan is not available, a fully
dimensioned sketch of the property showing the size, square footage
coverage and location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
a. An application shall be made to the Zoning Officer prior to the
installation or construction of any improvement on real property having
an impervious surface.
Impervious surface shall mean nonpermeable surfaces, including but
not limited to, buildings, parking areas, driveways, service areas,
streets, walkways, patios, pools and plazas. With reference to
walkways, patios and plazas, the materials utilized in the construction
of such areas may be determined to be permeable based upon
commonly accepted construction standards. All required parking areas
which are permitted to remain unimproved and all gravel areas and
landscape areas shall be considered as impervious surfaces if they
are lined with weed-inhibiting impervious plastic or other impervious
material.
b. If the Zoning Officer determines the application complies with the
provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning, of the Municipal Code and other
applicable laws, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit to the
applicant. The applicant may then request that the Construction Official
issue a construction permit.
All existing impervious surfaces may be repaired or replaced by other
impervious surfaces notwithstanding that the total amount of
impervious surface exceeds maximum coverage requirements; provided
however, the existing impervious surfaces in excess of ordinance
requirements cannot be further expanded without application to the
Planning Board for relief of the provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning.
Nothing contained in this section shall exempt any property from
CAFRA requirements or review, nor shall any approval or relief granted
by the Zoning Officer or the Planning Board violate CAFRA
requirements.
c. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application does not conform
with the provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning, or other applicable laws, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a written denial of the application and inform
the applicant of the procedure to apply to the Planning Board for relief
of the provisions of Chapter 35, Zoning.
§ 20-6.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 20-6.2
AO:352
and improvements having an impervious surface on the real property may
be provided to the Zoning Officer for review. The sketch shall be signed
by the property owner certifying to its accuracy, and shall be signed by
the Zoning Officer following review of the accuracy of the sketch. After
a written determination is made by the Zoning Officer that the proposed
improvements having an impervious surface conform with applicable zoning
requirements, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit to the
applicant. The applicant may then request the Construction Official issue a
construction permit. The applicant must also submit an affidavit certifying
that the plot plan/survey or sketch is accurate.
§ 20-6.3. Grading Plan. [Ord. No. 1810-2000 § 1]
A grading plan prepared by a licensed engineer shall be submitted for
the construction of any new improvement having an impervious surface
on real property in excess of 500 square feet. The plan must demonstrate
that surface water does not spill onto neighboring properties and that the
proposed grade elevation will not negatively impact neighboring properties.
The grading plan shall be subject to review and approval of the Construction
Official and Municipal Engineer.
§ 20-6.4. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. No. 1810-2000 § 2]
Any person, firm, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction hereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at
the discretion of the court having jurisdiction in this matter. The court
shall have the discretion to impose a term of community service in lieu
of imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 20-7. PROHIBITING THE INSTALLATION OF IMPERVIOUS
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY OF ANY PUBLIC STREET.
§ 20-7.1. Installation of Impervious Surface Between Curb and
Right-of-Way Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1809-2000 § 1]
No person shall install or construct or cause to be installed or constructed
any impervious improvement between an existing curb and the border of
private property abutting the right-of-way of a public street. In the absence
of a curb, no person shall install or construct or cause to be installed or
constructed any impervious improvement between the edge of a street and
the border of private property abutting the right-of-way of a public street.
Impervious improvement shall mean any improvement having a
nonpermeable surface or any area covered by weed-inhibiting plastic or
other material.
§ 20-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-7.2
AO:353
§ 20-7.2. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1809-2000 § 2; Ord. No. 1851-01 § 1]
Notwithstanding the prohibition established in subsection 20-7.1 above,
sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs may be installed in the right-of-way
of a public street by a property owner who obtains a permit under the
provisions of Ordinance No. 1769-98, (Section 20-5 of the Municipal Code).
A pervious area shall be maintained between the sidewalk and curb unless
the existing alignment with adjacent curbs and sidewalks precludes the
establishment of the pervious area. The width of the pervious area shall be
the same or coincidental with adjoining curbs and sidewalks. No trees shall
be planted within a pervious area between a curb and sidewalk unless such
planting is approved by the Manasquan Shade Tree Commission.
§ 20-7.3. Violations, Penalty. [Ord. No. 1809-2000 § 3]
Any person, firm, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction hereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at
the discretion of the court having jurisdiction in this matter. The court
shall have the discretion to impose a term of community service in lieu
of imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 21
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 21-1. COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
§ 21-1.1. Placement of Dumpsters and Private Collection
Containers. [1972 Code § 94-1]
Private collection containers, whether in regular or temporary use, shall not
be placed closer to a public road or right-of-way than between the sidewalk
and the front of the main building or structure of the property being served.
No such container shall be placed in the roadway, public right-of-way or in
a location that interferes with the use of the sidewalk.
§ 21-1.2. Time for Placement of Solid Waste at Curbside for
Collection. [1972 Code § 94-3; Ord. No. 1549-91]
No person, owner, lessee or occupant shall place any item of solid waste
at curbside for collection earlier than 24 hours prior to the designated
time and date for collection of solid waste. No person, owner, lessee or
occupant shall allow or permit any empty receptacle or container to remain
at curbside later than 8:00 a.m. on the morning following the day of
collection.
§ 21-1.3. Liquid and Hazardous Waste Exclusions. [Ord. No.
2062-10 § 2]
§ 20-7.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-1.3
AO:354
§ 21-2. REFUSE CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.
§ 21-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 3]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Manasquan and/or the
waters of the State so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 21-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 4]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Manasquan or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the oceans and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies or surface or ground water, whether natural or
a. No liquids of any type shall be placed with recyclables, or with solid
waste for collection and disposal.
b. No chemicals, liquid paints, pesticides, herbicides, reactive polishes or
cleansers, cleaning or automotive products, or other hazardous wastes
shall be placed with recyclables, or with solid waste for collection and
disposal.
§ 21-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.2
AO:355
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 21-2.3. Prohibited Conduct; Application; Fee. [Ord. No. 2059-09
§ 5; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 21-2.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 6]
§ 21-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 7]
This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Official of the
Borough of Manasquan.
§ 21-2.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 8]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500.
§ 21-2.7. Severability. [Ord. No. 2059-09 § 9]
Each subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this section is declared to
be an independent subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, and the finding
or holding of any such portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or
ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this
section.
§ 21-3. through § 21-5. (RESERVED)
a. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
b. Any person who owns, leases, or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Manasquan.
c. The fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be payable with the
submission of a dumpster application.
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g. furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup.
§ 21-2.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-6
AO:356
§ 21-6. RECYCLING OF NEWSPAPERS.
§ 21-6.1. Definitions. [1972 Code § 81-1; Ord. No. 1326]
As used in this section:
OTHER STRUCTURES — Shall mean and include hotels, guest houses,
business establishments and places where newspapers may be found.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage, rubbish and trash
either placed in receptacles for collection by the municipality or its duly
authorized agents.
USED NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded
from the term "used newspaper" are all magazines or other periodicals as
well as other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
§ 21-6.2. Separation of Used Newspapers from Other Solid Waste
Required. [1972 Code § 81-2; Ord. No. 1326]
The Borough Council shall have the authority to establish rules and
regulations for the collection of used newspaper for recycling purposes
from residences and other structures in the municipality. The rules and
regulations therefor shall be adopted by resolution. It shall be mandatory
for all persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of residences and
other structures in the Borough to separate used newspaper from all other
solid waste and to separately bundle used newspaper for collection by the
municipality or its duly authorized agents.
§ 21-6.3. Bundling Requirements. [1972 Code § 81-3; Ord. No.
1326; New]
The used newspaper shall be compacted and be tied securely in bundles not
exceeding 35 pounds in weight with rope or cord sufficient in strength to
facilitate handling. The bundles shall be placed separately at the curb for
collection not earlier than 6:00 a.m. on those days designated for collection.
If bundles of newspaper are not collected for any reason, they shall be
removed from the curb area not later than 7:00 p.m.
§ 21-6.4. Unauthorized Collections. [1972 Code § 81-4; Ord. No.
1326]
From the time used newspaper is placed at the curb for collection, the
used newspaper shall become the property of the Borough. It shall be a
violation of this section for any person to collect or cause to be collected
such used newspaper, unless authorized by the Borough Council, during the
twenty-four-hour period commencing at 6:00 a.m. on the day designated for
§ 21-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-6.4
AO:357
the collection. Each and every collection and violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense punishable as provided herein.
§ 21-6.5. Official Collection Agents. [1972 Code § 81-5; Ord. No.
1326]
The Borough Council may adopt regulations authorizing the following types
of organizations to be its official collection agent:
§ 21-6.6. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 81-6; Ord. No. 1686-96; Ord.
No. 1326]
It shall be the duty of the Manasquan Police Department, Code Enforcement
Official and such other officials as are designated by the Governing Body to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 21-7. MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM.
§ 21-7.1. Purpose. [1972 Code § 81-8; Ord. No. 1408; Ord. No. 1441;
Ord. No. 1456; Ord. No. 1528-90; Ord. No. 1686-96; Ord. 2062-10
§ 3]
a. Charitable or nonprofit organizations.
b. Veterans organizations or local service groups.
c. Quasi-governmental groups and associations, such as police, fire or civil
defense organizations.
d. Groups sponsored by governmental units.
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons, lessees and occupants of
residential property (including multi-family dwellings) to separate
newspapers, glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal
cans, white goods, scrap metal, batteries, leaves and grass clippings
from all other solid waste produced by such residences. Glass bottles
and jars, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans may be commingled in
the same container not to exceed 32 gallons in size. Each container
shall be clearly marked "RECYCLING." Newspapers must be tied in
bundles not to exceed 35 pounds. Leaves must be raked to the curb for
collection by the Public Works Department from October 1 to December
15. From December 16 through September 30, leaves must be placed in
clear plastic bags or containers and delivered to the Public Works
Garage. Grass cuttings must be left on the lawn or disposed of by the
property owner/occupant. White goods must be deposited in the
dumpster at the Public Works Garage by the property owner/occupant.
Batteries may be brought to the Public Works Garage or to selected
merchants.
b. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and occupants of business,
commercial or industrial property and of private, public and
governmental institutions and buildings to separate newspapers, glass
§ 21-6.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-7.1
AO:358
§ 21-7.2. Definitions. [1972 Code § 81-9; Ord. No. 1408; Ord. No.
1686-96; Ord. No. 2062-10 § 4]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM — Shall mean and include aluminum containers used for soda,
beer or other beverages.
BATTERIES — Shall mean and include cameras, flashlights, toys, car and
boat batteries.
CLEAN MIXED PAPER — Shall mean high grade bond paper, mixed office
and school papers, such as stationery, construction paper and writing
tablets, including computer printouts, magazines, gift wrapping paper, soft
bottles and jars, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans, scrap metal,
white goods, batteries, leaves, grass clippings, corrugated cardboard,
and/or high grade paper from all other solid waste produced by
nonresidential establishments. The following items to be recycled must
be delivered to the designated dumpster at the Public Works Garage:
glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans, batteries,
cardboard, office paper and white goods. Leaves must be raked to the
curb for collection by the Department of Public Works from October 1 to
December 15. From December 16 through September 30, leaves must
be placed in clear plastic bags or containers and delivered to the Public
Works Garage. The Borough will not collect grass cuttings.
c. It shall be unlawful for any persons to dispose of used motor oil in any
manner other than through an authorized "used oil collection site." On
and after the adoption of this chapter, and in accordance with existing
State regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil retainers,
and motor vehicle inspection stations with used oil holding tanks shall
accept up to five gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals
changing oil from cars, lawn mowers, or motorcycles and shall post a
sign informing the public that they are a "Used Oil Collection Site."
Antifreeze and gasoline cannot be mixed with oil.
d. Common nonrechargeable dry cell batteries, commonly labeled A, AA,
AAA, C, D, and 9-Volt, may be disposed with regular municipal solid
waste; however rechargeable dry cell and button batteries still contain
significant amounts of various toxic metals, including mercury, and
shall be separated and brought to retail outlets or publicly-operated
recycling facilities providing specific arrangements for the proper
packaging and shipment of rechargeable and/or button batteries to
appropriate processing facilities.
e. Computers, computer monitors and other related electronic hardware,
as well as analog and digital televisions, are prohibited from being
placed with the other solid waste for disposal. These and other
electronic devices shall be kept separate and brought to retail outlets or
publicly-operated recycling facilities providing specific arrangements
for shipment of these items to appropriate processing facilities.
§ 21-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-7.2
AO:359
cover books, junk mail and single layer cardboard (chipboard). Specifically
excluded are carbon papers, hard cover books (unless cover and binder
are removed), paper cups and plates, food wrappers or any other paper
contaminated by direct contact with food products, and paper products
used for personal hygiene such as tissues.
CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION MATERIALS — Shall mean and include
asphalt, concrete, tree stumps, land clearing debris, pallets and waste
lumber.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean and include cardboard of the
type used to make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar
corrugated and craft paper material.
GLASS — Shall mean and include all products made from silica or sand,
soda ash, and limestone; the product being transparent and translucent and
being used for packaging or bottling of various matters, excluding, however,
blue or flat glass commonly known as window glass, china, and mirrors.
HIGH GRADE PAPER — Shall mean and include white and/or off-white
stationery, photocopy and computer paper.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly having printed thereon news opinions and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded,
however are all magazines or other periodicals as well as all other paper
products of any nature whatsoever.
PLASTIC — Shall mean plastic bottles where the neck is smaller than the
body of the container, and is limited to plastic resin type #1 PET and plastic
resin type #2 HDPE. Specifically excluded are other resin type (#2 through
#7) and non-bottle plastic containers such as margarine tubs and other
consumer items and packages, such as film plastics, blister packaging,
boxes, baskets, toys and other products.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish normally
produced by the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential
property and disposed of by private or public pickup.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — Shall mean all disposable cans made of tin,
steel or combination of metals including, but not limited to, containers
commonly used for food products. Specifically excluded are cans which
contain toxic products, such as paints or oils.
WHITE GOODS AND SCRAP METALS — Shall mean and include appliances,
metal paper, scrap metal, metal lawn chairs, exterior furniture, screens,
storm doors, and bicycles.
§ 21-7.3. Recycling Coordinator. [1972 Code § 81-10; Ord. No. 1408;
Ord. No. 2062-10 § 5]
§ 21-7.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-7.3
AO:360
§ 21-7.4. Collection by Authorized Persons. [1972 Code § 81-11;
Ord. No. 1408; Ord. No. 1686-96]
The Governing Body may use municipal personnel to collect recyclable
material set forth herein at curbside and/or from a drop-off center and shall
sell the recyclable material if a market exists, therefor, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.
The Governing Body may elect to enter into agreements with qualified
persons, nonprofit organizations, or corporations authorizing them to
collect the recyclable material at curbside or from a drop-off center and
to sell the recyclable material. Establishments disposing of recyclables
through means other than the Borough's disposal mechanism shall provide
the Borough with a copy of the weight slips on a quarterly basis.
§ 21-7.5. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [1972
Code § 81-12; Ord. No. 1408]
Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Borough
once placed on the curbside or Borough to a drop-off center.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
Governing Body to pick up or cause to be picked up the recyclable material
as defined herein. Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
a. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
within the municipality to be appointed by the Governing Body for a
term of one year.
b. The duties of the Recycling Coordinator shall include, but are not
limited to, the preparation of annual or other reports as required by
State and County agencies regarding local solid waste and recycling
programs, reviewing the performance of local schools and municipal
agencies in conducting recycling activities, periodic review of local
residential and business recycling practices and compliance, review
and recommendation on local subdivision and site plan submittals and
local construction and demolition projects for appropriate waste
disposal and recycling provisions, reports to the Governing Body on the
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this section, and
such other reports and activities as may be requested by the Governing
Body.
c. The Recycling Coordinator shall be required to comply with the
Certification Requirements for Municipal Recycling Coordinators, as
established by the State of New Jersey. The Recycling Coordinator shall
have completed or be in the process of completing the requirements for
certification as "Certified Recycling Professional" (CRP) no later than
January 13, 2012, as required by the New Jersey Recycling
Enforcement Act.
§ 21-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-7.6
AO:361
§ 21-7.6. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Material by Resident. [1972
Code § 81-13; Ord. No. 1408]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding any person, partnership,
or corporation who is owner, lessee, or occupant of a residential or
nonresidential property, may donate or sell the recyclable material as
defined herein, to any person, partnership, or corporation whether or not
operating for profit. The person, partnership, or corporation, however, shall
not pick up the recyclable materials at curbside or at a drop-off center.
§ 21-7.7. Enforcement. [1972 Code § 81-14; Ord. No. 1408; Ord. No.
2062-10 § 6]
The enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator, the Monmouth County Health Department,
the Code Enforcement Official and the Manasquan Police Department.
The above named officials are hereby jointly and severally empowered to
inspect solid waste and recycling arrangements and compliance at local
residence, business, schools and institutions, and to enforce the provisions
of this section, by issuance of warnings, notices, summons and complaints.
A typical inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening
bagged solid wastes to detect the presence of recyclable materials.
The authorized inspector may, in his or her discretion, issue a warning
rather than a summons following an initial inspection(s), with a follow-up
visit to determine compliance within a stated period of time.
The responsibility of monitoring the program for the adequacy of the
collection and all other terms of the established rules and regulations is that
of the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 21-7.8. Placement for Collection; Delivery of Items for Recycling;
Development Provisions. [1972 Code § 81-16; Ord. No. 1408; Ord.
No. 1486; Ord. No. 1686-96]
a. No person, owner, lessee or occupant shall place any item or solid
waste (which ultimately will be recycled) at curbside for collection
earlier than 24 hours prior to the designated time and date for
collection of such items. No person, owner, lessee or occupant shall
allow or permit any empty receptacles or containers to remain at
curbside later than 8:00 a.m. on the morning following the day of
collection.
b. The owners, lessees and occupants of multi-family residential, business,
commercial or industrial property and of private, public and
governmental institutions and buildings shall have the option of
delivering items for recycling to the Municipal Recycling Center or
contracting with a private contractor to remove such items. If the
services of a private contractor are utilized, the owners, lessees or
occupants of such nonresidential properties shall be responsible to
§ 21-7.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-7.8
AO:362
§ 21-7.9. Additional Provisions. [1972 Code § 81-17; Ord. No. 1408;
Ord. No. 1686-96; Ord. No. 1994-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2062-10 § 7; Ord.
No. 2099-11]
maintain weight slips or receipts to measure the tonnage of the
recycled items. The weight slips or receipts shall be submitted to the
Recycling Coordinator on a quarterly basis on or before the 15th day of
January, April, July and October of each year.
c. Materials designated for recycling in this section shall be separated
from other solid waste by the generator and a storage area for
recyclable material shall be provided as follows:
1. For each subdivision application for 50 or more single-family units,
the applicant shall provide an exterior storage area of at least 12
square feet for each dwelling unit to accommodate a four week
accumulation of mandated recyclables (including but not limited to:
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans).
2. For each subdivision application for 25 or more multi-family units,
the applicant shall provide an exterior storage area of at least three
square feet for each dwelling unit to accommodate a one week
accumulation of mandated recyclables (including but not limited to:
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans).
Unless recyclables are collected on a weekly basis from each
dwelling unit, one or more common storage areas must be provided
at convenient locations within the development.
3. For each site plan application for commercial and industrial
development that utilize 1,000 square feet or more of land, the
applicant shall provide the Municipal Agency with estimates of the
quantity of mandated recyclable materials (including but not
limited to: newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and
bimetal cans, high grade paper, and corrugated cardboard) that
will be generated by the development during each week. A
separated storage area must be provided to accommodate one to
four weeks accumulation of recyclable material. The Municipal
Agency may require the location of one or more common storage
areas at convenient locations within the development.
a. Residents, businesses and institutions within the municipality may use
only those recycling haulers and/or facilities which are registered with
the County.
b. Businesses, institutions and multi-family residential properties not
served by municipal recycling collection programs shall provide the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator with the name and address of the
company providing solid waste and recycling collection services.
c. Businesses or institutions hauling their own recyclables shall provide
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator with reports on the quantity and
§ 21-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-7.9
AO:363
§ 21-8. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROPER HANDLING OF YARD
WASTE.
§ 21-8.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Borough of Manasquan, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 21-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
destination of recyclables. The reports shall be submitted on a quarterly
basis on or before the 15th day of January, April, July and October of
each year.
d. The municipality shall issue construction and demolition permits only
after the applicant has provided a Debris Management Plan identifying
disposal and recycling arrangements. The applicant shall supply
appropriate records documenting the quantity and disposition of all
materials. A refundable deposit of $50 shall be shall be paid upon
submission of the Debris Management Plan. Upon completion of the
project, the applicant shall submit the appropriate records
documenting the quantity and disposition of solid waste and
recyclables. Inadequate or incomplete documentation may result in a
delay of the final Certificate of Occupancy.
e. All containers used for the deposit of solid waste and recyclable
materials shall be identified with permanent markings indicating the
street number of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential,
business, commercial or industrial property utilizing a container for the
deposit of solid waste or recyclable materials. The numerals identifying
the street number shall be at least three inches in height and be clearly
legible on the container. In the event the container used for the deposit
of solid waste or recyclable materials is not marked in the prescribed
manner, the container may be expropriated by any officer or employee
of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 21-7.9 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-8.2
AO:364
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean grass clippings and other organic waste, but
does not include leaves.
§ 21-8.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste in the
street.
§ 21-8.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer and
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 21-8.5. (Reserved)65
§ 21-9. YARD WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL PROGRAM.
§ 21-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Manasquan, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 21-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
65.Editor's Note: Former subsection 21-8.5, Penalties, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2026-08 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2062-10. See Section 21-10 for Violations and Penalties.
§ 21-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-9.2
AO:365
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean grass clippings and other organic waste, but
does not include leaves.
§ 21-9.3. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste at the curb or
along the street is prohibited.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing leaves at the curb or along
the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and
announced collection. Leaves shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from
any storm drain inlet. Placement of leaves at the curb or along the street
at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this section. If
such placement of leaves occurs, the party responsible for placement of the
leaves must remove the leaves from the street or said party shall be deemed
in violation of this section.
§ 21-9.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer and
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 21-9.5. (Reserved)66
§ 21-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2062-10 § 10]
Violation or noncompliance with any of the provisions of Sections 21-6
through 21-9, or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be
punished by a fine as follows:
For a first offense: $25 to $100.
For a second offense: $50 to $250.
For a third and/or subsequent offense: $100 to $1,500 and/or the
performance of community service in the recycling programs, for a period
not to exceed 90 days.
66.Editor's Note: Former subsection 21-9.5, Penalties, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2026-08, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2062-10. See Section 21-10 for Violations and Penalties.
§ 21-9.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 21-10
AO:366
Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
Fines levied and collected in Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of
Sections 21-6 through 21-9 shall be deposited into the Municipal Recycling
Trust Fund. Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for
the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
Chapter 22
WATER AND SEWER UTILITY
General
§ 22-1. CONSOLIDATION OF UTILITIES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 1]
The Water and Sewer Systems of the Borough of Manasquan are
consolidated and shall be operated as one utility under the title of "Water
and Sewer Utility."
Water and Sewer Rates
§ 22-2. BASE WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATE. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 2; Ord. No. 1777-98 § 2; Ord. No. 1918-03 § 1; Ord. No.
1969-05 § 1; Ord. No. 1990-06 § 1; Ord. No. 1999-07 § 1; Ord. No.
2061-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2077- 11 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-13 § 1; Ord. No.
2172-14; Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2200-15 § 1; Ord. No.
2220-2016 § 1; Ord. No. 2272-18 § 1; amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2306-1967]
a. The base water and sewer rate for each residential and nonresidential
user shall be $598.88 per year. This charge represents the standby to
serve or fixed charges incurred in the operation of the municipal water
and sewer system. The fees shall be paid in equal quarterly installments
of $149.72.
A user shall be defined as follows:
1. Residential User:
(a) Each single-family residential dwelling.
(b) Multifamily residential dwellings.
Number of Units
Amount of Base Water and Sewer
Service Rates
1 to 10 Full service rate for each unit
11 to 20 50% service rate for each unit
21 to 30 25% service rate for each unit
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-10-2020.
§ 21-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2
AO:367
§ 22-3. WATER AND SEWER USAGE CHARGES. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 3; Ord. No. 1777-98 § 3; Ord. No. 1918-03 § 2; Ord. No. 1969-05
§ 2; Ord. No. 1990-06 § 2; Ord. No. 1999-07 § 2; Ord. No. 2061-09
§ 2; Ord. No. 2077- 11 § 2; Ord. No. 2146-13 § 2; Ord. No. 2172-14;
Ord. No. 2180-15; Ord. No. 2200-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2220-2016 § 2;
Ord. No. 2272-18 § 2]
§ 22-4. USERS USING A COMMON SERVICE LINE. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 4]
Number of Units
Amount of Base Water and Sewer
Service Rates
31 or over 10% service rate for each unit
2. Nonresidential User:
(a) Each nonresidential unit in sole occupancy of a structure.
(b) Each nonresidential unit in a multiunit structure.
(c) Each nonresidential unit being serviced by a common water
service line.
(d) Each hotel or motel.
b. The following service rate shall be charged to residential and
nonresidential users who are not connected to both the municipal water
and sewer systems:
1. The base water service rate for each residential and nonresidential
user shall be $299.44 per year. The fee shall be payable in equal
quarterly installments of $74.86.
2. The base sewer service rate for each residential and nonresidential
user shall be $299.44 per year. The fee shall be payable in equal
quarterly installments of $74.86.
a. The charge for water and sewer usage shall be $4.34 per 1,000 gallons
or part thereof.
b. The charge for water usage only shall be $2.17 per 1,000 gallons or part
thereof.
c. The charge for sewer usage only shall be $2.17 per 1,000 gallons or
part thereof.
d. Water and sewer usage shall be measured by the number of gallons of
water use shown on the water meter.
e. Any user found to be receiving water service that is not being metered
shall be charged at the rate of $2.17 per day.
§ 22-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-4
AO:368
§ 22-5. ANNUAL REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENTS OF WATER AND
SEWER RATES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 5]
The charges established in Sections 22-2, 22-3 and 22-4 shall be reviewed
annually by the Governing Body and be revised to reflect treatment,
operation, maintenance and capital expenses incurred in the operation of
the water and sewer systems.
§ 22-6. BULK WATER SUPPLY FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS. [Ord.
No. 1713-96 § 6; Ord. #2019-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 22-7. WATER AND SEWER TAP CHARGES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 7;
Ord. No. 1986-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 22-7.1. Cut and Cap Water. [Ord. No. 2180-15]
The fee to cut and cap the water supply shall be as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees.
a. Each residential or nonresidential user utilizing a common service line
with other users shall be billed a base water and sewer service rate.
b. The common service line to users shall be metered and billed for water
and sewer usage charges as provided in Section 22-3 above. This
charge shall be divided by the number of users connected to the
common service line, and the quotient shall be billed to each residential
or nonresidential user.
c. Residential or nonresidential users utilizing a common service line shall
be required to designate an association or entity to which the charges
shall be billed; provided, however, that each user shall remain
responsible for the payment of such charges. Further, each property or
unit of occupancy shall be subject to a lien for unpaid water and sewer
charges.
a. Bulk water supplied for any special event or operation shall be billed at
the rate as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
b. Bulk water supplied for use during construction shall be billed as stated
in Chapter 16, Fees per unit being built, rebuilt or rehabilitated. The
property owner shall be required to display a sticker provided by the
Water/Sewer Superintendent or Water/Sewer collector at the time of
payment, which shall be affixed to the construction permit, and be
displayed at all times.
a. The charges for water taps shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
b. A charge shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees will be made for each
sewer connection.
§ 22-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-8
AO:369
§ 22-8. RATES; PAYMENT DUE. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 8]
The base water and sewer service rate shall be billed in advance on a
quarterly basis. Water and sewer usage charges shall be billed on a
quarterly basis in the quarter following the actual usage. All billings shall
be due and payable within 30 days of the billing date. In the event that
any billings are not paid within 30 days of the billing date, then the billings
will be considered delinquent, and water service to the customer having a
delinquent account may be discontinued. Interest shall accrue on all unpaid
balances at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of the delinquency.
§ 22-9. CHARGES FOR TURNING WATER ON OR OFF. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 9; Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
a. Charges shall be imposed for work performed in discontinuing water
service for delinquent accounts during normal business hours between
7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any weekday:
1. Turn off municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
2. Turn off municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
b. Charges shall be imposed for work performed in discontinuing water
service for delinquent accounts before 7:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m. on
any weekday, or on a Saturday, Sunday or any holiday celebrated by the
Municipality:
1. Turn off municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
2. Turn on municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
c. Charges shall be imposed for each emergency call, service call or any
other work performed before 7:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m. on a weekday, or on
a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday celebrated by the Municipality:
1. After hours call: See Chapter 16, Fees.
2. Turn off municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
3. Turn on municipal water supply: See Chapter 16, Fees.
4. Emergency call for broken or leaking service whether or not
service is disconnected - first service call: See Chapter 16, Fees.
5. Emergency call for broken or leaking service whether or not
service is disconnected - second service call to the same property
within a consecutive twelve-month period: See Chapter 16, Fees.
6. Emergency call for broken or leaking service whether or not
service is disconnected - third service call to the same property
within a consecutive twelve-month period: See Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 22-8 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-9
AO:370
§ 22-9.1. Swimming Pools. [Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1]
§ 22-10. EXEMPTIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 10; Ord. No. 1727-97
§ 1]
The following users receiving water and sewer service shall be exempt from
paying rates and charges established under this section:
Borough of Manasquan
Manasquan First Aid Squad
Manasquan Hook & Ladder Company No. 1
Volunteer Engineer Co. No. 2
Manasquan Library
Manasquan/Brielle Little League
Squan Village Historical Society, Inc.
Sewer System Regulations
§ 22-11. APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION; AUTHORIZATION;
PERMIT. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 11; Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1]
7. Emergency call for broken or leaking service whether or not
service is disconnected - fourth service call to the same property
within a consecutive twelve-month period: See Chapter 16, Fees.
d. In the event there is an emergency or service call for broken or leaking
service, whether or not service is disconnected, for four or more times
to the same property within a consecutive twelve-month period, the
water supply shall be discontinued until the condition is permanently
corrected and the Municipality shall have the right to file a summons
and complaint seeking penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this
chapter.
a. Water utilized for filling newly installed swimming pools shall be taken
from the main service. An adjustment reducing the sewer portion of the
bill shall be given upon receipt by the Water/Sewer Collector of a letter
from the sales or installation company certifying the total capacity of
the swimming pool.
b. Water utilized to fill existing swimming pools shall be taken from the
main service. Prior to utilizing the water supply, the property owner
shall contact the Water/Sewer Superintendent to obtain an auxiliary
meter to be attached to an outside hose bib to be utilized to fill the
swimming pool. An adjustment reducing the sewer portion of the bill
shall be given based upon the auxiliary meter reading.
§ 22-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-11
AO:371
§ 22-12. MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 12]
Pipe and other materials used in the installation of sewer laterals shall
comply with all applicable BOCA or National Plumbing Codes in effect at the
time of the operation. In addition, if the sewer lateral is constructed of PVC
or ABS plastic pipe, there shall be installed along the length of the lateral,
from where it connects to the main in the street to just inside the wall where
the service enters the structure, a single strand, plastic coated, 12 gauge
wire, so that the line can be identified while underground.
a. Application for sewer service for any premises shall be made in writing
and signed by the property owner or an authorized agent on a form to
be provided and filed with the Municipal Clerk. The owner shall agree,
in the application, to comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations
of the Municipality relating to the water and sewer system. Prior to the
issuance of any permit, an applicant shall pay to the Municipal Clerk all
fees for a sewer tap established in this chapter and all fees for a street
opening permit established in Chapter 20 (Streets and Sidewalks).
b. Laterals from the main sewer line to the curb shall be constructed,
maintained and repaired by and at the expense of the property owner.
No construction, maintenance or repair work shall be performed on
sewer laterals other than by a person, firm or corporation licensed as a
plumber by the State of New Jersey and all work on sewer laterals
between the main sewer line and the curb shall be subject to the
supervision of the Water/Sewer Superintendent.
c. Prior to the Water/Sewer Superintendent authorizing any sewer tap,
the property owner or an authorized agent shall submit to the
Superintendent permits for the sewer connection and street opening.
d. All new buildings constructed shall be connected to a separate sewer
line. Shared sewer lines with other buildings are prohibited, except
where approved by the Water/Sewer Superintendent. The owner of any
property permitted to maintain a shared sewer line shall provide
evidence of a utility easement recorded in the County Clerk's office
prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
e. Existing buildings and properties with a shared sewer line shall, upon
application for a construction permit for any development in excess of
50% of the assessed value of the structure where the work is proposed,
be required to construct a separate sewer line, except where approved
by the Water/Sewer Superintendent. The owner of any property
permitted to maintain a shared line shall provide evidence of a utility
easement recorded in the County Clerk's office prior to the issuance of
a construction permit.
§ 22-11 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-13
AO:372
§ 22-13. INSPECTION PRIOR TO CLOSING DITCHES. [Ord. No.
1713 § 13]
No ditch in which a pipeline is laid shall be covered over until such time
as the work has been inspected by and is satisfactory to the Sewer
Superintendent, Plumbing Subcode Official or an authorized agent.
§ 22-14. REPLACEMENT OF SEWER LATERALS. [Ord. No. 1713
§ 14]
Prior to the replacement of any sewer lateral, the property owner or an
authorized agent shall obtain a permit from the Municipal Clerk and pay all
charges established in this section.
§ 22-15. SIZE OF HOUSE SEWER LATERAL RESTRICTED. [Ord. No.
1713 § 15]
No house sewer lateral larger than four inches in size shall be permitted
without special permission from the Sewer Superintendent.
§ 22-16. PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR MAINTENANCE
AND REPAIR OF SEWER LATERAL. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 16]
The property owner receiving sewer service shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of the sewer lateral between the main sewer line
and the building or unit receiving the sewer service. In the event that the
Sewer Superintendent shall determine that there is a break or malfunction
in the sewer lateral line, the Superintendent shall cause the property owner
to be notified of such condition. The property owner shall be responsible
to carry out repairs to the sewer lateral line within 24 hours of receiving
notice from the Superintendent. If the Superintendent is unable to contact
the property owner within 12 hours of the break or disruption in the sewer
lateral line or should the property owner fail to correct the condition within
the time period set forth above, the Superintendent shall be authorized
to carry out such emergency repairs and services. In the event that the
Superintendent shall determine that the break or malfunction is major
in nature and constitutes an immediate problem adversely affecting the
health, safety and welfare of the community, the time periods for
notification to the property owner shall be suspended and the
Superintendent shall be authorized to carry out such emergency repairs and
services. In the event emergency repairs and services are carried out by
the Superintendent, the actual cost of repairs shall be assessed as a charge
against the property and shall be due and payable within 30 days of the time
when a written bill is served upon the property owner at the address listed
in the assessment records of the Borough. In the event the charge is not
paid within the thirty-day period, it shall be subject to interest and service
shall be subject to disconnection as set forth in Section 22-2 of this chapter.
§ 22-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-17
AO:373
§ 22-17. PROHIBITED SEWER DISCHARGES. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 17]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters, liquids or waste in any portion of the sewer system:
§ 22-18. PROHIBITED SEWER CONNECTIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 18]
No cellar drains, area drains, roof leaders, sump pumps or down spouts
shall be connected to the sewer system. In addition, the use of a mushroom
cap for the purpose of sewer venting shall be prohibited, unless the cap is at
least three feet above ground and the cap is secured at all times. All elbow
vents must be located at least three feet above ground level.
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
b. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
c. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
d. Any garbage or trash, except discharges from a refuse disposal unit.
e. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
f. Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.3 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of sewage works. "pH"
shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
g. Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewer treatment
process or constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a hazard
in receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
h. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such a character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the sewage treatment plan.
i. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
j. Any storm run-off or drainage, including such run-off or drainage
entering the sewer system through broken, missing, improperly
connected or disconnected sewer clean-out or plug.
§ 22-17 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-19
AO:374
§ 22-19. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 19]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, other remedies
will include:
§ 22-20. APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 20; Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1]
a. Any person who shall violate any provision of Sections 22-11 through
22-18 may, at the discretion of the Sewer Superintendent, be subject to
discontinuation of water service until the violation has been corrected.
Water System Regulations
a. All applications for the connection of the municipal water system to any
premises must be made in writing upon a form furnished and provided
for the purpose by the Municipal Clerk. The form must be signed by the
owner of the property, or his agent, and must be filed with the
Municipal Clerk. The property owner shall, in the application, agree to
comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the municipality
relative to its water system. Prior to a permit being issued, an applicant
shall pay the Municipal Clerk all fees for a water tap established in this
chapter and all fees for a street opening permit established in Chapter
20 (Streets and Sidewalks). All service pipes shall be installed by the
authorized plumber under the supervision of the Water/Sewer
Superintendent. No street shall be excavated or opened for the purpose
of installing, repairing or renewing any service pipe unless an
application shall be first made in writing to the Municipal Clerk and a
permit is issued by the Municipal Clerk for the work under the
provisions of Chapter 20 (Streets and Sidewalks).
b. All new buildings shall be connected to a separate water line. Shared
water lines with other buildings are prohibited, except where approved
by the Water/Sewer Superintendent. The owner of any property
permitted to maintain a shared water line shall provide evidence of a
utility easement recorded in the County Clerk's office prior to the
issuance of a construction permit.
c. Existing buildings and properties with a shared water line shall, upon
application for a construction permit for any development in excess of
50% of the assessed value of the structure where the work is proposed,
be required to construct a separate water line, except where approved
by the Water/Sewer Superintendent. The owner of any property
permitted to maintain a shared water line shall provide evidence of a
utility easement recorded in the county clerk's office prior to the
issuance of a construction permit.
§ 22-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-21
AO:375
§ 22-21. PERMIT SUBMITTED TO THE WATER SUPERINTENDENT.
[Ord. No. 1713-96 § 21]
A property owner or an authorized agent shall submit permits for a water
connection and street opening permit issued by the Municipal Clerk prior to
the Water Superintendent authorizing a tap of the water main.
§ 22-22. AUTHORITY TO TAP. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 22]
No person shall be permitted to tap into any water distribution pipe or in
any fashion make a connection to the water distribution system without the
prior approval of the Water Superintendent.
§ 22-23. MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 23]
The pipe and other material to be used in the installation and service lines
shall comply with all applicable BOCA Codes or National Plumbing Codes in
effect at the time of installation. In addition, if the water service is installed
using either PVC or ABS plastic pipe, the installer shall attach to the service
with a bolt, on or near the top of the curbstop, to either the meter or the
first shut off valve inside the structure, a single strand, plastic coated, 12
gauge wire. Any new construction or replacement of service from the curb
to a structure or structures where there are two or more users shall, at
the owner's discretion, install either a separate curbstop with an individual
service line into each unit or a manifold at the point inside the structure
where the service line separates.
§ 22-24. SURVEYS AND EXAMINATIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 24]
It shall be lawful for the Water Superintendent, Municipal Engineer, or any
agents of the Municipality to enter upon any land for the purpose of making
any and all necessary surveys and examinations and, at all reasonable
hours, to enter any structure where water is furnished for the purpose of
inspecting the water service pipes, fixtures and connections.
§ 22-25. CONTROL OF SERVICE PIPES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 25]
The entire control of such service pipe from the water main, including the
stopcock at the curb, shall remain with the municipality, and no person
other than the Water Superintendent or a plumber licensed by the State of
New Jersey shall be allowed to open or close the curb stops.
§ 22-26. RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF
WATER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 26]
The property owner shall be responsible for construction, maintenance and
repair of the water service pipe between its connection with the water
main line and its connection with the unit receiving water service. All work
on the service pipes between the water main line and the curb shall be
subject to the supervision of the Water Superintendent. In the event that
the Superintendent shall determine that there is a break or malfunction in
§ 22-21 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-26
AO:376
the water service pipe, the Superintendent shall cause the property owner
to be notified of such condition. The property owner shall be responsible
to carry out repairs to the water service pipe within five days of receiving
notice from the Superintendent. In the event the Superintendent is unable
to contact the property owner within 48 hours of the break or disruption
in the water service pipe or should the property owner fail to correct the
condition within the time period set forth, the Superintendent shall be
authorized to carry out such emergency repairs and services. In the event
that the Superintendent shall determine that the break or malfunction is
major in nature and constitutes an immediate problem adversely affecting
the health, safety and welfare of the community, the time periods for
notification to the property owner and completion of repairs by the property
owner shall be suspended and the Superintendent shall be authorized to
carry out such emergency repairs and services. In the event emergency
repairs and services are carried out by the Superintendent, the actual cost
of repairs shall be assessed as a charge against the property and shall be
due and payable within 30 days of the time when a written bill is served
upon the property owner at the address listed in the assessment records of
the Municipality. In the event the charge is not paid within the thirty-day
period, it shall be subject to interest and service and shall be subject to
disconnection as set forth in Sections 22-2 through 22-10 of this chapter.
§ 22-27. PERMISSION TO TURN ON WATER. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 27]
The water supply to any premises shall not be turned on by anyone without
first obtaining permission from the Water/Sewer Collector.
§ 22-28. DEPTH OF SERVICE LINES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 28]
Service pipes from the curbstop to a structure must be installed at least 3 1/
2 feet underground. A stopcock must be installed at the curb to allow the
water service line to be opened or closed at the curbstop.
§ 22-29. REPLACEMENT OF SERVICE LINES. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 29]
When the replacement of any service line installed prior to the passage
of Section 22-20 through Section 22-36 is required, the property owner
shall comply with all regulations previously stated, as in the case of a new
connection.
§ 22-30. SPECIAL PERMIT TO LEAVE WATER RUNNING. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 30]
No person or persons shall permit water to be left running without having
first received a special permit from the Water Superintendent.
§ 22-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-31
AO:377
§ 22-31. UNLAWFUL FOR UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS TO OPEN OR
CLOSE CURB STOPS, VALVES OR HYDRANTS. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 31]
If any person other than the Water Superintendent or a duly authorized
agent of the Municipality shall open or close the curb stops, valves or
hydrants in any public or private street main or service pipe, such person
shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment as established in Section 22-37.
§ 22-32. FIRE HYDRANT CONNECTION FEES. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 32; Ord. No. 2180-15]
All fire hydrant connections for the use of water for pile driving, jetty work
or the like shall be charged at the rate as stated in Chapter 16, Fees
per eight hour day for each connection, payable in advance to the Chief
Financial Officer.
§ 22-33. SPECIAL USE OF FIRE HYDRANT WATER TO BE
METERED. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 33]
Permission for the use of water from fire hydrants for any other purpose
shall be obtained from the Governing Body or Water Superintendent, and
meters shall be installed to register the quantity of water used, all to be paid
for by the user. The prevailing rates for metered water shall be applied.
§ 22-34. FIXTURES AND PIPES TO BE IN GOOD REPAIR. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 34; Ord. No. 2019-07 § 1]
§ 22-35. RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 35]
It shall be lawful for the Municipality or its duly authorized agent or agents,
at any and all times after first giving proper notice, to shut off the supply of
water to any consumer or consumers for the purpose of making extensions,
additions or repairs to the distribution system.
§ 22-36. CURRENT CHARGES PAID PRIOR TO TURNING ON
WATER SUPPLY. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 36]
No water supply service to any premises shall be turned on until such time
as all charges for water and sewer service, including the current year, shall
have been paid in full.
a. All water users shall keep water pipes, fixtures, the service pipe to the
main and the curbbox and stopcock in good repair, and shall, at the
expense of the user, protect the same from frost, freezing or from
wasting water.
b. The curbbox shall be kept accessible at all times, and shall not be
buried or covered by concrete, pavers, grass or any other surface or
material that will prevent access to the curbbox.
§ 22-31 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-37
AO:378
§ 22-37. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 37]
Any person shall violate any provision of Sections 23-20 through 23-36 may,
at the discretion of the Water Superintendent, be subject to discontinuation
of water service until the violation has been corrected. Any person, firm or
corporation that shall be convicted of a violation of a provision of Sections
23-20 through 23-36 shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
Drought Restrictions
§ 22-38. PROCLAMATION OF AN EMERGENCY. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 38]
The Governing Body shall have the authority to proclaim the existence of a
water emergency and prescribe regulations as follows:
§ 22-39. EMERGENCY CONCLUSIVE UPON FILING AND
PUBLICATION. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 39]
The proclamation of an emergency shall be conclusive on all persons and
users upon the filing of the proclamation in the Office of the Municipal Clerk
and the publication at least once in an official newspaper of the Borough.
§ 22-40. REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 40]
The regulations set forth in the proclamation and any subsequent
regulations made and published as aforesaid, upon filing thereof in the
Office of the Municipal Clerk, shall become part hereof the same as if
specifically incorporated and set forth herein.
§ 22-41. CONFORMANCE. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 41]
Every user shall, upon the proclamation of an emergency, become bound
and shall conform and comply in the use of water and the maintenance of
the water service connections and equipment.
§ 22-42. USES RESTRICTED DURING EMERGENCIES. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 42]
During the continuance of any water emergency, as determined by a
resolution of the Governing Body, restrictions as to the watering of lawns,
a. Prohibit the use of water from the municipal water supply for any
purpose not necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
b. Allocate and prorate the available water supply.
c. Prevent waste for the duration of such emergency.
§ 22-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-42
AO:379
shrubbery, gardens, other vegetation and any other nonessential use from
the municipal water supply shall be determined at the time of the
proclamation of the emergency. These restrictions may be added to, or
relaxed at any time during the emergency, by resolution of the Governing
Body. Persons watering lawns, shrubbery, gardens or other vegetation from
privately owned wells may continue to do so during such water emergency,
providing their well and well water distribution system has been inspected
by the Water Department and a permit issued by the Water Department.
No private well or well water distribution system shall, in any way, be
connected to the municipal water supply or to any system connected to the
municipal water supply.
§ 22-43. NOTIFICATION. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 43]
Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises connected
with the municipal water supply shall immediately notify the owner or
his agent of any defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections
whereby water is being wasted and every lessee, tenant and occupant of
any such building or premises shall notify the Water Department or Police
Department of any waste occurring by reason of defective water service
pipes, fixtures or connections.
§ 22-44. RIGHT TO INSPECT. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 44]
Every property owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person, firm or
corporation in charge of any building or premises connected with the
municipal water supply shall admit thereto the authorized agents and
employees of the municipality for the purpose of inspecting the water
service pipes, fixtures and connections.
§ 22-45. REPAIRS OF DEFECTIVE SERVICE PIPES. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 45]
Every property owner and water user during a period of a water emergency
shall be upon notice of any waste of water due to defective service pipes,
fixtures or connections and of the regulations promulgated under the
proclamation. It shall be the duty of the property owner to forthwith make
or cause to be made repairs necessary to prevent such waste.
§ 22-46. COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 46]
All users of water from the municipal water supply by and under any
contract, ordinance or statute are bound by the provisions hereof and of the
regulations promulgated under any proclamation pursuant hereto.
§ 22-47. FAILURE TO MAKE REPAIRS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 47]
Whenever a property owner shall fail or refuse to make repairs so as to
prevent the waste of water, the Municipality shall have the right to make
such repairs and charge the cost thereto to the property owner in the same
§ 22-42 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-47
AO:380
manner as other water charges are made, as by the statutes and ordinances
provided.
§ 22-48. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 37]
Any person shall violate any provision of Sections 22-38 through 22-47 may,
at the discretion of the Water Superintendent, be subject to discontinuation
of water service until the violation has been corrected. Any person, firm or
corporation that shall be convicted of a violation of a provision of Sections
22-38 through 22-47 shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
Meters
§ 22-49. REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 49]
All users shall be equipped with water meters and remote reading sensors.
§ 22-50. SEPARATE METERS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 50]
§ 22-51. LOCATION. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 51]
a. Each structure or building having a separate water service shall be
separately metered. A property owner may request that additional
water service lines be supplied to the premises at the property owner's
expense.
b. In the event that the owner of the premises fails to install a water meter
and remote reading sensor within the time period established in
Sections 22-49 through 22-60, water usage shall be billed at the
prevailing rate for unmetered water.
c. No water meters will be supplied for subtractive water metering
purposes.
a. All water meters shall be: located within the structure receiving the
water supply; protected from the elements; located as close as possible
to the stop and waste valve where the service enters the building; and
located in a suitable and readily accessible area to permit meter
reading and service to the meter. A suitable stopcock shall be installed
on each side of the water meter. The stopcock must be a type that is
arranged to be locked when it is closed. The location of the water
meters shall be approved by the Water Superintendent, or his
designated agents, prior to its installation. The Superintendent shall
have the discretion to allow the meter to be located in other locations
requested by the property owner or occupant receiving water service;
provided, however, that the property owner or occupant shall be
responsible for repair or replacement costs of the meter because of the
deviation from the location prescribed herein.
§ 22-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-51
AO:381
§ 22-52. METERS AND REMOTES OWNED BY THE BOROUGH.
[Ord. No. 1713-96 § 52]
§ 22-53. TIME LIMITS FOR INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS.
§ 22-53.1. Time Limits for Installation. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 53; Ord.
No. 2217-2016 § 1; Ord. No. 2268-18 § 1]
b. Remote Reading Sensor Location. The user shall provide a suitable and
readily accessible place on the exterior of the building or structure for
the installation of a remote reading sensor. In no event shall a remote
reading device be installed inside of a fence, in an area where animals
are kept, behind any large shrubbery, or in any other location that
would prohibit the meter reader to access it. The location of the remote
reading sensor shall be approved by the Superintendent prior to its
installation.
a. Meters measuring the quantity of water consumed and remote reading
senors shall be made available by the Water Department; and shall
remain the property of the Borough. The property owner shall pay for
all meter repairs or replacement costs, along with repairs or
replacement costs of the remote sensor, due to the negligence of the
property owner or occupant of the property receiving water service.
The Superintendent shall be charged with the responsibility of
determining whether damage to the water meter or remote sensor was
caused by the negligence of the property owner or occupant of the
property receiving water service.
b. When any structure containing a water meter and remote sensor is to
be demolished or substantially altered, the property owner or a
designated agent shall deliver to the Water Department both the meter
and remove, for storage. Contractors, plumbers and homeowners shall
be liable for the cost of replacement for any meter or remote that is lost
or damaged during construction.
a. The property owner of any premises connected to the municipal water
system shall, at the expense of the property owner, install a water meter
and remote reading sensor to be supplied by the Water Department.
The water meter and remote shall be installed within 10 days of the
date on which it is supplied or made available to the owner or user. In
the case of a new water service to a building or structure constructed
after the adoption of Sections 22-49 through 22-60, a Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued until a water meter and remote sensor
have been installed. All work in connection with the installation of the
water meter must be accomplished by either the property owner or a
licensed plumber and shall be inspected by the Water Superintendent.
b. In the event the property owner of the premises connected to the
municipal water supply fails to install a water meter and remote within
the time period as provided in Sections 22-49 through 22-60, the
§ 22-51 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-53.1
AO:382
§ 22-54. PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE. [Ord. No. 1713-96
§ 54]
The property owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be
held responsible for its care and protection from freezing, hot water or from
any other damage thereto. The property owner shall also be responsible
for the remote reading sensors and the wires from it to the meter, and
shall protect the same from being lost, broken or otherwise damaged. The
property owner or user shall notify the Water Superintendent of any damage
to or of the nonworking of the meter or remote as soon as the property
owner has knowledge of this condition.
§ 22-55. BYPASS OF WATER METER PROHIBITED. [Ord. No.
1713-96 § 55]
No bypass of a water meter shall be permitted. Any property owner
determined to be bypassing a water meter shall be charged the prevailing
rate for unmetered water for the entire quarter, and shall be subject to
disconnection of water service.
§ 22-56. REPAIRS TO WATER METERS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 56]
Repairs to water meters shall be made by the Water Department; provided,
however, that if proper protection has not been provided, all expenses
incurred by the Department for repairing or replacing the meter shall be
charged to the user or property owner of the premises where such meter is
located, in accordance with the schedule of repair and replacement charges
on file in the Office of the Department of Public Works/Water Department.
Borough shall have the right to install a water meter and remote
and charge all expenses in connection therewith against the property
receiving the water supply. The installation charges shall be determined
by the Water Superintendent and shall include, but not be limited to, all
labor and material costs in connection with the installation.
c. Effective December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2018, any property
owner utilizing a water meter that predates the water meters which
were supplied by HD Supply Waterworks, LTD pursuant to a contract
entered into with the Borough of Manasquan on June 1, 2016 shall be
required to pay a fee of $500 to the Borough of Manasquan for reading
of said water meter. Said fee shall be assessed only one time during the
period of December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2018.
d. Effective January 1, 2019, any property owners utilizing a water meter
that predates the water meters which were supplied by HD Supply
Waterworks, LTD pursuant to a contract entered into with the Borough
of Manasquan on June 1, 2016 shall be required to pay a fee of $500 to
the Borough of Manasquan for reading of said water meter each time
meter is read for quarterly billing.
§ 22-53.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-57
AO:383
§ 22-57. MEASUREMENT. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 57]
Where water is furnished by metered measurement, the quantity recorded
by the meter shall be conclusive on both the user and the Borough, except
where the meter has been found to be registering incorrectly or has ceased
to register. In such case or cases, the quantity may be determined by the
average registration of another meter for a period of 30 days, or by the
same meter for a period of 30 days after it has been repaired and tested,
during a similar use period. The period of similar use or the previous
corresponding period shall be determined by the Office of the Collector of
Water and Sewer Rates.
§ 22-57.1. Meter Reading. [Ordinance No. 2180-15; Ord. No.
2268-18 § 2]
§ 22-58. TESTS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 58; Ord. No. 2217-2016 § 3;
Ord. No. 2268-18 § 3]
The Water Department shall, at the request of any property owner or user,
test the meter. A meter shall be considered to be functioning correctly if
it reads a flow within 2% of absolute correctness. If the water meter is
determined to be recording a flow in excess of the water actually delivered,
the water charge shall be adjusted; provided, however, that the adjustment
shall be for a maximum of one year's water charges. If the meter is found to
be recording correctly, the appropriate owner or user shall pay a test fee of
$200.
§ 22-59. COMPLAINTS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 59]
Complaints relating to water service shall be made in writing to the Water/
Sewer Collector. The Water Department shall make a record of such
complaint, except in the case of a billing complaint, giving the name and
address of the complainants, the date, the nature of the complaint and the
remedy.
§ 22-60. INTERFERENCE WITH METERS. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 60]
No person, other than an employee of the Water Department or its
authorized agents, shall, without the prior authorization of the Water
Superintendent remove, replace or in any manner interfere with a meter
attached to a water pipe, used or intended to be used to supply water to
any premises. This applies whether the meter is set inside or outside of a
building.
a. The fee for a meter reading for final balance due as well as a fee for
reading a meter not the subject of an installation pursuant to a contract
entered into between HD Supply Waterworks, LTD and the Borough of
Manasquan dated June 1, 2016 shall be as stated in Chapter 16- Fees.68
68.Editor's Note: See also Section 22-53, paragraph c.
§ 22-57 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-61
AO:384
§ 22-61. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 1713-96 § 37]
Any person shall violate any provision of Sections 22-49 through 22-60 may,
at the discretion of the Water Superintendent, be subject to discontinuation
of water service until the violation has been corrected. Any person, firm or
corporation that shall be convicted of a violation of a provision of Sections
22-49 through 22-60 shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 22-62. PROHIBIT THE SPILLING, DUMPING OR DISPOSAL OF
MATERIALS OTHER THAN STORMWATER INTO THE MUNICIPAL
SEPARATE STORMWATER SYSTEM.
§ 22-62.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Manasquan, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 22-62.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Manasquan or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political, subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 22-62.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
§ 22-61 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-62.3
AO:385
Manasquan is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 22-62.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
§ 22-62.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer,
Code Enforcement Officer or the Sewer System Operator (C-4) of the
Borough of Manasquan.
a. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
c. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
d. Incidental irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering
runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
3. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 22-62.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-62.6
AO:386
§ 22-62.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum
fines and penalties established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 and as same may be
amended from time to time. Each and every day a violation of this section
shall exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 22-63. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
§ 22-63.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
The purpose of this section is to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 22-63.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Manasquan, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJO141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Manasquan or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
§ 22-62.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-63.2
AO:387
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 22-63.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Manasquan any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 22-63.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer and
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Manasquan.
§ 22-63.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2026-08]
Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum
fines and penalties established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 and as same may be
amended from time to time. Each and every day a violation of this section
shall exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 22-64. GREASE DISCHARGE ABATEMENT.
§ 22-63.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-64.1
AO:388
§ 22-64.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
The scope and purpose of this section is to aid in the prevention of sanitary
sewer blockages and obstructions due to contributions and accumulation
of fats, oils, and greases into the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of
Manasquan from nonresidential food preparation and service facilities.
§ 22-64.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
As used in this section:
EATING AND DRINKING FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any
nonresidential facility connected to the Borough sanitary sewer system
primarily or regularly engaged in the activity of preparing, serving or
otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs, including ice cream,
or one that uses one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking
by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie
cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or
poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and any
other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food
product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
GREASE — Shall mean an organic foodstuff component and/or by-product
from the preparation thereof, which is viscous at room temperature and
non-water soluble, and commonly referred to as fat, oil or grease.
GREASE TRAP — Shall mean a device for intercepting, separating and
retaining waterborne grease prior to the wastewater exiting the device and
entering the sanitary sewer system.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Shall mean and refer to the sanitary system
of the Borough of Manasquan.
SEASONAL EATING AND DRINKING FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall
mean any eating and drinking food establishment that operates six months
or less in any calendar year.
§ 22-64.3. Restrictions and Regulations for Grease Traps. [Ord. No.
2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
a. Installation. All eating and drinking food establishments shall install a
grease interceptor capable of preventing discernible accumulations of
grease in the sanitary sewer system of the Borough and/or connecting
wastewater lines from said establishment. The specifications,
installation and repair of all grease interceptors shall be approved by
the Plumbing Subcode Official of the Borough.
b. Maintenance/Records. Eating and drinking food establishments shall
establish a grease interceptor maintenance schedule based upon the
size and nature of the individual operation. That schedule shall be of
sufficient frequency to prevent the interceptor from becoming
overloaded with grease and solids and shall prevent the discharge of
grease and solids into the downstream piping and sanitary sewer
§ 22-64.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-64.3
AO:389
§ 22-64.4. Specifications. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
Grease Interceptors shall meet the specifications of Chapter 6 of the current
National Standard Plumbing Code/N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.15.
§ 22-64.5. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
system. In any event, an eating and drinking food establishment shall
clean its grease interceptor(s) and properly dispose of any grease
removed therefrom at least once every three calendar months. Eating
and drinking food establishments shall maintain records of said actions
for a period of at least three years for the purpose of inspection thereof
by the Borough. These records shall be subject to inspection by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough Public Works
Department. Seasonal eating and drinking food establishments shall
be subject to all of the requirements of an eating and drinking food
establishment except that the seasonal eating and drinking food
establishment shall clean its grease interceptor(s) and properly dispose
of any grease two times during the seasonal operation.
c. Annual Inspection/Report. On or before April 1st of each calendar year,
an eating and drinking food establishment shall provide to the Borough
Plumbing Subcode Official an annual inspection report of its grease
interceptor(s) and connecting wastewater lines to ensure that grease is
being adequately removed from the wastewater being discharged into
the sewer system. The inspection shall be performed by a licensed
plumber or cleaning service that specializes in grease interceptor
cleaning, and a report provided to both the eating and drinking food
establishment and to the Borough Plumbing Subcode Official within
three weeks of said inspection. This inspection report shall contain
observations with regard to the efficiency of the grease interceptor, the
amount of grease found in the connecting wastewater lines, the
percentage of grease being removed from wastewater that is
discharged into the sanitary sewer system and the maintenance and
efficiency of the grease interceptor (with particular attention given to
whether the grease interceptor needs replacement or increased
capacity).
d. Prohibited. The use of enzymes, emulsifiers, or similar chemicals in
grease interceptors shall be prohibited.
a. Generally. In consideration for continued use of its sanitary sewer
system, The Borough of Manasquan shall reserve the right to
periodically conduct routine inspections of the grease interceptor(s) of
any eating and drinking food establishment during regular business
hours. During such inspections, the Borough shall have the right to
inspect (i) any food preparation areas (ii) any records maintained
pursuant to this section (iii) all grease interceptors which shall be
opened upon request, and (iv) all wastewater lines from the
§ 22-64.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 22-64.5
AO:390
§ 22-64.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
§ 22-64.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2073-10; Ord. No. 2090-11]
establishment to the sanitary sewer system, which may be
accomplished by use of a line camera.
b. Inspection Fee for New Grease Interceptor Installations. The inspection
fee for new grease interceptor is established in subsection 14-1.2b2(b).
c. Blockage. Whenever the Borough of Manasquan discovers a blockage of
the sanitary sewer system caused by grease, the Borough shall have the
right to conduct an inspection of any eating and drinking food
establishment connected to the main in which said blockage is found,
without regard to any prior or recent inspection(s) thereof.
d. Violation Discovered. If during an inspection, the Borough discovers a
violation of this section, the Borough shall notify the owner and/or
operator of the eating and drinking food establishment of the nature of
said violation as soon as reasonably possible and, in its discretion, issue
a notice to the owner and/or operator for the correction of said violation
within seven calendar days thereof. If said violation is not corrected
within such time the Borough shall issue a summons in accordance with
said penalty provision. The owner and/or operator of the eating and
drinking food establishment shall be subject to additional fees for any
borough labor associated with correcting a blockage.
a. Fine for Noncompliance. Any retail food establishment that violates any
of the provisions of this section is subject to penalties as established by
the General Penalty Provisions (Section 1-5) of the Borough
Ordinances.
b. Posting of Bond. For any retail food establishment that has plead guilty
or been found guilty of a violation of this section, the Borough may
require the posting of a bond by the retail food establishment as a
guarantee against future violations of this section. The amount of the
bond shall be calculated based on the anticipated cost of correcting a
sanitary sewer blockage/obstruction due to a build up of fats, oils and
grease. Any bond posted pursuant to this section shall remain in effect
for two years. Upon the lapse of two years with no violations of this
section, the retail food establishment shall be entitled to a refund of the
bond unless the Borough has instituted proceedings for the forfeiture of
the bond. Forfeiture of the bond shall occur if the retail food
establishment is found guilty of a violation of this section and the retail
food establishment has not paid any and all fees for Borough labor
associated with correcting the blockage.
a. Generally. Except as where otherwise provided, the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough, his/her designated representative(s), including
the Borough of Manasquan Department of Public Works shall have the
§ 22-64.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-64.7
AO:391
Chapter 23
SHADE TREES
§ 23-1. PROTECTION OF TREES.
§ 23-1.1. Injuring, Destroying or Misusing Trees. [1972 Code § 89-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person without the written permit of the Shade
Tree Commission, to cut, break, climb or injure any tree or portion of tree
planted or growing in any public highway within the Borough, or cause,
authorize or procure any person to cut, break, climb or injure any such tree
or any portion of any tree or plant planted or growing in any Borough park
or parking strip within the Borough, or cause or authorize or procure any
person to cut, break, climb or injure any such tree or plant or any portion
of such tree or plant; or to injure, misuse or remove, or cause, authorize
or procure any person to injure, misuse or remove any device set for the
protection of any tree or plant in any public highway or Borough park. Any
person, firm or corporation desiring for any lawful purpose to cut, prune
or trim any tree in any public highway of the Borough may apply to the
Shade Tree Commission, and if the judgment of the Commission, the desired
cutting, pruning or trimming shall appear necessary and the proposed
method and workmanship thereof is such as the Commission approves, the
Shade Tree Commission may thereupon issue a written permit for such
work. Any work done under such written permit shall be performed in strict
accordance with the terms thereof.69
§ 23-1.2. Removal of Trees. [1972 Code § 89-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to kill or remove,
or cause, authorize or procure the death or removal of any tree planted
or growing in any public highway, or any tree or plant planted or growing
in any Borough park within the Borough. Any person desiring for any
lawful purpose to take down or remove any tree in any public highway
of the Borough may apply to the Shade Tree Commission, and, if in the
judgment of the Commission, the desired taking down or removal shall
authority to enforce the terms of this section and to perform all duties
described herein on behalf of the Borough of Manasquan.
b. Related Authorities. Nothing contained herein shall limit the authority
of the Superintendent of Public Works, the Code Enforcement Officer
and others so designated to enter the premises of any eating and
drinking food establishment at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspecting any water or sewer connection or service equipment, nor
limit the authority of the Borough to assess penalties for any discharge
of grease into the sanitary sewer system in violation of the Borough's
Revised General Ordinances.
69.Editor's Note: See Section 2-33, Shade Tree Commission.
§ 22-64.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 23-1.2
AO:392
appear necessary, the Shade Tree Commission may issue a written permit
therefor. Any work done under such written permit must be performed in
strict accordance with the terms thereof.
§ 23-1.3. Exposure to Gasoline or Chemicals. [1972 Code § 89-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or using
or having control or charge of gasoline or other substance to allow such
gasoline or other substance to come into contact with the soil surrounding
the roots of any tree in any public highway or any tree or plant in any
Borough park in such manner as may injure such tree or plant.
§ 23-1.4. Destroying Trees or Plants with Gasoline or Chemicals.
[1972 Code § 89-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or using or having control or
charge of gasoline or other substance deleterious to tree life to allow such
gasoline or other substance to come in contact with the soil surrounding the
roots of any tree in any public highway or any tree or plant in any Borough
park in such manner as shall kill or destroy such tree or plant.
§ 23-1.5. Exposure to Oil, Liquid Dye. [1972 Code § 89-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or procure any brine,
water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak,
pour, flow or drip on or into the soil about the base of any tree in any public
highway or Borough park or onto a sidewalk, road or pavement therein at
a point whence such substance may be lying on or be flowing, dripping
or seeping into such soil, or in any other manner whatsoever injure such
tree, or cause or procure such lying, leaking, flowing, dripping, seeping or
injuring.
§ 23-1.6. Stone, Cement Obstructing Free Access of Air and Water.
[1972 Code § 89-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except with the written permit of the
Shade Tree Commission, to place or maintain upon the ground in any public
highway or Borough park any stone, cement or other material or substance
in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots
of any tree in such highway or park. Unless otherwise provided for in such
written permit as above provided for, there must be maintained about the
base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public highways and Borough
parks at least six square feet of open ground for a tree of three inches in
diameter, and for every two inches increase of such diameter there must be
at least one square foot of open ground.
§ 23-1.7. Interfering with Employees, Agents of Shade Tree
Commission. [1972 Code § 89-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or cause or authorize or
procure any interference with the Shade Tree Commission or any of its
§ 23-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.7
AO:393
employees, agents or servants while they are engaged in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any tree
in any public highway or Borough park or in the removing of any device
attached to the tree or in such removing of stone, cement, sidewalk or other
material or substance as may be necessary for the protection and care of
any such trees in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection
23-1.6 as to the area of open ground to be maintained about the base of the
truck of each shade tree in the public highways and Borough parks.
§ 23-1.8. Electrical Wires Injuring Trees or Plants. [1972 Code
§ 89-8]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or procure a wire
or other conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any
tree in a public highway or with any tree or plant in a Borough park in such
manner as may injure or abrade such tree or plant.
§ 23-1.9. Electrical Wires Destroying Trees or Plants. [1972 Code
§ 89-9]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or authorize or procure a wire or
other conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree
in a public highway or any tree or plant in a Borough park in such manner
as shall destroy or kill such tree or plant.
§ 23-1.10. Attaching Ropes, Wires. [1972 Code § 89-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or keep attached to any tree in
any public highway or Borough park or to any guard or stake intended for
the protection of such tree, any rope, wire, sign or any device whatsoever.
§ 23-1.11. Planting Restrictions. [1972 Code § 89-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or set out any shade tree or
cause or authorize or procure any person to plant or set out any shade
tree in or on any part of any public highway or Borough park without
first obtaining from the Shade Tree Commission a written permit so to do
or without complying in all respects with the conditions set forth in such
written permit.
§ 23-1.12. Removal or Construction of Buildings: Protection of
Trees. [1972 Code § 89-13]
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or
structure within the Borough, it shall be unlawful for the person in charge
of such erection, repair, alteration or removal to leave any street tree in
the vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient
guards or protection as shall prevent injury to such tree arising out of or by
reason of said erection, repair, alteration or removal.
§ 23-1.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 23-2
AO:394
§ 23-2. REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; MUNICIPAL
TREE ESCROW FUND.
§ 23-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to control and regulate the indiscriminate or
excessive removal, clear cutting and destruction of trees on privately owned
property, encourage the planting of new trees and control, regulate and
prevent conditions which cause increased surface drainage, sedimentation
and soil erosion adversely impacting the value of real estate and the public
health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulations contained in
this section are designed to limit such adverse impact while not interfering
with the right of a property owner to appropriately remove trees in
accordance with the regulations contained in this ordinance.
§ 23-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 2]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER — Shall mean standard measure of tree size for trees to be newly
planted. Measurement is taken six inches above the ground for trees four
inches in diameter or less and 12 inches above the ground for trees greater
than four inches in diameter.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT — Shall mean the diameter of a tree
measured 54 inches (forestry method) above the ground level on the uphill
side for existing trees. Diameter at breast height may appear as the
abbreviation "DBH".
EMERGENCY REMOVAL — Shall mean a removal which is necessitated
by an event, whether natural or man-made, which requires the immediate
removal of a regulated tree because it has been determined that such tree
presents an immediate public safety hazard. This determination shall be
made by the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee.
REGULATED TREE — Shall mean a tree, other than a diseased or hazardous
tree, located in an area covered under subsections 23-2.3 and 23-2.4 of this
section.
REMOVAL — Shall mean any activity that results in cutting down
completely or substantially eliminating a living regulated tree.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Shall mean a tree that is nursery grade quality,
balled and burlapped, not less than 2 1/2 to three inch caliper with a
durable label designating its genus, species and variety.
TREE — Shall mean any self-supporting woody plant which reaches a typical
mature height of 12 feet or more at maturity and has a typical DBH of four
inches or greater.
§ 23-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2.3
AO:395
§ 23-2.3. Applicability of Regulations. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 3]
The terms and provisions of this section shall apply to vacant lots, lots
where the principal structure has been demolished and lots on which the
foundation to an existing building or structure is being increased by more
than 500 square feet. Trees removed from a property within six months
prior to an application for a construction permit for a new or replacement
principal structure shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Nothing
contained in this section is intended to restrict a property owner's rights to
remove trees on real property where no construction permit for a new or
replacement principal structure is sought.
§ 23-2.4. Removal of Trees Unlawful; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1927-04
§ 4]
Unless an exemption is established by this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to remove or cause to be removed any tree regulated under
subsection 23-2.3 above, with the trunk diameter in excess of six inches
DBH and located a distance greater than 15 feet from the area of new
construction. In the event a tree is removed as a result of new construction
and having been located within the area of disturbance, the property owner
or applicant shall comply with subsection 23-2.5 of this section unless
otherwise approved by the Zoning Officer or Planning Board in conjunction
with a land development application. Diseased or hazardous trees may be
removed at the property owner or applicant's expense from any location if
the condition of the tree is documented by a qualified tree expert.
§ 23-2.5. Replacement of Tree; Contribution to Municipal Tree
Escrow Fund in Lieu of Replacement. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 5]
In the event of the removal of a regulated tree, the property owner or
applicant shall be required to either replace the tree or make a contribution
to the Municipal Tree Escrow Fund. The formula for replacing trees is as
follows: one replacement tree of not less than 2 1/2 to three inch caliper
must be planted for each tree removed with a DBH of six to 18 inches and
two replacement trees of not less than 2 1/2 to three inch caliper must be
planted for each tree removed exceeding 18 inches DBH. A replacement
tree must comply with the definition in subsection 23-2.2 above.
§ 23-2.6. Tree Information Required on Land Development
Applications. [Ord. No. 1927-04, § 6]
All trees with a DBH of six inches or more shall be shown on the plot plan
as submitted with a land development application. The application shall list
all trees to be removed. Each tree to be removed shall be identified by size
and species and the reason for the proposed removal shall be detailed.
On land development applications for properties having an area greater
than 4,500 square feet, if there are no existing shade or ornamental trees in
the front yard of the property, the Planning Board shall require the property
§ 23-2.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 23-2.6
AO:396
owner or applicant to provide a shade tree or ornamental tree, or contribute
to the Municipal Tree Escrow Fund.
§ 23-2.7. Planting Requirements. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 7; Ord. No.
2180-15]
All required trees shall be planted on the site from which the trees were
removed. In the event such plantings cannot take place as a result of
practical physical difficulties or undue hardship related to the conditions
of the property, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer or Shade
Tree Commission or, in the event of a land development application, by
the Planning Board, the property owner or applicant, upon approval of
the Shade Tree Commission, may either plant the replacement tree(s) on
municipal property in accordance with the requirements of the Shade Tree
Commission, or contribute the sum as stated in Chapter 16, Fees for each
required replacement tree to the Municipal Tree Escrow Fund.
§ 23-2.8. Municipal Tree Escrow Fund. [Ord. No. 1927-04 § 8]
A Municipal Tree Escrow Fund is established for the administration and
promotion of environmental enhancement programs such as tree planting,
tree preservation, landscaping or other related projects on or within
municipally owned properties or facilities. A separate account shall be
established to administer this fund. Appropriations from the tree escrow
account shall be approved by the Mayor and Council and shall be used
for municipal purposes through the recommendations of the Shade Tree
Commission.
Chapter 24
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 24-1. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.
§ 24-1.1. Title. [1972 Code § 37-1; Ord. No. 875]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the Borough."
§ 24-1.2. Legislative Intent. [1972 Code § 37-2; Ord. No. 875]
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants
is a menace to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the
Borough and a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of
controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be
the policy of the Borough to minimize air pollution as herein defined and
prohibit excessive emission of the same, to establish standards governing
the installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion which are a source or potential
§ 23-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.2
AO:397
source of air pollution, and in furtherance of this purpose to cooperate
and coordinate these efforts with the State Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Air Pollution Control.
§ 24-1.3. Definitions. [1972 Code § 37-3; Ord. No. 875]
As used in this section:
AIR POLLUTION — Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere
of one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are,
or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant
life, or to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of
life or property throughout this Borough as shall be affected thereby, and
excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and
safety hazards.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Department of Environmental Protection
and Energy.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Shall mean equipment in which heat from
the combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Shall mean those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL — Shall mean solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce
useful heat by burning.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any furnace, boiler, water
heater, device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or
other apparatus, or a group or collection of such units in the process of
fuel-burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment
shall be considered incinerators as herein defined and not as fuel-burning
equipment under this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Shall mean any device, apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or
substance, including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or
scrap or facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Shall mean equipment in which heat
from the combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heatconducting
material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not
contacted by and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Shall mean any maximum
linear perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney
to the inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross
section or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Shall mean any action, operation or
treatment embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing
§ 24-1.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 24-1.3
AO:398
factors, methods or forms, including but not limited to furnaces, kettles,
ovens, converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters,
crushers, grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters,
reboilers, columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters,
towers, washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
MARINE INSTALLATION — Shall mean equipment for propulsion, power or
heating on all types of marine craft and floating equipment.
MOBILE SOURCE — Shall mean equipment designed or constructed to
be portable or movable from one location to another, including but not
limited to aircraft, locomotives operating on rails, tractors, earth-moving
equipment, hoists and mobile power generators.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — Shall mean a property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPACITY — Shall mean the property of a substance which renders it
partially or wholly obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed
as the percentage to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Shall mean any fire wherein the products of combustion
are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack
or chimney.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has care, custody or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, along or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care
or control of any premises of part thereof, including but not limited to a
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary,
including but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver,
guardian, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or
any part of any premises, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased
or subleased.
PERSON — Shall mean and include corporations, companies, associations,
societies, firms, partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as
individuals.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except
body wastes), and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish,
yard trimmings, leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
§ 24-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.3
AO:399
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Shall mean Ringelmann's Scale for
Grading the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of
Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of
smoke density which is approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey, as the equivalent of Ringelmann's
Scale.
RUBBISH — Shall mean solids not considered to be highly flammable
or explosive, and shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes,
leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar
materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Shall mean any business, trade or industry
engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or
material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers
or drums.
SMOKE — Shall mean small gas-borne and airborne particles arising from
a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
STACK or CHIMNEY — Shall mean a flue, conduit or opening designed and
constructed for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor
air.
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, and shall include but not be limited to plastic products,
carbon, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Shall mean smoke which obscures light to a degree
readily discernible by visual observation.
§ 24-1.4. Open-Air Burning. [1972 Code § 37-4; Ord. No. 875]
No person shall cause, suffer or permit open burning of refuse, plant
life, or conduct a salvage operation by open burning except as permitted
under Chapter 2 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code and only as
prescribed thereunder.
§ 24-1.5. Smoke Emissions from Fuel-Burning Equipment. [1972
Code § 37-5; Ord. No. 875]
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke from any fuelburning
equipment except as permitted under Chapter 4 of the New Jersey
Air Pollution Control Code
§ 24-1.6. Incinerator Regulation. [1972 Code § 37-6; Ord. No. 875]
a. Smoke Emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air;
§ 24-1.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 24-1.6
AO:400
§ 24-1.7. Air Pollution Prohibited. [1972 Code § 37-7; Ord. No. 875]
No person or owner of property, and no person having possession or control
of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 24-1.8. Inspections and Right of Entry. [1972 Code § 37-8; Ord.
No. 875]
or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
b. New Fires. The provisions of paragraph a shall not apply to smoke
emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of
which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period of no longer than three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of
such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of
such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree which is not greater
than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart,
for a period no longer than three consecutive minutes.
c. Visible Particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
d. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used, any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
e. Limitation on Time of Operation. No person shall operate, and no owner
or operator of any building in the Borough shall permit the operation of,
an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any day and all
operation shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including
complete extinction of the fire and removal of material in a safe manner
from the firebox to a non-combustible container; provided, however,
that by special permit, the Health Officer may because of exceptional
circumstances permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare
of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
a. All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
by the Borough Health Officer or his duly authorized representatives.
All rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for
such inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the
premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that
inspections may be made at other times if the premises are not
available during the foregoing hours for inspection; or there is reason
§ 24-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.8
AO:401
§ 24-1.9. Release of Balloons. [Ord. No. 2269-18]
This article is adopted in order to protect the environment, particularly the
wildlife, and the health, safety and well-being of persons and property by
prohibiting the release of helium balloons into the atmosphere, including
latex and Mylar, as it has been determined that the release of balloons
inflated with lighter-than-air gases pose a danger and nuisance to the
environment, particularly to wildlife and marine animals so as to constitute
a public nuisance and may pose a threat to the safety of its habitants and
their property.
to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can
only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the
prescribed hours; or there is reason to believe a violation exists of a
character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring
inspection and abatement without delay.
b. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Health Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take
place only where the time required to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective any immediate action necessary
to abate the condition. Emergency inspections may also be authorized
by the Governor in times of air pollution emergencies in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32. Where the Health Officer or his duly authorized
representatives are refused entry or access or are otherwise impeded
or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this Code
and subject to the penalties hereunder.
c. Search Warrant or Access Warrant.
1. The Health Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court for a search warrant setting forth factually the
actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of the Code may
exist on the premises, including one or more of the following:
(a) That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Health Officer for periodic inspections of
premises of the type involved.
(b) That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke,
ash, soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has
resulted in the belief that violations of this Code exist.
(c) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning
equipment and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use
of premises or other factor which renders systematic
inspections of such buildings necessary in the interest of public
health and safety.
§ 24-1.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 24-1.9
AO:402
Chapter 25
CABLE TELEVISION
Note: The Borough is currently under contract with Cablevision of
Monmouth, Inc. to provide Cable TV service to the Borough.
Editor's Note: For further information see Ordinance No. 1902-02
granting municipal consent for the operation of a cable television
system within the Borough.
Chapter 26
PERSONNEL
§ 26-1. MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATOR. [1972 Code § 18-2; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1042; Ord. No. 1757-98 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 1772-98 § 1;
Ord. No. 1798-99 § 2]
a. Prohibited Releases. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to intentionally release, organize the release, or
intentionally cause to be released balloons inflated with a gas that is
lighter than air within the Borough of Manasquan, except for:
1. Balloons released by a person on behalf of a governmental agency
or pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or
meteorological purposes.
2. Hot air balloons that are recovered after launching.
3. Balloons released indoors.
b. Violations and Penalties. Any person found in violation is guilty of a noncriminal
infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.
a. The position of Municipal Administrator is established in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
b. The Municipal Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Governing Body.
c. The term of office of the Municipal Administrator shall be at the
discretion of the Governing Body.
d. The Municipal Administrator may hold one or more other municipal
positions in the Municipality while at the same time fulfilling the duties
and responsibilities of the position of Municipal Administrator.
e. The Municipal Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the Municipality. The Municipal Administrator shall exercise
supervision of all departments of the Municipality, including the Police
Department to the extent permitted by law. Further, the Municipal
§ 24-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-1
AO:403
§ 26-2. DEPUTY MUNICIPAL CLERK. [1972 Code § 18-3; Ord. No.
888]
§ 26-3. ACCOUNT CLERK-TYPIST. [1972 Code § 18-5; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 913; Ord. No. 1187; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
Administrator shall be subject to the decisions, directives and policies
as established by the Governing Body.
f. The Municipal Administrator shall have the following duties and
responsibilities which are not intended to be all inclusive but rather to
be a broad outline of the duties and responsibilities of the office of
Municipal Administrator.
1. Function as Chief Administrative Officer in the implementation of
the decisions and policies of the Governing Body;
2. Research, initiate and carry-out efficient and economical
administrative, personnel and purchasing procedures for all
departments, offices, boards and agencies of the Municipality;
3. Consult with department heads and develop personnel practices
consistent with the proper assignment of positions of employment;
4. Act as the liaison between the Governing Body and the officers and
employees of the Municipality. This responsibility is not intended to
preclude direct discussion between the members of the Governing
Body and any officer or employee of the Municipality. It is intended
to designate one person who shall receive complaints,
recommendations and any other information which may be
presented to the Governing Body;
5. Investigate and report to the Governing Body the availability of
financial and other aid from the County, State and Federal
governments;
6. Attend meetings of the Governing Body, meetings of department
heads and other meetings concerning municipal business
whenever necessary or advisable;
7. Assist and advise the Governing Body and department heads in the
preparation of the Municipal budgets;
8. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned
to the Municipal Administrator by the Governing Body.
a. The position of Deputy Municipal Clerk is hereby established.
b. The duties of this office shall be to assist the Municipal Clerk in the
performance of all of the duties incumbent upon that office.
a. The position of Account Clerk-Typist is hereby created.
§ 26-1 MANASQUAN CODE § 26-3
AO:404
§ 26-4. CLERK-TYPIST. [1972 Code § 18-6; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No.
941; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-5. EQUIPMENT OPERATOR. [1972 Code § 18-8; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 945; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-6. LABORER. [1972 Code § 18-9; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 945;
Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-7. DEPUTY TREASURER. [1972 Code § 18-10; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 1024]
§ 26-8. VIOLATIONS CLERK-TYPIST. [1972 Code § 18-13; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1049]
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Collector of Taxes and the Municipal Administrator and shall
perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may from time to time
direct.
a. The position of Clerk-Typist is hereby created in the Borough of
Manasquan.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Municipal Clerk and Municipal Administrator, who shall assign
the Clerk- Typist to duties with the Municipal Court, the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Municipal Clerk.
a. The position of Equipment Operator (Class A) in the Street Department
of the Borough of Manasquan is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Superintendent of the Street Department and under the
supervision of the Municipal Administrator.
a. The position of Laborer (Class A) in the Water and Sewer Department is
hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Water and Sewer Superintendent and the Municipal
Administrator.
a. The position of Deputy Treasurer is hereby established.
b. The duties of this office shall be to assist the Borough Treasurer in the
performance of all the duties incumbent upon that office in the absence,
disability or incapacity of the Borough Treasurer.
a. The position of Violations Clerk-Typist is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform such clerical work
as shall be assigned by the Clerk of the Municipal Court and perform
§ 26-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-8
AO:405
§ 26-9. SENIOR PAYROLL CLERK. [Ord. No. 2114-12 § 1]
§ 26-10. PAYROLL CLERK. [Ord. No. 2114-12 § 2]
§ 26-11. (RESERVED)
§ 26-12. PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
See Chapter 2, subsection 2-24.4.
§ 26-13. LOCAL HISTORIAN.
See Chapter 2, subsection 2-19.1.
§ 26-14. SENIOR PARK MAINTENANCE WORKER. [1972 Code
§ 18-22; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1156; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-15. EQUIPMENT OPERATOR-SWEEPER. [1972 Code § 18-23;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1156; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
such other duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to time,
direct and in conformity with the Administrative Office of the Courts.
a. The position of Senior Payroll Clerk is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief Financial Officer or his/her designee and Municipal
Administrator and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council
or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Payroll Clerk is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Senior Payroll Clerk, Chief Financial Officer or his/her designee
and the Municipal Administrator and shall perform such duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Senior Park Maintenance Worker is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Public Works Superintendent and the Municipal Administrator
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
a. The position of Equipment Operator-Sweeper is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Public Works Superintendent and the Municipal Administrator
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
§ 26-8 MANASQUAN CODE § 26-16
AO:406
§ 26-16. CLERK. [1972 Code § 18-24; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1189;
Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-17. DEPUTY CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. [1972 Code
§ 18-26; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1210; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-18. SENIOR ACCOUNT CLERK, TYPING. [1972 Code § 18-27;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1222; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-19. POLICE RECORDS CLERK, TYPING. [1972 Code § 18-28;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1271; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-20. SENIOR CLERK TYPIST. [1972 Code § 18-29; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 1271; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-21. SENIOR POLICE RECORDS CLERK, TYPING. [1972 Code
§ 18-30; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1274; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
a. The position of Clerk is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Supervisor in the department where she is employed and shall
perform such duties as the Mayor and Council or Municipal
Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Deputy Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Code Enforcement Officer and shall perform such duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Senior Account Clerk, Typing, is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Tax Collector and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Police Records Clerk, Typing, is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief of Police and the Municipal Administrator, and shall
perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Senior Clerk Typist is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Construction Code Official and the Municipal Administrator, and
shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to
time, direct.
§ 26-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-21
AO:407
§ 26-22. ROAD FOREMAN. [1972 Code § 18-31; Ord. No. 888; Ord.
No. 1283; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-23. WATER TREATMENT PLANT OPERATOR. [1972 Code
§ 18-32; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1283; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-24. WATER METER REPAIRER. [1972 Code § 18-34; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1294; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-25. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
See Chapter 2, subsection 2-19.2.
§ 26-26. BOROUGH RECREATION DIRECTOR. [Ord. No. 2151-14]
a. The position of Senior Police Records Clerk, Typing is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief of Police and the Municipal Administrator, and shall
perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Road Foreman is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Public Works Superintendent and the Municipal Administrator,
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
a. The position of Senior Water Plant Operator is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Public Works Superintendent and the Municipal Administrator,
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
a. The position of Water Meter Repairer is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Municipal Administrator
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
a. The position of Borough Recreation Director is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this part-time position shall work under the
supervision of the Recreation Committee and the duties of the position
shall include, but are not limited to, the following:70
70.Editor's Note: Amended pursuant to Ord. No. 2274-19, adopted 2-19-2019, which replaced
the Board of Recreation Commissioners with the Recreation Committee.
§ 26-21 MANASQUAN CODE § 26-26
AO:408
§ 26-27. (RESERVED)
§ 26-28. ELECTRICAL SUBCODE OFFICIAL. [1972 Code § 18-41;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1433]
§ 26-29. FIRE SUBCODE OFFICIAL. [1972 Code § 18-42; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1433]
§ 26-30. PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL. [1972 Code § 18-43; Ord.
No. 888; Ord. No. 1433]
§ 26-31. POLICE MATRON. [1972 Code § 18-45; Ord. No. 888; Ord.
No. 1463; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-32. SUPERVISING LABORER. [1972 Code § 18-46; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1464; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
1. Planning, developing, implementing, recreation programs as well
as supervising Recreation staff;
2. Oversee all daily operations of the community center;
3. Prepare and manage the capital budget program;
4. Develop the annual capital fundraising campaign events;
5. Organize and complete payroll purchasing receipts relating to the
recreation programs consistent with policies established by the
Borough Finance Department.
a. The position of Electrical Subcode Official is hereby established.
b. The duties of this office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances of the
Borough of Manasquan and laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining
to the Uniform Construction Code and related matters.
a. The position of Fire Subcode Official is hereby established.
b. The duties of the office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances of the
Borough of Manasquan and laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining
to the Uniform Construction Code and related matters.
a. The position of Plumbing Subcode Official is hereby established.
b. The duties of this office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances of the
Borough of Manasquan and laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining
to the Uniform Construction Code and related matters.
a. The position of Police Matron is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
§ 26-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-32
AO:409
§ 26-33. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER. [1972 Code § 18-47; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1466; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-34. DEPUTY MUNICIPAL COURT ADMINISTRATOR. [1972
Code § 18-50; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-35. MUNICIPAL COURT ADMINISTRATOR. [1972 Code
§ 18-51; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-36. MUNICIPAL CLERK. [1972 Code § 18-52; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
a. The position of Supervising Laborer is hereby created.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Superintendent of Public Works and shall perform such duties as
the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to
time, direct.
a. The position of Chief Financial Officer is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall be responsible to carry out
all duties and functions provided for in Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Deputy Municipal Court Administrator is hereby
established.
b. The duties of this office shall be to assist the Municipal Court
Administrator in the performance of all duties incumbent upon that
office, act in the absence, disability or incapacity of the Municipal Court
Administrator, and perform such other duties as the Municipal Court
Judge and the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from
time to time, direct.
a. The position of Municipal Court Administrator is hereby established.
b. The duties of the office shall be as established by the Administrative
Director of the Courts of the State of New Jersey, and the Municipal
Court Administrator shall perform such other duties as the Municipal
Court Judge and the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator
may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Municipal Clerk is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform all duties as
prescribed by the statutes of the State of New Jersey and perform such
other duties as the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may,
from time to time, direct.
§ 26-32 MANASQUAN CODE § 26-37
AO:410
§ 26-37. ASSISTANT PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT. [1972
Code § 18-53; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-38. PUBLIC ASSISTANCE DIRECTOR. [1972 Code § 18-54; Ord.
No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-39. DCA CONTROL PERSON. [1972 Code § 18-55; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-40. TAX ASSESSOR. [1972 Code § 18-56; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No.
1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-41. PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATOR OPERATOR. [1972
Code § 18-57; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
a. The position of Assistant Public Works Superintendent is hereby
established.
b. The duties of this position shall be to assist the Public Works
Superintendent in the performance of all duties incumbent upon that
position, act in the absence, disability or incapacity of the Public Works
Superintendent, and perform such other duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Public Assistance Director is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform all duties as
prescribed by the statutes of the State of New Jersey and perform such
other duties as the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may,
from time to time, direct.
a. The position of DCA Control Person is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform such duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Tax Assessor is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform all duties as
prescribed by the statutes of the State of New Jersey and perform such
other duties as the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may,
from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Public Safety Telecommunicator Operator is hereby
established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief of Police and the Municipal Administrator and shall perform
such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to time, direct.
§ 26-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-42
AO:411
§ 26-42. EQUIPMENT OPERATOR-STREETS. [1972 Code § 18-58;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-43. ASSISTANT MUNICIPAL TAX COLLECTOR. [1972 Code
§ 18-60; Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1594-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-44. BUILDING MAINTENANCE WORKER. [1972 Code § 18-61;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1621-93; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-45. COURT ATTENDANT. [1972 Code § 18-62; Ord. No. 888;
Ord. No. 1642-94; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-46. SECRETARY, BOARD/COMMISSION. [1972 Code § 18-63;
Ord. No. 888; Ord. No. 1642-94; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
a. The position of Equipment Operator-Streets is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Public Works Superintendent and the Municipal Administrator,
and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time
to time, direct.
a. The position of Assistant Municipal Tax Collector is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Tax Collector, and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
a. The position of Building Maintenance Worker is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Municipal Clerk and the Municipal Administrator, and shall
perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Court Attendant is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform such work as shall
be assigned by the Municipal Judge and perform such other duties as
the Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to
time, direct and in conformity with the Administrative Office of the
Courts.
a. The position of Secretary, Board/Commission is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall perform such work as shall
be assigned by the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment and the
Chairperson of the Planning Board and perform such other duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
§ 26-42 MANASQUAN CODE § 26-47
AO:412
§ 26-47. SEWER SUPERINTENDENT. [1972 Code § 18-64; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1666-95; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-48. WATER SUPERINTENDENT. [1972 Code § 18-65; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1666-95; Ord. No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-49. WATER/SEWER COLLECTOR. [Ord. No. 1714-96 § 1; Ord.
No. 1798-99 § 3]
§ 26-50. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. [1972 Code § 18-2; Ord.
No. 888; Ord. No. 1042; Ord. No. 1757-98; Ord. No. 1798-99]
§ 26-51. CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL. [1972 Code § 18-2; Ord. No.
888; Ord. No. 1042; Ord. No. 1757-98; Ord. No. 1798-99]
a. The position of Sewer Superintendent is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Municipal Administrator
and perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to
time, direct.
a. The position of Water Superintendent is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Municipal Administrator
and perform such duties as the Mayor and Council may, from time to
time, direct.
a. The position of Water/Sewer Collector is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall work under the supervision
of the Chief Financial Officer and shall perform such duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Code Enforcement Officer is established.
b. The duties of this office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances in the
Municipality pertaining to zoning, housing and such duties as the
Mayor and Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time,
direct.
a. The position of Construction Official is established.
b. The duties of this office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances of the
Municipality and the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to
construction codes and related matters.
c. The Construction Official shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council or Municipal Administrator may, from time to time, direct.
§ 26-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-52
AO:413
§ 26-52. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/ZONING OFFICER. [Ord.
No. 1772-98 § 1]
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
STORMWATER REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: See Chapter 32, Section 32-17 for additional
Stormwater Management Regulations.
§ 28-1. STORMWATER DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS ON REAL
PROPERTY.71
§ 28-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2043-08 § 2]
This section is enacted to support the goals of the stormwater management
best practices established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection ("NJDEP") for the purpose of maximizing the retention of water
on private property in order to: reduce runoff onto public streets; improve
percolation; reduce stormwater and sediment entering storm drains and
waterways; and to reduce standing water and ponding in public streets.
§ 28-1.2. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2043-08 § 3]
This section applies to all new construction or development, the expansion
of an existing building footprint by more than 500 square feet, or the
installation of an inground swimming pool, because such improvements
impact water runoff to neighboring properties, public streets and storm
drains, and displacement of ground water.
§ 28-1.3. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2043-08 § 4]
The general regulations established by this section are as follows:
a. The position of Code Enforcement Officer/Zoning Officer is hereby
established.
b. The duties of this office shall consist of enforcing all ordinances
pertaining to zoning, housing and related matters.
c. The person employed in this position shall perform such duties as the
Mayor and Council may, from time to time, direct.
a. The basement or crawl space floor level of any new structure, or the
basement or crawl space floor level of an expansion of an existing
structure by more than 500 square feet, or the lowest base point of an
71.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2007-07.
§ 26-52 MANASQUAN CODE § 28-1.3
AO:414
Chapter 29
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1972
Code §§ 67-1 -67-19 and Ordinance Nos. 1066, 1289, 1404 and
1577-92.
§ 29-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 29-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
inground swimming pool, must be at least one foot above the seasonal
high groundwater level as certified by a professional engineer. The
certification shall be based on soil borings and other recognized criteria
used to determine seasonal high groundwater levels.
b. No sump pump outlet shall drain or be pumped directly or indirectly
onto a sidewalk or public street. A sump pump outlet must be
terminated within the area of the lot on which it is located.
c. Irrigation sprinklers shall not discharge water onto a public street.
d. Curbs and driveway aprons shall be constructed pursuant to Section
20-3 of Chapter 20 (Streets and Sidewalks).
e. Concrete, asphalt and paver driveways must be crowned to direct the
flow of stormwater onto the lot on which the improvements are
constructed. There shall be no curb reveal at the edges of a driveway.
f. The lot must be graded so that stormwater does not flow onto
neighboring properties.
g. Water from a gutter, downspout or sump pump must be piped directly
into a drywell or seepage pit installed on the lot, except that this
provision shall not apply to properties in the R-4 Zone. The drywell or
seepage pit must be constructed to meet the following criteria:
1. The drywell or seepage pit system shall be designated to contain
stormwater runoff from one inch of precipitation in a twenty-fourhour
period.
2. No such water shall enter the municipal sanitary sewer system.
h. All drainage plans to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
this section must be submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to the
issuance of a construction permit.
§ 28-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-1.1
AO:415
of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of the Borough of Manasquan,
of Monmouth County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 29-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
§ 29-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 1]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 29-2. METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Manasquan are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 29-1.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-2
AO:416
§ 29-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2141-13; Ord.
No. 2159-14 § 1]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD — Shall mean
the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe
flood related erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation of the special flood
related erosion hazard area will be designated a Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 29-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-3
AO:417
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — Shall mean an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
CRITICAL FACILITIES — Shall mean facilities that are designed as facilities
that are vital to flood response activities or critical to the health and safety
of the public before, during, and after a flood or facilities that, if flooded,
would make the flood problem and its impacts much worse.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure
that equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure at the time
of the improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in a coastal high hazard area to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated
above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters. In areas of coastal high hazard
"elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — Shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of
landmasses.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
§ 29-3 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-3
AO:418
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of, historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 29-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-3
AO:419
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — Shall mean a continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
§ 29-3 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-3
AO:420
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 40% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related
damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during
a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, modification, addition, or other improvement of a structure
during a ten-year period the cost which exceeds 40% of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
Substantial improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement"
for the last 10 years prior to the issuance of a building permit for such
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed or
"repetitive loss." The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 29-4. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 29-4.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2054-09
§ 2]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Manasquan, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 29-5. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Manasquan,
Community No. 345303, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 25, 2009.
§ 29-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-5
AO:421
§ 29-6. PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $2,500 or imprisoned for not more than 10 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of
Manasquan from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Borough of Manasquan from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 29-7. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 29-8. INTERPRETATION. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
25, 2009.
2. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34025CO343F,
34025C0456F; whose effective date is September 25, 2009.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
201 East Main Street, Manasquan, New Jersey 08736.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 29-5 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-9
AO:422
§ 29-9. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Manasquan, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 29-10. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 29-10.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2054-09
§ 2]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 29-5.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 29-10.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 29-12.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 29-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-10.3
AO:423
§ 29-10.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord.
No. 2054-09 § 2]
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
§ 29-10.4. Permit Review. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
§ 29-10.5. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 29-5, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special
Flood Hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer subsections 29-12.2a, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 29-12.2b, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
§ 29-10.6. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained. [Ord. No.
2054-09 § 2]
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
d. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed development
alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood damage.
e. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood
level in accordance with subsection 29-12.3b4.
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection
29-10.1c.
§ 29-10.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-10.6
AO:424
§ 29-10.7. Alterations of Watercourses. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
§ 29-10.8. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. [Ord. No. 2054-09
§ 2]
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
section 29-11.
§ 29-11. VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
§ 29-11.1. Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
c. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
subsection 29-12.3b and subsection 29-12.3b2(a) and (b) are met.
d. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control section and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
a. The Planning Board as established by the Borough of Manasquan shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
b. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Construction Official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
c. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as provided in by law.
d. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
§ 29-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-11.1
AO:425
§ 29-11.2. Conditions for Variances. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program of that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
e. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 29-11.1d and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
f. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1-11) in
subsection 29-11.1d have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
§ 29-11.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-11.2
AO:426
§ 29-12. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 29-12.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2159
§ 2]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. Showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in subsection 29-11.1d, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
§ 29-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-12.1
AO:427
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements haying fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 29-12.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-12.1
AO:428
§ 29-12.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2159
§ 3; Ord. No. 2211-2016]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 29-5, Basis for Establishing the Areas
of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 29-10.5, Use of Other Base Flood
Data, the following standards are required:
f. Fill. All new buildings constructed on fill in the regulatory flood plain
must be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill that
meets the criteria of Section 1803.58 and Section 1804.4 of the
International Building Code and must be on fill that has appropriate
protection from erosion and scour.
g. Drainage. All new construction must provide positive drainage away
from the building site in accordance with Section 1803.3 and Section
1805 of the International Building Code.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to one
foot above the NJ Flood Hazard Area Design Flood elevation, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:13.
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall:
1. Either have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to the level of the
base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
§ 29-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-12.2
AO:429
§ 29-12.3. Coastal High Hazard Area. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas of
special flood hazard established in Section 29-5. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and
hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 29-10.6b2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 29-12.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
d. Critical Facilities. New critical facilities shall not be permitted within
the 500-year floodplain.
a. Location of Structures.
1. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
2. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision.
b. Construction Methods.
1. Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
piling or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level, with
all space below the lowest floor's supporting member open so as
not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as
provided or in subsection 29-12.3b4.
2. Structural Support.
§ 29-12.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 29-12.3
AO:430
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence
interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
3. Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of subsection
29-12.3b1 and 29-12.3b2(a) and (b).
4. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or State codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
(1) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood and,
(2) The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable State or local building standards.
§ 29-12.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-12.3
AO:431
§ 29-12.4. Sand Dunes. [Ord. No. 2054-09 § 2]
Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones VE and V on the
community's DFIRM which would increase potential flood damage.
Chapter 30
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
§ 30-1. SOIL AND EXCAVATION.
§ 30-1.1. Permit Required. [1972 Code § 90-1; Ord. No. 1038]
Except as set forth in subsection 30-1.7, any person, firm, association or
corporation which excavates, removes, fills or grades any soil or sand in
the Borough shall obtain a permit prior to commencing such activity in the
manner set forth in subsection 30-1.2.
§ 30-1.2. Application; Fee. [1972 Code § 90-2; Ord. No. 1038; Ord.
No. 2180-15]
Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to obtain a permit
as required by subsection 30-1.1 shall make application for the permit on
a form provided by the Construction Code Official of the Borough. The
application is to be submitted to the Construction Code Official, together
with a fee and a map showing existing and proposed contours and
elevations of the premises upon which the work is to be performed as well
as the existing contours of all premises within a radius of 200 feet of the lot
lines of the premises upon which the work is to be performed. The fee for
such application and permit shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
§ 30-1.3. Review by Engineer. [1972 Code § 90-3; Ord. No. 1038]
The application and map shall be referred to by the Construction Code
Official to the Borough Engineer. In arriving at a decision as to whether a
permit shall be granted, the Engineer shall be guided by considerations of
public health, safety and general welfare and, in particular, the following
factors:
(3) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall
be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage and not for human habitation.
(4) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must
be submitted to the construction official for approval.
a. Erosion by water and wind.
b. Drainage.
c. Grades and elevations of adjoining streets and lands.
§ 29-12.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 30-1.3
AO:432
§ 30-1.4. Denial of Permit. [1972 Code § 90-4; Ord. No. 1038]
The Borough Engineer shall instruct the Construction Code Official to deny
the permit under the following circumstances:
§ 30-1.5. Issuance of Permit. [1972 Code § 90-5; Ord. No. 1038]
If, after examining the application and the map required to be filed, the
Borough Engineer shall be of the opinion that the proposed work will not
create any condition for which a permit could be denied under subsection
30-1.4, he shall instruct the Construction Code Official to issue a permit for
the work. The Borough Engineer shall have the authority to impose such
terms and conditions upon the issuance of the permit as may be necessary
to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and to ensure that no
work is done which will create any of the conditions for which a permit
could be denied under Section 30-1.4.
d. Effect of the excavation removal or fill upon nearby lands and values
and uses of other lands as affected by such work and land values and
uses of lands to be excavated or filled from which materials are to be
removed or added.
e. Lateral support of public streets, roads and highways and of adjoining
properties.
f. Grades, elevations and depths to be excavated or filled so that the lands
after excavation or fill shall be generally level and no stagnant water
will remain.
g. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
a. The applicant proposes to remove any sand or sand dune which is
located east of First Avenue.
b. The proposed work shall endanger or damage any adjacent property,
including public streets, sidewalks, alleys or rights-of-way.
c. The proposed work shall adversely affect existing drainage conditions
on any adjacent property, including public streets, sidewalks, alleys or
rights-of-way.
d. The proposed work shall substantially increase the natural flow of
surface or subterranean waters on any adjacent property, including
public streets, sidewalks, alleys or rights-of-way.
e. The proposed work will create any condition which is inimical to public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 30-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-1.6
AO:433
§ 30-1.6. Performance Bond Required. [1972 Code § 90-6; Ord. No.
1038]
Before any permit for excavation, removal, filling or grading shall be
granted, the owner of the premises or applicant shall file with the Borough
Engineer a bond in form acceptable to the Borough Attorney and with a
surety licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey in such amount
as, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, shall be sufficient to indemnify
the Borough from any failure of the holder of the permit to comply with the
provisions hereof.
§ 30-1.7. Exemptions from Permit and Bond Requirements. [1972
Code § 90-7; Ord. No. 1038]
§ 30-1.8. Municipal Soil Bank. [1972 Code § 90-8; Ord. No. 1038]
As soon as is practicable after the adoption of this section, the Borough
Engineer shall designate an area which can be utilized for the depositing
and storing of excess soil or sand. Any property owner within the Borough
who wants to dispose of any soil or sand at that site shall first obtain written
permission from the Construction Code Official. The Borough Engineer
may authorize the use of any soil or sand so deposited either by the
Borough or any property owner of the Borough in such a manner as the
Borough Engineer, in his absolute discretion, shall deem appropriate. It
is the intention of this provision to create a municipal soil bank so as to
encourage the retention of soil and sand within the Borough and to make
such soil and sand available for reuse to the benefit of the Borough and its
property owners.
a. A permit and performance bond shall not be required to be obtained in
the following instances:
1. Excavation, removal, filling or grading of less than 50 cubic yards
of soil or sand.
2. Work performed in accordance with a validly issued construction
permit.
3. Work performed in accordance with a subdivision or site plan
approved by the Planning Board.
b. Although a permit or performance bond shall not be required in the
above instances, all work shall be performed in such a manner so as not
to create any condition for which a permit can be denied under
subsection 30-1.4, hereof. It is the intention of this provision to create
an exemption of permit and bond requirements for certain categories of
work as specified herein. However, all excavation, removal, filling or
grading of soil and sand in the Borough must be performed in
accordance with the terms, standards and criteria set forth in this
section.
§ 30-1.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 30-1.8
AO:434
Chapter 31
PLANNING BOARD
Planning Board Established
§ 31-1. ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION. [Ord. No. 1732-97
§ 73-1]
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq. a Planning
Board of nine members consisting of the following four classes:
§ 31-2. ALTERNATE MEMBERS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-2; Ord. No.
1141-00 § 1]
a. Class I: The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
b. Class II: One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the Governing Body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
c. Class III: A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
d. Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Historic Preservation
Commission and one member may be a member of the Board of
Education. If there be a Municipal Environmental Commission, the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board, as required by N.J.S. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there be a member of the Historic
Preservation Commission and a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member common to the Planning Board and Municipal
Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the
Planning Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on a
municipal board or commission whose function is advisory in nature,
and the establishment of which is discretionary and not required by
Statute, shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
a. There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1 four
alternate members of the Planning Board. Alternate members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, and shall meet qualifications of Class IV
members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2,"
"Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate
members shall be such that the term of not more than two alternate
members shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no
instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only.
§ 30-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-2
AO:435
§ 31-3. TERMS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-3]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with the
Mayor's official tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members composing
Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion
of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a
Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission.
The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first. The term of a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is
no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class
IV term, whichever occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first
appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the
expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first four years
after their appointment; provided, however, that no term of any member
shall exceed four years. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed
for terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 31-4. VACANCIES. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-4]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
§ 31-5. ORGANIZATION. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-5]
The Planning Board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee.
§ 31-6. ATTORNEY. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-6]
There is hereby created the Office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and establish the compensation of or agree
upon the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be
an attorney other than the municipal attorney.
b. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
§ 31-2 MANASQUAN CODE § 31-7
AO:436
§ 31-7. EXPERTS AND STAFF. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-7]
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Governing Body for its use.
§ 31-8. POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY. [Ord. No. 1732-97
§ 73-8]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. To make, adopt and from time to time amend a master plan for the
physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside its
boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the Borough, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.
40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the land subdivision ordinance and site
plan review ordinance of the Borough in accordance with the provisions
of said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
c. To exercise, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions, all
powers of a Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq., but the Class I and
Class III members shall not participate in the consideration of
applications for development which involve relief pursuant to
subsection d of N.J.S. 40:55D-70.
d. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
e. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
f. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the Governing Body.
g. To consider and make report to the Governing Body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
Governing Body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-26b.
h. To perform such other advisory duties are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or officers.
§ 31-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-9
AO:437
§ 31-9. TIME LIMITS FOR DECISIONS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-9]
The Planning Board shall grant or deny development approvals within the
time periods established in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et
sq.
§ 31-10. PROCEDURE FOR FILING APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No.
1732-97 § 73-10]
Development applications shall be filed with the secretary of the Planning
Board. The applicant shall file, at least 21 days before the date of the
meeting of the Board 15 copies of development applications, maps and
other required documents. At the time of filing the application, but in no
event less than 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall
also file all plot plans, maps and other documents required by virtue of any
provisions of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant
shall obtain all necessary forms from the secretary of the Planning Board.
The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be
taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 31-11. CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE. [Ord. No. 1732-97
§ 73-11]
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 31-12. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION. [Ord. No. 1732-97
§ 73-12]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 31-13. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-13]
The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, N.J.S.
2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
§ 31-9 MANASQUAN CODE § 31-14
AO:438
§ 31-14. VOTING. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-14]
All actions of the Planning Board shall be taken in accordance with the
voting requirements as established in N.J.S. 40:55D-9a. When any hearing
before the Planning Board shall carry over two or more meetings, a member
of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings; provided,
however, that such Board member has available to him a transcript or
recording of the meeting from which he was absent and certifies, in writing,
to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 31-15. DISSOLUTION OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
[Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-15]
§ 31-16. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-16]
No member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter,
he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter nor
participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 31-17. MEETINGS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-17]
a. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is dissolved in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq., and
the Planning Board shall exercise to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions all of the powers formerly exercised by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
b. All references to the "Zoning Board," "Board of Adjustment" or "Zoning
Board of Adjustment" in any municipal ordinance are amended to refer
to the "Planning Board" except where such reference is clearly
inapplicable.
Provisions Applicable to the Planning Board
a. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled no less often than
once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to the Board's members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
§ 31-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-17
AO:439
§ 31-18. MINUTES. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-18; New]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
Office of the Board Secretary. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 31-19. FEES. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-19; Ord. No. 1788-99 § 1;
Ord. No. 1921-04 § 1; Ord. No. 1944-05 § 1; Ord. No. 1946-05 § 1;
Ord. No. 1995-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2180-15]
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S. 10:4-6 et seq.
a. Fees for the Review of Development Applications shall be as stated in
Chapter 16, Fees.
b. In addition to the application fees set forth above, the Planning Board
may charge the applicant an amount equal to the fee(s) which the Board
pays to an engineer, planner or attorney to review the development
application. If the Board determines that it is necessary to retain the
services of an engineer, planner or attorney to review the development
application, the applicant shall be required to pay an initial deposit and
such other additional deposits as may be required to offset these special
review costs incurred by the Board.
In the event any development application requires more than two
hearings, or should an applicant request and be granted a special
meeting date, the Planning Board shall charge the applicant the fee as
stated in Chapter 16, Fees for such meeting.
c. The amount of the initial deposit shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
d. The initial deposit shall be held in an escrow account to the credit of the
applicant and the Clerk of the Planning Board shall be responsible to
keep records to determine the special review costs attributable to each
application. The Clerk of the Planning Board shall, from time to time,
charge such special review costs against the escrow account of each
applicant. In the event it is determined that the initial deposit is
insufficient to cover such costs, the applicant shall deposit additional
§ 31-17 MANASQUAN CODE § 31-19
AO:440
§ 31-20. HEARINGS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-20]
funds to the account as determined by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall not be required to process the application or take
further action upon an application until such additional deposits are
made by the applicant. Any excess funds remaining after review of the
application shall be returned to the applicant.
e. At the time of the filing of the development application, the Planning
Board shall have the applicant sign an agreement consenting to pay
both the application fee and the special review costs incurred by the
Board. The agreement shall specifically state that in the event the fees
imposed by the Planning Board are not paid, any development
approvals granted by the Planning Board shall be considered null and
void. In the event that additional deposits requested by the Planning
Board remain unpaid for a period of 60 days, the development
application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and shall be dismissed
without prejudice.
f. The Planning Board shall have the authority to waive fees or special
review charges of any development applications made by bona fide
charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or other organizations
or associations which are operated on a nonprofit basis. The production
of a certified copy of a certificate of incorporation, issued pursuant to
Title 15 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, shall be presumptive
evidence that the applicant is a nonprofit entity.
g. Tax Map Maintenance Fee.
1. The fees as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be paid by the
applicant at the time of filing a development application:
2. In the event that a development application is denied and the
application is no longer pending before the Planning Board, then
any portion of this fee which has not been expended for
maintaining the municipal tax map shall be refunded to the
applicant.
a. Rules. The Planning Board may make rules governing the conduct of
hearings before such body, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
or the provisions of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law,
N.J.S. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
§ 31-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-20
AO:441
§ 31-21. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR HEARING. [Ord. No.
1732-97 § 73-21]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-12.
§ 31-22. LIST OF PROPERTY OWNERS FURNISHED. [Ord. No.
1732-97 § 73-22; Ord. No. 2180-15]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-12, the Municipal Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon
payment of a fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, make and certify a list from
the current tax duplicate of the names and addresses of owners to whom an
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this chapter.
The applicant shall be entitled to rely on the validity of this list for a period
of 120 days. Thereafter, the applicant shall be responsible to determine if
any changes in ownership have occurred which affect the validity of the list
of property owners furnished by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
§ 31-23. DECISIONS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-23]
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, to his attorney,
without separate charge.
A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to all persons who have
requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by the Board for such
service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the Office of the
Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available
to any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same
manner as those established for copies of other public documents in the
municipality.
§ 31-20 MANASQUAN CODE § 31-24
AO:442
§ 31-24. PUBLICATION OF DECISION. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-24]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. The publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board, without separate charge to the applicant.
The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10
days of the date of any such decision.
§ 31-25. PAYMENT OF TAXES. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-25]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S. 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property, any approvals or other relief granted by the Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments
or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner
that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 31-26. EXPIRATION OF VARIANCE. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-26]
Any variance granted by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-70d
shall expire by limitation, unless such construction, alteration or use shall
have been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by
the variance or unless such use has actually been commenced within nine
months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of the
Planning Board; except, however, that the running of the period of limitation
herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the
decision of the Planning Board to the Governing Body or to a Court of
competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such appeal
or proceeding. Any construction commenced within the nine-month period
provided for in this section shall be completed within 18 months of the date
of entry of the judgment of the Planning Board; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation shall be tolled from the date of the filing
of the appeal from the decision of the Planning Board to the Governing Body
or to a Court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner
of such appeal or proceeding.
The Planning Board shall have the authority to extend the above provisions
for one additional nine-month period upon a developer making application
for such extension and paying an extension fee equal to fees established
under this chapter.
Technical Review Committee
§ 31-26A. TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE. [Ord. No. 2014-07
§ 2; Ord. No. 2180-15]
A Technical Review Committee is established for the purpose of examining
development applications to determine if an application constitutes a minor
§ 31-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-26A
AO:443
deviation from the municipal zoning ordinance. A as stated in Chapter
16, Fees, shall be imposed for services rendered by the Committee. This
fee must be paid prior to the Committee commencing its review. In the
event the Committee approves a development application for expedited
processing, the fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be assessed in
addition to application fees established under Section 31-19. If the
Committee determines that a development application is not eligible for
expedited processing, the fee shall be credited against other fees or
deposits required under Section 31-19. It is the intention of the provision
that this fee shall be imposed only when a development application is
determined to be eligible for expedited processing.
Appeals
§ 31-27. APPEAL TO GOVERNING BODY OF CERTAIN DECISIONS
OF THE PLANNING BOARD. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-27]
Any interested party may appeal to the Borough Council any final decision
of the Planning Board approving an application pursuant to N.J.S.
40:55D-70d. The appeal shall be made, pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-17, within
10 days of the publication of the final decision of the Planning Board.
§ 31-28. ALL OTHER DECISIONS OF PLANNING BOARD. [Ord. No.
1732-97 § 73-28]
All other decisions of the Planning Board shall be deemed final and shall not
be appealable to the Borough Council.
§ 31-29. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-29]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in N.J.S. 40:55D-1
et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 31-30. REPEALER. [Ord. No. 1732-97 § 73-30]
All sections of the land subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinances, site plan
review ordinance or any other ordinance of the municipality which contain
provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby
repealed but only to the extent of such inconsistency.
Chapter 32
LAND SUBDIVISION
§ 32-1. TITLE.
§ 31-26A MANASQUAN CODE § 32-1.1
AO:444
§ 32-1.1. Short Title. [1972 Code § 95-1; Ord. No. 1098]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Regulations of the Borough of Manasquan."
§ 32-2. PURPOSE. [1972 Code § 95-2; Ord. No. 1098]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Borough of Manasquan, in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the municipality. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth
and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 32-3. APPROVING AGENCY.
§ 32-3.1. Agency Designated. [1972 Code § 95-3; Ord. No. 1098]
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Planning Board of the Borough of Manasquan in accordance with Chapter
291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975.72
§ 32-4. INTERPRETATION AND VARIANCES.
§ 32-4.1. Interpretation; Variances Authorized. [1972 Code § 95-4;
Ord. No. 1098]
The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken
by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to such matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit
such variances as may be reasonable, within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 32-5. DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF
OCCUPANCY.
§ 32-5.1. Installation of Improvements Required. [1972 Code § 95-5;
Ord. No. 1098]
No development permit or development certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless all improvements required by this chapter have been
installed, except as noted in Section 32-6.
72.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-6
AO:445
§ 32-6. EXCEPTIONS TO INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
REQUIREMENT.
§ 32-6.1. Exceptions; Issuance of Temporary Permits and
Certificates. [1972 Code § 95-6; Ord. No. 1098]
§ 32-7. DEFINITIONS. [1972 Code § 95-7; Ord. No. 1098; Ord. No.
1940-04 § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Shall mean a developer submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for the approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board of the
municipality, unless a different agency is designated by this chapter or State
Statute.
CURB GRADE — Shall mean the established elevation of the curb in front
of the building, measured at the center of such front. Where no curb grade
has been established, the Borough shall establish such curb level or its
equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or
of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of
a. A development permit or development certificate of occupancy may be
issued if all improvements have been installed except the finish course
of the road and the Borough Engineer warrants that completion of the
road is in the Borough's interest after the subdivider has completed
construction of dwellings and structures. The maintenance guaranty
required hereafter shall not begin until the finish course has been
installed.
b. The Planning Board may also authorize the issuance of a temporary
certificate or permit if the following improvements have been bonded
but not yet installed: landscaping, sidewalks or other similar
improvements. Prior to the issuance of more than 50% of the
development certificates of occupancy for a subdivision, all
improvements shall have been constructed or installed.
§ 32-6 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-7
AO:446
any building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this act.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the Planning Board
taken on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been completed
or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — Shall mean the final map of all or a portion of the subdivision
which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
County Recording Officer.
GRADE — Shall mean a reference plan representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the completed area contained within the lot lines,
but not including any street rights-of-way.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean the distance measured along the major
street line of a lot when the sidelines of the lot are at right angles to the
street; and when the side lines are not at right angles to the street, the
distance shall be measured across said lot at right angles to either side line,
provided that the width of a lot shall not be less than the minimum frontage
required for the particular zone in which the lot is located.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Shall mean the line separating the lot from a street.
LOT LINE, REAR — Shall mean the lot line or lines opposite the most distant
from the front lot line.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between
the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — Shall mean a lot bounded by two or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT, DEPTH — Shall mean the main distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — Shall mean any lot other than a comer lot.
LOT, IRREGULAR — Shall mean any lot in the shape of a rectangle.
§ 32-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-7
AO:447
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean all subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of one or more written or
graphic proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth in
and adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.73
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision of land that does not
involve the creation of more than two lots fronting on an existing street;
planned development; any new street; or extension of any off-tract
improvement and that does not adversely affect the development of the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map adopted in accordance with Article 5
of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.74
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Shall mean any security which may be
accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before
the Planning Board or other approving body approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area of land, controlled
by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of specified
uses, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of
dwelling or commercial use, density, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one or more districts created in the
Zoning Ordinance.75
PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board established pursuant
to Chapter 291 of the New Jersey Public Laws of 1975.76
PLAT — Shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — Shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision.
SKETCH PLAT — Shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and
meeting the requirements of subsection 32-13.1a of this chapter.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway; which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law; which is approved by official action as provided by this act; or which
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See Chapter 35, Zoning.
76.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32-7 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-7
AO:448
is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, "streets"
shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this act if no new streets are created: divisions of land found
by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the
Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are
five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testmentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon Court order; and conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument. The term "subdivision"
shall also include the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee of at least three
Planning Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be
conferred on this Committee by the Board.
VARIANCE — Shall mean permission to depart from the literal requirements
of this chapter pursuant to the conditions set forth in Section 32-4.
WETLANDS — Shall mean coastal marshlands designated as wetlands
pursuant to the Wetlands Act of 1970 (P.L. 1970, c. 272, N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et
seq.).
§ 32-8. SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION.
ARTERIAL STREETS — shall mean those which are used primarily for
fast or heavy traffic.
a.
COLLECTOR STREETS — shall mean those which carry traffic from
minor streets to the major system or arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
b.
MINOR STREETS — shall mean those which are used primarily for
access to the abutting properties.
c.
ALLEYS — shall mean minor ways which are used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
d.
§ 32-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-8.1
AO:449
§ 32-8.1. General Procedure. [1972 Code § 95-8; Ord. No. 1098]
Any applicant wishing to subdivide or resubdivide land within the Borough
of Manasquan shall apply for and obtain the approval of the Planning Board
in accordance with the following procedure. The applicant or his agent
shall appear at all regular meetings of the Planning Board wherever the
application is being considered. Failure to appear shall give the Planning
Board the right to postpone action on the application for that particular
meeting if applicant's or his agent's absence deprives the Planning Board of
information necessary to make a decision.
§ 32-8.2. Preapplication Conference. [1972 Code § 95-9; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 32-8.3. Submission of Sketch Plat. [1972 Code § 95-10; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 1226]
An applicant for the subdivision of land shall submit to the Secretary of
the Planning Board an application for subdivision, the required application
fee as specified herein, 10 copies of a sketch plat and other engineering
documents of the proposed subdivision at least 21 days prior to a regular
meeting of the Planning Board.
§ 32-8.4. Review and Classification. [1972 Code § 95-11; Ord. No.
1098]
The Planning Board or its Secretary shall determine if the application is
complete and, if not, inform the applicant of any deficiencies. The Planning
Board shall review the plat prior to the Planning Board meeting and classify
it as a minor or major subdivision. Subdivisions failing to receive a
unanimous vote as a minor exempt subdivision shall be considered a major
subdivision. No plat shall be classified as a minor subdivision if it results
in any remaining lands capable of being resubdivided into one or more
building lots. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision, a notation to
that effect will be made on the sketch plat.
§ 32-8.5. Distribution of Copies. [1972 Code § 95-12; Ord. No. 1098]
a. Applicants for subdivision approval may attend a preapplication
conference prior to submitting any application for subdivision. The fee
for a preapplication conference shall be as stated in Chapter 16, Fees.
The conference shall be designed to assist applicants in the expeditious
processing of all applications and to provide for a mutual exchange of
information. Applicants shall be informed of special problems or
proposals relating to a particular site.
b. Brief minutes of the preapplication conference shall be kept and
distributed to all Planning Board members.
§ 32-8.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-8.5
AO:450
§ 32-8.6. Final Action. [1972 Code § 95-13; Ord. No. 1098]
Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied by the Planning
Board within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete application
to the Planning Board Secretary or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. The Planning Board shall not approve or
conditionally approve the minor subdivision prior to receipt of comments
by the above agencies or officials until 30 days has elapsed from referral
without any comments. If approved, a notation to that effect shall be made
on the plat, and it shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairman and the
Planning Board Secretary and returned to the subdivider within one week
following the next regular meeting of the Planning Board. If rejected, the
reasons for rejection shall be noted on all copies of the application form, one
of which shall be returned to the applicant. The Planning Board may attach
conditions of approval to any minor subdivision.
§ 32-8.7. Filing of Plat or Deed. [1972 Code § 95-14; Ord. No. 1098]
If approved as a minor subdivision, a plat drawn in compliance with Chapter
141 of the Laws of 1960 or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision stamped or signed and dated by the Planning Board Chairman
and Secretary shall be filed with the County Recording Officer within 190
days from the date of approval. Failure to file within 190 days shall void the
subdivision approval.77
a. If classified as a minor subdivision, two copies of the plat shall be
retained by the Board, and copies of the plat shall be forwarded to the
following for review and comment:
1. Borough Engineer.
2. County Planning Board.
3. Borough Health Officer.
4. Borough Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
5. Borough Tax Assessor.
6. Borough Tax Collector.
7. Environmental Commission.
8. Borough Shade Tree Commission.
b. The applicant shall be responsible for forwarding copies of all plats and
required exhibits to the County Planning Board and should furnish a
receipt indicating the delivery to the Borough and County Planning
Board.
77.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9.
§ 32-8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-8.8
AO:451
§ 32-8.8. Resulting Lots Not to Be Resubmitted as Minor
Subdivision. [1972 Code § 95-15; Ord. No. 1098]
Any lands, lots or parcels resulting from a minor subdivision shall not be
resubmitted as a minor subdivision.
§ 32-8.9. Certificate of Filing; Distribution of Approved Plat. [1972
Code § 95-16; Ord. No. 1098]
Before the Planning Board Secretary returns any approved minor
subdivision to the subdivider, the applicant shall provide the Secretary
with a certificate of filing from the County Clerk's Office. The Secretary
shall distribute copies of the approved subdivision to the agencies listed in
subsection 32-8.5a.
§ 32-8.10. Effect of Approval. [1972 Code § 95-17; Ord. No. 1098]
The granting of minor subdivision approval shall guarantee that the zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted shall not
be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor subdivision
approval, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been
duly recorded as provided herein.
§ 32-9. (RESERVED)
§ 32-10. PRELIMINARY APPROVAL PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 32-10.1. Submission of Preliminary Plat; Application; Fee. [1972
Code § 95-18; Ord. No. 1098; Ord. No. 1226]
At least 10 black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat, together with three
completed application forms for preliminary approval, and all fees shall be
submitted to the Planning Board Secretary 21 days prior to the Planning
Board meeting at which consideration is desired.
§ 32-10.2. Exhibits Required with Preliminary Plat. [1972 Code
§ 95-19; Ord. No. 1098]
The following exhibits shall be filed with all preliminary plats:
a. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or a letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
b. Two copies of a letter of intent stating the following information, if
known:
1. Type of structure(s) to be erected.
2. Approximate date of start of construction.
§ 32-8.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-10.2
AO:452
§ 32-10.3. Distribution of Copies. [1972 Code § 95-20; Ord. No.
1098]
§ 32-10.4. Review Procedure. [1972 Code § 95-21; Ord. No. 1098]
The officials and agencies shall forward their views and recommendations
in writing to the Planning Board within 30 days from the receipt of the
plat. The preliminary plat should be referred to the Subdivision Committee
for review and recommendations. The Planning Board may recommend
certain changes based on its review and the comments of other officials and
agencies. A full report of all meetings, recommendations and discussions
shall be forwarded to the Planning Board within 30 days after receipt
of the plat by the Committee. If the application is found to be deficient,
the applicant shall be notified within 45 days of submission, and such
notification shall constitute a rejection of the application.
§ 32-10.5. Scheduling of Public Hearing. [1972 Code § 95-22; Ord.
No. 1098]
After all comments have been received or after 30 days have elapsed and
after the applicant has revised the plat to meet required changes, the
Planning Board shall, after a review of the plat and if all requirements are
3. Priority of construction (point or location), if appropriate.
4. A tentative section plan for the entire subdivision indicating all
facilities, including the estimated number of lots on which final
approval will be requested for the first section.
5. Other information as may be required by this chapter.
a. Copies of the preliminary plat and exhibits shall be forwarded
immediately upon receipt to the following persons or agencies:
1. Borough Engineer.
2. Borough Health Officer.
3. Borough Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
4. County Planning Board.
5. Environmental Commission.
6. Borough Tax Collector.
7. Borough Tax Assessor.
8. Borough Shade Tree Commission.
b. The applicant shall be responsible for forwarding all preliminary plans
and exhibits to the County Planning Board and other required agencies
set forth hereunder.
§ 32-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-10.5
AO:453
met and the application is complete, set the date for the public hearing and
shall notify the subdivider of such date.
§ 32-10.6. Notice to Property Owners. [1972 Code § 95-23; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 2180-15]
The applicant shall give notice to the owners of all real property, as shown
on the current tax duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property that is the subject of the hearing, by serving a copy thereof on
each such owner or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a
copy thereof by certified mail to each such owner at his address as shown
on the tax duplicate. Notice to a partnership owner may be given to any
partner, and notice to a corporate owner may be given to its president, a
vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. The Tax Assessor shall,
within seven days after written request by applicant, make and certify a list
from the current tax duplicate of the names and addresses of the property
owners entitled to notice as aforesaid, and a fee as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees, shall be charged for the list. The applicant shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 32-10.7. Contents of Notice. [1972 Code § 95-24; Ord. No. 1098]
The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature
of the matters to be considered and the location and times at which any
maps and documents proposed or for which approval is sought are available
in the Office of the Planning Board Secretary. In addition, the notice shall
contain an identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the
current tax duplicate in the Municipal Assessor's Office. Also, notice of
any application shall include reference to all requests made in conjunction
therewith.
§ 32-10.8. Publication of Notice. [1972 Code § 95-25; Ord. No. 1098]
The applicant shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
§ 32-10.9. Notice to Adjoining Municipalities. [1972 Code § 95-26;
Ord. No. 1098]
Notice shall also be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk
of any adjoining municipality for an application involving property located
within 200 feet of such municipality.
§ 32-10.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-10.10
AO:454
§ 32-10.10. Notice to County Planning Board. [1972 Code § 95-27;
Ord. No. 1098]
Notice shall also be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board for development of property adjacent to an existing County
road or a proposed road shown on the Official County Map or County Master
Plan or property adjoining other County land or property situated within
200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 32-10.11. Notice to Commissioner of Transportation. [1972 Code
§ 95-28; Ord. No. 1098]
Notice shall also be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation in cases of applications for development of
property adjacent to a State highway.
§ 32-10.12. Required Submissions Prior to Public Hearing. [1972
Code § 95-29; Ord. No. 1098]
The following shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the applicant:
§ 32-10.13. Time Limits for Action. [1972 Code § 95-30; Ord. No.
1098]
Preliminary approval shall be granted or denied on applications to the
Planning Board for a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots within 45 days,
and for a major subdivision of more than 10 lots within 95 days, after
the date of submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
§ 32-10.14. Actions Required; Notification of Applicants; Required
Resubmissions. [1972 Code § 95-31; Ord. No. 1098]
a. Notice and Proof of Publication. Proof of compliance with this section
shall be done by affidavit of the applicant duly supported by proof of
publication from the newspaper used to advertise the hearing.
b. Affidavit. Affidavit of notice of public hearing to persons and agencies
served, giving a list of the names, addresses and lot and block numbers
of owners so notified, how served, date of service and a copy of the
notice and mail receipt.
a. The Planning Board shall act on the plat within the applicable time
period set forth in this chapter. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the applicable time period or within a time extension mutually
agreed upon shall be considered an approval. If the Planning Board
disapproves a plat, the reasons for the disapproval shall be
communicated in writing to the applicant within 10 days of the date of
the decision and advertised as required by this chapter. No action shall
§ 32-10.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-10.14
AO:455
§ 32-10.15. Actions of Planning Board. [1972 Code § 95-32; Ord. No.
1098]
§ 32-10.16. Extensions of Approval Period. [1972 Code § 95-33; Ord.
No. 1098]
The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant extensions
on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year, but
not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design
standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may
govern.
be taken until receipt of County Planning Board review or until 30 days
have elapsed from date of referral to the County Board.
b. If substantial changes or amendments are required, such as changes to
the drainage and circulation pattern, lot configuration or number of
lots, as a result of the public hearing or of the Planning Board
deliberations, the applicant may be required to resubmit the plat for
preliminary approval.
a. The Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the
application. Approval or conditional approval confers upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
approval or conditional approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
b. If either the Planning Board or County Planning Board disapproves a
plat, the reason for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. If approval is required by any other officer or public
body, the same procedure as applies to submission to and approval by
the County Planning Board shall apply. The Planning Board may grant
conditional approval subject to the subsequent approval of other
officers or public bodies.
§ 32-10.14 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-10.17
AO:456
§ 32-10.17. Conditional Approval Pending Action by County
Planning Board. [1972 Code § 95-34; Ord. No. 1098]
Whenever review or approval of any application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.3, 40:27-6.6), the municipal agency shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application
by the County Planning Board or upon County Planning Board approval by
default for failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§ 32-10.18. Decisions to Be in Writing; Required Contents. [1972
Code § 95-35; Ord. No. 1098]
Each decision of a municipal agency on any subdivision application shall be
in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.
§ 32-10.19. Copies of Decision to Be Furnished to Applicant. [1972
Code § 95-36; Ord. No. 1098]
A copy of each decision shall be mailed by the Planning Board, within 10
days after the date of decision, to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his attorney, without separate charge, and to all others upon request, for a
reasonable fee.
§ 32-10.20. Filing of Decisions. [1972 Code § 95-37; Ord. No. 1098]
A copy of each decision shall also be filed by the municipal agency in the
Office of the Planning Board Secretary, who shall make a copy of the filed
decision available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and available
for public inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
§ 32-10.21. Publication of Decisions. [1972 Code § 95-36; Ord. No.
1098]
A brief notice of each decision shall be published by the Planning Board
Secretary, and the municipality may make a reasonable charge for such
publication. The applicant also may cause such publication to be made if he
so desires. The time for approval from the decision shall run from the first
publication, whether made by the administrative officer or the applicant.
§ 32-11. (RESERVED)
§ 32-12. FINAL APPROVAL PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 32-12.1. Submission Procedure. [1972 Code § 95-39; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 1226]
a. The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Board for final
approval within three years from the date of preliminary plan approval
or within such extension as provided herein. One original tracing, one
§ 32-10.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-12.1
AO:457
§ 32-12.2. Required Exhibits. [1972 Code § 95-40; Ord. No. 1098;
New]
The following exhibits shall accompany the application for final approval, in
addition to any other exhibits that may have been required by the Board as
a condition of final approval:
translucent cloth copy, two cloth prints and 10 black and white prints
with three copies of an application for final approval and the
appropriate fees as required in subsection 32-21.1 herein shall be
submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 21 days prior
to the regular meeting of the Planning Board.
b. Unless the preliminary plat was approved without changes, the final
plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required by
the Planning Board, including conditions of preliminary approval. The
applicant shall submit an affidavit indicating no changes or those
changes noted.
a. Borough Engineer. A letter from the Borough Engineer indicating:
1. The Engineer is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed
and those to be installed.
2. The subdivider has either completed the installation of all
improvements in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
or posted with the Municipal Clerk a performance guaranty in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements herein or
incompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Borough
Engineer, assuring the installation of such improvements on or
before an agreed date.
3. All items and amounts required for the corporate surety
maintenance guaranty.
4. The final plat conforms to the preliminary plat as submitted and
approved.
b. Tax Collector. A letter from the Tax Collector indicating that all taxes
and assessments for local improvements have been paid to date on the
property.
c. Clerk.
1. A letter from the Municipal Clerk indicating that the amount, form
and content of the maintenance guaranty have been accepted by
the Governing Body.
2. A letter from the Chief Financial Officer, where appropriate,
pursuant to this chapter, indicating that monies as provided therein
have been paid to the Borough as reimbursement for engineering
§ 32-12.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-12.2
AO:458
§ 32-12.3. Distribution of Copies. [1972 Code § 95-41; Ord. No.
1098; New]
Copies of the final plat shall be distributed to the following:
§ 32-12.4. Time Limitations; Failure to Act. [1972 Code § 95-42;
Ord. No. 1098]
Final approval of major subdivisions shall be granted or denied on
applications made to the Planning Board within 45 days after the date of
submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the Planning Board
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. If the
Planning Board approves the final plat, a notation to that effect shall be
made on each plat, signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable approval
and the Municipal Clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect.
§ 32-12.5. Action by County Planning Board. [1972 Code § 95-43;
Ord. No. 1098]
Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board for its
action. The Planning Board may grant final approval subject to approval by
the County Planning Board as provided in subsection 32-10.17.
§ 32-12.6. Filing with County Recording Officer Required. [1972
Code § 95-44; Ord. No. 1098]
The final plat approval shall be filed by the subdivider with the County
Recording Officer within 95 days from the date of such approval. If any final
plat is not filed within that period, the approval shall expire. For good cause,
the Planning Board may extend the time for the filing of the plat for an
additional period not to exceed 95 days. No plat shall be accepted for filing
inspection costs of improvement construction or installation
incurred since preliminary approval.
a. Municipal Clerk.
b. Borough Engineer.
c. Borough Building Inspector.
d. Borough Tax Assessor.
e. County Planning Board.
f. Borough Fire Inspector.
g. Monmouth County Health Department.
h. Other municipal or County agencies or authorities as may be required.
§ 32-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-12.6
AO:459
by the Clerk of the County of Monmouth unless it has been duly approved
by the Borough of Manasquan Planning Board and signed by its Chairman
and Secretary.
§ 32-12.7. Effect of Final Approval. [1972 Code § 95-45; Ord. No.
1098]
The granting of final approval shall guarantee to the applicant that the
zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted
and all other rights conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
final approval, provided that these rights shall expire if the plat has not been
duly recorded within the prescribed time period.
§ 32-12.8. Extension of Approval Period. [1972 Code § 95-46; Ord.
No. 1098]
If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval
and has duly recorded the plat as required by this chapter, the Planning
Board may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year but
not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval for the section granted final approval.
§ 32-12.9. Decisions to Be in Writing; Required Contents. [1972
Code § 95-47; Ord. No. 1098]
Each decision of a municipal agency on any subdivision application shall be
in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.
§ 32-12.10. Copies of Decision to Be Furnished to Applicant. [1972
Code § 95-48; Ord. No. 1098]
A copy of each decision shall be mailed by the Planning Board agency,
within 10 days after the date of decision, to the applicant or, if represented,
then to his attorney, without separate charges, and to all others upon
request, for a reasonable fee.
§ 32-12.11. Filing of Decisions. [1972 Code § 95-49; Ord. No. 1098]
A copy of each decision shall also be filed by the municipal agency in the
Office of the Planning Board Secretary, who shall make a copy of the filed
decision available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and available
for public inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
§ 32-12.12. Publication of Decision. [1972 Code § 95-50; Ord. No.
1098]
A brief notice of each decision shall be published by the Planning Board
Secretary, and the municipality may make a reasonable charge for such
publication. The applicant also may cause such publication to be made if he
§ 32-12.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-12.12
AO:460
so desires. The time for appeal from the decision shall run from the first
publication, whether made by the administrative officer or the applicant.
§ 32-13. PLAT DETAILS.
§ 32-13.1. Information Required on Plats. [1972 Code § 95-51; Ord.
No. 1098]
a. Sketch Plat. The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base at a scale (preferable not less than
100 feet to the inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet
and shall show or include the following information:
1. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
2. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
3. The name of the owner and all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
4. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
5. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
b. Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn
or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
Preliminary plats shall be designated and drawn by a licensed (New
Jersey) land surveyor. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the
provisions of subsection 32-10.1 of this chapter and shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
1. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
2. The tract name; Tax Map sheet, block and lot number; date;
reference meridian; graphic scale; and the following names and
addresses:
(a) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(b) Name and address of the subdivider.
(c) Name and address of person who prepared map, with official
designation.
3. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
4. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope
and natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and
tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for all proposed
new streets, including any necessary drainage.
§ 32-12.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-13.1
AO:461
5. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes
and any natural features such as wooded areas, rock formations
and wetlands.
6. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas
and electricity), showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or
sewerage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such must be
approved by the appropriate local, County or State health agency.
Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements of this chapter or other applicable
regulations shall not be approved.
7. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
8. The plat shall show the base flood elevation for the property in
question as established by the Flood Hazard Boundary Map of the
Borough of Manasquan.
c. Final Plat.
1. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not
less than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all the
provisions of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960. The final plat shall
show or be accompanied by the following:78
(a) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
(b) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved
or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines with
accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves.
(c) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated and the proposed use of sites
other than residential shall be noted.
(d) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block
shall be numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1.
(e) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(f) Location and description of all monuments.
(g) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
78.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9.
§ 32-13.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-13.1
AO:462
§ 32-14. (RESERVED)
§ 32-15. DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS; RESERVATION OF PUBLIC
AREAS.
§ 32-15.1. Requirements and Principles. [1972 Code § 95-52; Ord.
No. 1098]
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
(h) Certification by a surveyor as to accuracy of details of the plat.
(i) Certification that the applicant is owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(j) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of
such a municipality, County or State, approval shall be certified
on the plat.
(k) Profiles and typical sections of streets approved by the
Municipal Engineer may be required to accompany the final
plat.
(l) Contours at five foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or
greater and at two foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
(m) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
a. Development Pattern. The subdivision plat shall conform to design
standards that will encourage the most appropriate development
pattern within the Borough.
b. Reservation of Public Areas. If the Master Plan or the Official Map
provides for the reservation of designated streets, public drainageways
or other public areas within the proposed development, before
approving a subdivision the Planning Board may further require that
such streets or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve the
location and extent of such streets, ways or public areas shown on the
plat for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat or for
such further time as may be agreed to by the developer. Unless during
such period or extension thereof the Borough shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according
to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such
streets, ways or public areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for
private use in accordance with applicable development regulations. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the subdivision
or land development and required for final approval.
§ 32-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-15.1
AO:463
§ 32-16. IMPROVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 32-16.1. Standards Established. [1972 Code § 95-54; Ord. No.
1098; New]
c. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation, provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include but not be limited to consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
a. Streets.
1. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets and, where necessary in order to
promote the orderly flow of traffic and for the safety, welfare and
convenience of the public, shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extensions to adjoining properties.
2. Minor streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
3. The right-of-way width shall be measured to the lot line and shall
not be less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(d) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily, commercial, industrial and planned unit
developments shall be determined on an individual basis and
shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design to safely
accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs
and maximum access for firefighting equipment.
(e) Cul-de-sac or dead-end turnarounds. Cul-de-sac or dead-end
turnarounds shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet in the
curb, right-of-way minimum of 50 feet and pavement width of
18 to 24 feet. Landscaped islands shall be provided where
required by the Planning Board.
§ 32-15.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-16.1
AO:464
4. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the Governing Body
under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
5. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of the road. If the
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated.
6. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades
on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
7. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at
intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a
radius of not less than 20 feet and shall have a clear sight triangle
of not less than 30 feet.
8. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
9. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
10. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves with a
rate of change not to exceed 4% per 10 feet of road.
11. Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 3% and
approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight course within
100 feet of the intersection.
12. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or nearly duplicate
so as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
13. Sidewalks. Sidewalks, where required, shall be a minimum of four
feet in width.
14. Traffic Signs and Control Devices. These improvements, such as
stop, yield and one-way signs, etc., shall be designed and installed
in accordance with applicable Federal, State and County
regulations. Recommendations as to their installation may be made
by the Police Department or other competent agency.
b. Blocks.
§ 32-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-16.1
AO:465
1. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the
Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation
control and safety of street traffic.79
2. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
Such walkway shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to
street.
3. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
4. New block numbers shall be assigned by the Tax Assessor in the
manner provided by N.J.A.C. 18:23A-1.9.
c. Lots.
1. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance.80
2. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
3. Each lot must front upon an approved street which is at least 50
feet in width, except lots fronting on streets described in
subsection 32-16.1a3(d) of this chapter.
4. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
5. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
6. New lot numbers shall be assigned by the Tax Assessor in the
manner provided by N.J.A.C. 18:23A-1.10(g).
d. Public Use and Service Areas.
1. In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines
or elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such
easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation
with the companies or municipal departments concerned.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Zoning.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Zoning.
§ 32-16.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-16.1
AO:466
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with width or
construction or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
3. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
e. Drainage facilities shall be designed and located so as to minimize flood
damage. New utilities shall be located and designed so as to eliminate
flood damage and to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into
sewage and water systems. The stormwater disposal system shall
include all or some of the following: curbs, catch basins, culverts, pipes,
stormwater drains, swales, drainage rights-of-way, ditches, channel
improvements, riprap, retention and detention basins, or combinations
of all or some of the above where appropriate. It may also include
ground cover seeding, trees, shrubs, bushes and vegetation.
f. Sanitary Sewage Disposal. A sanitary waste disposal system shall
include all or some of the following: pipes and necessary
appurtenances, such as manholes, handholes, pumping stations,
drainage tiles, valves and siphons.
g. Water. A water system shall include all or part of the following: pipes
and necessary appurtenances of sufficient size, material and capacity,
pumps, valves, pumping stations, standpipes and fire hydrants. Fire
hydrants shall be of a design and type approved by the Borough and
shall be installed in accordance with Borough requirements.
h. Private Utilities. Gas lines, telephone lines, electrical services, cable
television and similar utilities when installed shall consist of those
elements required by the applicable utility, Federal, State or local law.
i. Natural Improvements. These improvements shall include all or some of
the following: shade trees, topsoil, earth removal, borrow and fill,
improvements to prevent erosion and landslides and improvements to
prevent damage to adjacent property and to protect vistas and existing
natural growth.
j. Monuments. Monuments shall be of such size and shape and properly
located as required by the Map Filing Law.
k. Shade Trees. Shade trees are to be provided in accordance with
requirements of the Manasquan Shade Tree Commission.
l. Topsoil Protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
m. Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a licensed
land surveyor in the employ of the subdivider, developer or contractor.
One copy of all cut sheets, signed by a land surveyor or professional
§ 32-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-16.1
AO:467
§ 32-16.2. Notice of Beginning of Such Work; Inspection; Notice of
Defects; Corrections. [1972 Code § 95-54; Ord. No. 1098]
Prior to the start of the construction or installation of such improvements,
the developer shall advise the Borough Engineer 24 hours prior to the
commencement of such work. No underground installation shall be covered
until inspected and approved by the appropriate official. If, during
installation of any of the required improvements, the developer fails to meet
specification requirements or to correct unacceptable work, the developer
shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, that the developer has failed
to comply with specifications or to correct unacceptable work properly, and
the notice shall set forth in detail what has not been properly installed.
If, within 10 days after mailing of such notice, the developer has failed to
perform in accordance with the notice, the Borough shall then cause the
notice of failure to comply to be served upon the developer, and a copy shall
be sent to the Governing Body and Planning Board.
§ 32-16.3. Temporary Improvements. [1972 Code § 95-55; Ord. No.
1098]
Prior to or during construction, the Borough Engineer may require the
installation or construction of improvements to prevent or correct
temporary conditions on the site which could cause personal injury, damage
to property or constitute a health hazard. These conditions may result
from erosion and landslide, flooding, heavy construction, traffic, creation
of steep grades and pollution. Improvements may include berms, mulching,
sediment traps, detention and retention basins, grading, plantings,
retaining walls, culverts, pipes, guardrails, temporary roads and others
appropriate to the specific condition. All temporary improvements shall
remain in place and in operation until otherwise directed by the Borough
Engineer.
engineer, shall be filed with the Borough Engineer 24 hours prior to the
commencement of any construction.
n. Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed as required by the Planning
Board.
o. Disposal of Dead Trees, Litter, Building Materials. Developed areas
shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and
dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap building materials
shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the request of and to
the satisfaction of the Building Inspector prior to issuing an occupancy
permit.
p. During Construction. During construction, the site shall be maintained
and left each day in a safe and sanitary manner, and any condition
which could lead to personal injury or property damage shall be
immediately corrected by the developer upon an order by the Building
Inspector or other authorized personnel.
§ 32-16.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-17
AO:468
§ 32-17. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL. [Ord. No.
1975-06; Ord. No. 1993-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-07 §§ 14]
§ 32-18. PERFORMANCE GUARANTIES.
§ 32-18.1. Required Guaranties; Surety; Release. [1972 Code
§ 95-56; Ord. No. 1098]
In lieu of certified completion of all required site improvements, before
recording final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site plan approval,
the Planning Board shall require and accept, in accordance with the
standards adopted herein, for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of both on-tract and off-tract public improvements and
landscaping:
a. Findings.
1. The Borough Council adopted Ordinance No. 1975-06 on April 17,
2006.
2. The Borough Council adopted Ordinance No. 1993-07 on February
26, 2007.
3. Ordinance No. 2008-07, which is attached in its full version, is a
composite of Ordinance No. 1975-06 and Ordinance No. 1993-07.
This ordinance is adopted by reference and is incorporated as if
fully set forth at length herein.
b. Copies on File. Three copies of this ordinance are on file in the Office of
the Municipal Clerk for use and examination by the public. Copies of
this ordinance are available for purchase upon payment of the
maximum fee established by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b.
a. The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the municipality in
an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements, as estimated by the Borough Engineer, including
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting,
shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and
other on-site improvements and landscaping.
b. Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the Municipal
Clerk for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance of maintenance guaranty
to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
§ 32-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-18.1
AO:469
guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the municipality for
such utilities or improvements.
1. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Planning Board by resolution when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the Borough Engineer to have been
completed. The time allowed for installation of the improvements
for which the performance guaranty has been provided may be
extended by the body by resolution.
2. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost
of the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough
may either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof
complete such improvements.
3. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Planning Board, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk of the completion of the
improvements and shall send, a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the
Planning Board indicating either approval, partial approval or
rejection of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any
rejections. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth.
4. The Planning Board shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough
Engineer and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of
the contents of the report and the action of the Planning Board with
relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice
from the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where
partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the
improvements not yet approved. Failure of the Planning Board to
send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall
be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements and the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to such performance guaranty.
5. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
Planning Board may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
6. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Planning Board or the Borough Engineer.
§ 32-18.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-18.1
AO:470
§ 32-19. OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 32-19.1. Improvements Required. [1972 Code § 95-57; Ord. No.
1098]
Developers shall be required, as a condition for approval of a subdivision, to
pay their pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary
street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage facilities and
easements therefor located outside the property limits of the subdivision
but necessitated or required by construction or improvements within the
subdivision. The following criteria shall be utilized in determining a
developer's proportionate or pro rata share of necessary off-tract
improvements.
§ 32-19.2. Certain Improvements Required at Sole Expense of
Developer. [1972 Code § 95-58; Ord. No. 1098]
In cases where the reasonable and necessary need for an off-street
improvement or improvements is necessitated or required by the proposed
development application and when no other property owners receive a
special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and construct such
improvements as if such were an on-tract improvement in the manner
provided hereafter and otherwise provided by law.
§ 32-19.3. Determination of Expenses to Be Paid by Developer.
[1972 Code § 95-59; Ord. No. 1098]
In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is necessitated by the
proposed subdivision application and where it is determined that properties
outside the subdivision will also be benefited by the improvement, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the developer's
proportionate share of such improvements:
7. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements and for costs of the Municipal Attorney
for services rendered to the Borough in this regard.
a. Sanitary Sewers. For distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith, the applicant's proportionate share shall be
computed as follows:
1. The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be
based on Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Sewerage Systems, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, and all Manasquan
Borough sewer design standards, including infiltration standards,
and all other Manasquan Borough water drain standards.
§ 32-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-19.3
AO:471
2. Developer's Pro Rata Share.
(a) The capacity of the existing system to service the entire
improved drainage area shall be computed. If the system is
able to carry the total developed drainage basin, no
improvement or enlargement cost will be assigned to the
developer. If the existing system does not have adequate
capacity for the total developed drainage basin, the prorated
enlargement or improvement share shall be computed as
follows:
Total enlargement or improvement cost
Developer's cost
=
Total tributary gallons per day
Development gallons per day
(b) If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to develop
the subdivision, the enlargement share to the developer shall
be computed as follows:
Total project cost
Developer's cost
=
Total tributary gallons per day to new system
Development tributary gallons per day
(c) The plans for the improved system or extended system shall be
prepared by developer's engineer. All work shall be calculated
by the developer and approved by the Borough Engineer.
b. Roadways. For street widening, alignment channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvement
uncovered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or
existing streets and other associated streets or traffic improvements,
the applicant's proportionate cost shall be determined as follows:
1. The Borough Engineer shall provide the applicant's engineer with
the existing and anticipated peak-hour flows for the off-tract
improvements.
2. The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvement, which shall include the estimated peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development. The ratio of the peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed development to the future peakhour
traffic shall form the basis of the proportionate share. The
prorated share shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of the roadway improvement and/or
extension
Developer's cost
=
Future peak-hour traffic
Future peak-hour traffic generated by
the development
c. Drainage Improvements. For stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap or improved drainage ditches
§ 32-19.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-19.3
AO:472
§ 32-20. (RESERVED)
§ 32-21. FEES.
§ 32-21.1. Fee Schedule Established. [1972 Code § 95-60; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 1280]
Fees, charges and regulations for the review of subdivision applications are
established under Chapter 31, Planning Board, of the Code of the Borough
of Manasquan.
and appurtenances thereto and the relocation or replacement of other
storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
1. The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a method
described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed Technical
Release 55, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department
of Agriculture, January 1975, as amended, and shall be computed
by the developer's engineer and approved by the Borough
Engineer.
2. The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's
tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by the
developer's engineer, subject to approval of the Borough Engineer.
The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the
developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system
calculated by the Borough Engineer. The prorated share for the
proposed improvement shall be computed as follows:
Total enlargement or improvement cost of
drainage facilities
Developer's cost
=
Total tributary cubic feet per second
Development cubic feet per second
d. Escrow Accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at some future date, the monies required for the
improvement shall be deposited to the credit of the Borough in a
separate account until such time as the improvement is constructed. If
the off-tract improvement is not begun with 10 years of deposit, all
monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
e. Computation of Pro Rata Share. In any case in which an applicant shall
not provide the approving authority with the estimates of a traffic
consultant engineer with regard to estimated improvement costs and
all other information necessary to proportion costs, the approving
authority may rely on the estimates of the Borough Engineer in order to
prorate costs.
§ 32-19.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-22
AO:473
§ 32-22. PAYMENT OF TAXES.
§ 32-22.1. Proof of Payment Required. [1972 Code § 95-61; Ord. No.
1098]
No application shall be considered by the Planning Board unless the
applicant shall submit proof from the Office of the Tax Collector that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which any development application is made.81
§ 32-23. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 32-23.1. Violations and Penalties. [1972 Code § 95-62; Ord. No.
1098; Ord. No. 1304; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55]
a. If, before favorable referral and final approval by the Planning Board
has been obtained, any person, firm or corporation transfers, sells or
agrees to sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned
on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a
part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is
required to act, such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the
penalty prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55. Each parcel, plot or lot so
disposed of shall be deemed a separate offense and each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
b. In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
1. For injunctive relief.
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Section 44 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975,
but only if the Borough Planning Board has adopted by ordinance
standards and procedures in accordance with Section 29 of
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.82, 83
c. In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled
to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price
paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expenses, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after
the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of the land or within six years, if unrecorded.
81.Editor's Note: See Chapter 2, Section 2-63, Payment of Delinquent Property Taxes or
Assessments Required Prior to Issuance of License or Permits.
82.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
83.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.
§ 32-22 MANASQUAN CODE § 32-24
AO:474
§ 32-24. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 32-24.1. Enforcement Criteria. [1972 Code § 95-63; Ord. No.
1098]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough of Manasquan. Any action taken by the Planning
Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to
the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such variance or
variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 32-25. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LEGISLATION.
§ 32-25.1. Applicability of Conflicting Provisions. [1972 Code
§ 95-64; Ord. No. 1098]
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance,
such as a Construction Code, Housing Code or Licensing Ordinance, the
ordinance requiring the more restrictive regulation or the one requiring the
higher set of standards shall apply.84
§ 32-26. PENDING APPLICATIONS.
§ 32-26.1. Pending Applications Not Affected. [1972 Code § 95-65;
Ord. No. 1098]
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which
any construction permit has been granted before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction for such plans shall have been started
within 60 days of enactment of this chapter and shall be diligently pursued
to completion.
§ 32-27. REPEALER.
§ 32-27.1. Repealer. [1972 Code § 95-66; Ord. No. 1098]
Chapter 95, Subdivision of Land, (adopted on May 11, 1959 as Ordinance
No. 701) of the Code of the Borough of Manasquan is hereby repealed. All
other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
repealed, but only to the extent of such inconsistency.
84.Editor's Note: See Chapter 14, Building and Housing, Section 14-1, State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
§ 32-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-27.1
AO:475
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
ZONING
Editor's Note: See Chapter 31 for Planning Board Acting as Zoning
Board of Adjustment. All references to the "Zoning Board," "Board
of Adjustment" or "Zoning Board of Adjustment" shall refer to the
"Planning Board" except where such reference is clearly
inapplicable.
Purpose
§ 35-1. PURPOSE. [1972 Code § 107-1; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No.
1657-95]
a. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to exercise the authority
delegated to municipalities by the Municipal Land Use Law and
thereby, in conformance with the purposes of said law:
1. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in a
manner that will promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
2. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters.
3. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
4. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and the
preservation of the environment.
5. To divide the Borough of Manasquan into zones or districts,
restricting and regulating therein the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other
specified uses.
6. To regulate the intensity of the use of lot areas and to regulate and
determine the area of open spaces surrounding such buildings.
§ 32-27.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-1
AO:476
7. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed
for specified industrial, business, residential and other uses within
such areas.
8. To fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform
therein.
9. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts, respectively.
10. To prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions
and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder.
11. To limit and lessen congestion in the public streets by providing for
the off-street parking and loading and unloading of vehicles, by
eliminating and reducing vehicular parking or loading practices
which affect the free-flow of traffic or pedestrians, and by insuring
that traffic created by land development can be accommodated on
roadways in the municipality.
12. To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of
land, buildings and structures.
13. To prescribe penalties for the violation of the chapter.
14. To insure that the development of the municipality does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the County or the State of New Jersey, as a whole.
15. To prevent the overcrowding of land.
16. To conserve the value of land and buildings throughout the
Borough.
17. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens.
18. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
19. To promote the conservation of historic districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources and to prevent
urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land.
20. To encourage planned developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of
development to the particular site.
21. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
§ 35-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-1
AO:477
§ 35-2. TITLE. [1972 Code § 107-2; Ord. No. 1097]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Manasquan."
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 35-3. WORD USAGE.85 [Ord. No. 1812-2000 § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows:
§ 35-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1812-2000 § 2; Ord. No. 1825-00 § 1;
Ord. No. 1884-02 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1976-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2034-08 § 1;
22. To encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land.
23. To promote the utilization of renewable energy resources.
24. To promote the maximum practical recovery and recycling of
recyclable material from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling
Plan goals and to complement municipal recycling programs.
25. To be consistent with, and to promote the objectives of the New
Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
Title
a. Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
b. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and vice
versa;
c. Words used to include the male gender include the female gender and
vice versa;
d. The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased or intended to be used;
e. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "premises";
f. The word "building" includes the word "structure";
g. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; and
h. The word "may" is discretionary and not mandatory.
85.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1812-2000 repealed former Section 107-3. Definitions and Word
Usage, as contained in the 1972 Code § 107-3, as further amended and supplemented, and
established a new Section 107-3, WORD USAGE.
§ 35-1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:478
Ord. No. 2057-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2100-11; Ord. No. 2122-12 § 2; Ord.
No. 2130-13 §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 2145-13 § 1; Ord. No. 2150-14 § 1; Ord.
No. 2271-18]
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property for not less than one
year by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights of
the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure, the use
of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building located on the same lot.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot as the principal use.
ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ELEMENT — Any environmental
pollutant such as smoke, odors, liquid wastes, solid wastes, radiation, noise,
vibrations, glare or heat.
ALLEY — A public or private street primarily designed to serve as secondary
access to the side or rear of property whose principal frontage is on some
other street.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
of an existing building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows or any
enlargement or diminution of a building or structure. Alteration shall not
be construed to mean any necessary repairs and renovation of an existing
structure solely for the purpose of maintenance, improvement or
redecoration of the appearance.
APARTMENT — See Dwelling Unit.
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract purchaser or
other person or entity authorized to act for the landowner in submitting an
application under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plan, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.
40:55D-34, 35 and 36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Borough of
Manasquan.
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN — In order to promote a desirable environment
through creative development techniques and good civic design where
elevation or construction of a building is either necessary or desirable,
facade treatment shall be required to a point not less than 2 1/2 feet above
the finished grade of the property surrounding the building.
ATTACHED SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on a
building with the principal support of the sign being the building, including
specifically the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of a
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:479
building. "Attached signs" shall be not more than 12 inches off the building
to which they are attached.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — General repair, engineer rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame or
fender straightening and repair, or overall painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A place where motor fuels stored only
in underground tanks, kerosene or motor oil and lubricants or grease for
operation of automobiles, are retailed directly to the public on the premises,
including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including
automobile repairs and rebuilding. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage,
the premises shall be classified as a public garage. This definition is not
intended to cover or include the provision on site of food or beverage sales
or other commercial or retail activities not described herein.
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
BED AND BREAKFAST — An "owner-occupied" dwelling in which overnight
accommodations and a morning meal are provided for transient guests
(guests staying not more than 30 days during any 60 calendar day period)
for compensation, and in which the overnight accommodations are
accessory to the principal use of the dwelling as a residence.
BICYCLE LANE — A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for
exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH — A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and
sidewalks, designed to be used by bicyclists.
BILLBOARD — See Sign, Billboard.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to
the continuity of development.
BOARDING HOUSE — A dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for
compensation, lodging and meals are provided; personal and financial
services may be offered as well.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Manasquan.
BUFFER — Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms or any
combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use of
property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights or other
nuisances.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, posts,
piers or walls and intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosing
of persons, animals, property or materials of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The aggregate square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured in a
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:480
horizontal plane around the periphery of the foundation, and including the
area under any roof extending more than two feet beyond the foundation.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The two-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot and that is defined by minimum
yard setbacks.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the reference datum
to the highest point of the structure. (a) single frontage or comer
properties — height shall be measured from the top of the curb or in the
absence of the curb from the crown of the road or in the absence of a
road with a crown, then from the average of the grades at the center of
each street front (or the monumented borough beach walk in the case
of structures contiguous to the beachfront). (b) properties with opposite
frontages — heights from the lot midpoint to the respective right-of-way line
shall be measured from the top of the curb or in the absence of a curb
from the crown of the road or in the absence of a road with a crown, then
from the grade at the center of the street front or the monumented Borough
beach walk in the case of structures contiguous to the beachfront.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street line touching that part of
a building closest to the street. In the case of a cantilevered section of a
building, the building line will coincide with the most projected surface. All
yard requirements shall be measured to the "building line."
BUILDING PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity which is sold,
offered, or conducted on the premises on which the sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six (6) inches
above ground level for trees up to four (4) inches in diameter and measured
twelve (12) inches above ground level for trees over four (4) inches in
diameter.
CAMPER —
A self-propelled, vehicular structure built as one unit on a chassis
and designed for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or
other short-term uses which may contain cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities.
a.
An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities for
travel, recreation, vacation or other short term use and designed to
be attached to the body of another vehicle for transporting from one
location to another.
b.
A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis, designed for camping,
the body of which is basically rectangular with a flat top not more than
four feet above the surface of the ground. The camper is designed to
c.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:481
CAR WASH — Any land, building or part of a building used for the
commercial washing of motor vehicles, but excluding service stations where
the washing of motor vehicles is a use incidental to the service station.
CARPORT — A structure with a roof for storing automobiles, enclosed by
not more than three sides.
CARTWAY — The paved area of a street between the curbs, including travel
lanes and parking areas but not including shoulders, curbs, sidewalks or
swales. Where there are no curbs, the "cartway" is that portion between the
parallel edges of the paved street width.
CELLAR — A space with less than one-half of its floor to ceiling height,
above the averaged finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floorto-
ceiling height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CEMETERY — A use of land for the burial of the dead.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Construction
Official allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed and will be used in compliance with
all applicable State codes and Municipal ordinances.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — Any sign which is designed so that
characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or the surface of the sign shall be prohibited in all zones.
This shall include all signage inclusive of billboards.
CHILD CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision, and protection of children that is licensed by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to N.J.S. 30:5B-1 et seq.
CHURCH — See House of Worship.
CLUB, SOCIAL — A private organization for social purposes in which the
principal use is in enclosed buildings and no outdoor sports are involved.
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not
conducted for profit and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in
connection with or as a public tavern, cafe or other like public place.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use that is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests of
the development and may include such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
have a temporary tent erected above the four-foot level for camping
activities.
A portable structure built on a chassis, designed for towing and as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation and other shortterm
uses and having an outside body width not exceeding eight feet
and a length not exceeding 30 feet, and which may contain cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
d.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:482
COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT — A study to determine the potential
direct or indirect effects of a proposed development on community facilities.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S. 30:11B-1 et
seq. providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision
as required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally ill
persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to
live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes,
half-way houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements, and hotels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health
care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning
Act" (N.J.S. 26:2H-1 et seq.). In the case of such community residence
housing mentally ill persons, such residence shall have been approved for
a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such
procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental
Health and Hospitals of the Department of Human Services.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department of
Human Services pursuant to N.J.S. 30:14-1 et seq. providing food, shelter,
medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services to
not more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence,
including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and
assistance in order to protect their physical and psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — The application form and all accompanying
documents required by ordinance or promulgated checklist in connection
with the approval of a subdivision plan, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance or permit issuance direction.
CONCEPT PLAN — An informal map of a proposed subdivision or site plan
of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used for the purpose of discussion
and classification.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon
showing that such use will comply with the conditions and standards for the
location or operation of the use as specified in the zoning ordinance and
authorized by the approving agency.
CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY — The land covered by the master deed,
whether or not contiguous, and all improvements thereon, all owned either
in fee simple or under lease and all easements, rights and appurtenances
belonging thereto or intended for the benefit thereof.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — The grant of a property right stipulating
that the described land will remain in its natural state and precluding future
or additional development.
CONSOLIDATION — A conveyance of land so as to combine existing lots by
deed or other instrument and having the consent of all parties in interest.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:483
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Borough official specified in the
Municipal Code who is charged with administering the land development
regulations, together with the Administrative Officer of the Borough.
CONTIGUOUS PARCELS — Tracts of land which share a common boundary.
CONVENIENCE RETAIL — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines,
sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads. Food products
are generally for off-site consumption but may contain seating
accommodations of not more than eight seats. Examples shall include but
not be limited to a cheese shop, dessert shop or ice cream parlor.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of Monmouth County, with accompanying maps, plats, charts
and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the Monmouth County
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S. 40:27-1 et seq.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Monmouth County Planning Board.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The aggregate square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured in a
horizontal plane around the periphery of the foundation and including the
area under any roof extending more than two feet beyond the foundation.
COVERAGE, LOT — The aggregate square footage or other measurement by
which all buildings and structures and driveways, parking areas, and other
impervious surface covers a lot, as measured in a horizontal plane.
CRITICAL AREA — Water bodies, including streams, ponds and lakes,
100-year flood plains, freshwater wetlands, transition areas and slopes over
25%.
CUL-DE-SAC — See Street, Cul-de-sac.
CURB CUT — The depression of the curbline at which point vehicles, people
or surface water runoff cross the curbline.
DAY — A calendar day in any year.
DECK — An above grade, unroofed structure without walls that is attached
to a residential dwelling unit, eight inches or more above grade.
DEDICATION — An offering for public use by an owner of an interest
in property, with or without improvements, which is accepted by the
appropriate public body.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that require or establish specific
improvement requirements.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and sub-surface water in order to impede its flow
and to release the water gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to
the development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:484
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbances or any use, change in use or
extension of use of land for which permission may be required pursuant to
this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, adopted pursuant to the
"Municipal Land Use Law" (N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign designating the name of a subdivision
of residential homes, whether single-family or multi-family, attached or
detached or an apartment complex.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S. 30:11B-2.
DILAPIDATED SIGN — A sign which is structurally unsound, contains faulty
wiring or loose fastenings, or is otherwise detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which is designed and erected solely
for the purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction which is placed on the
property to which or on which the public is directed.
DISTRICT — The zone districts established in this chapter.
DORMER — A projection from a roof that contains a window which shall
not exceed 10 feet in length measured along the fascia and is set back a
minimum of two feet from the exterior vertical building wall beneath the
dormer and/or an elevator.[Ord. No. 2226-2017]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention and alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT/TAKE OUT — The same as "Restaurant Drive-In/
Take-Out."
DRIVEWAY — A delineated paved and unpaved area used for ingress and
egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street to a building or other
structure or facility.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:485
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for
human habitation. "Dwellings" may include but are not limited to the
following types:
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Manasquan Environmental
Commission, a municipal advisory body, created pursuant to N.J.S. 40:56A-1
et seq.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.
ESCROW — A deed, bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a third
person to be delivered by that person to the grantee only upon fulfillment of
a condition.
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY — A long-term care facility or a distinct part of
a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home
for the aged, or a governmental medical institution.
EXTERNALLY LIGHTED SIGN — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is outside the display portion of the sign.
FACADE SIGN — (Reserved)
FAIR HOUSING ACT — The provisions of N.J.S. 52:27D-302 et seq.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling unit that is not attached to
any other dwelling by any means.
a.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Three or more dwelling units located within
a single building, with an entrance to each dwelling by direct access
from the outside or through a common hall. "Garden apartments" may
include buildings in cooperative or condominium ownership. Also see
"dwelling, multifamily."
b.
TOWNHOUSE — A one family dwelling unit in a row of at least three
such attached units in which each unit has its own front and rear access
to the outside, no unit is located over another unit and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fireresistant
walls.
c.
MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling units
that share common vertical and/or horizontal separations, including
garden apartments.
d.
SEMI-DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A single-family dwelling
attached to one other single-family dwelling on an adjoining lot by a
common vertical wall erected on the lot line dividing the two lots.
e.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:486
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based
on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and
stability.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — A private residence which is registered as
a family day care home pursuant to the "Family Day Care Provider
Registration Act" (N.J.S. 30:5B-16 et seq.); and is further defined as a
private residence in which child care services are provided for a fee to not
less than three and no more than five children at any one time for no less
than 15 hours per week; except that the division shall not exclude a family
day care home with less than three children from voluntary registration.
FAST SERVICE RESTAURANT — An establishment or business which is
essentially designed to dispense a limited variety of food and beverages
which are so prepared, packaged in paper or in other types of disposable
wrappers and contained in a form for quick or ready consumption. Such
establishments may or may not have tables, and the food and beverages
may be sold for consumption inside the building or on or off the premises. It
shall not include a convenience retail establishment.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on a
preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan, after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
those guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is
presented for final approval.
FLAG LOT — A lot not meeting the minimum frontage requirements of
this chapter, which lot has access to a public road provided by a relatively
narrow, private right-of-way, easement or driveway.[Ord. No. 2271-18]
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination of the water
surface elevations of the design flood, i.e., the flood level that has a 1% or
greater chance of occurrence in any given year, i.e., a 100-year storm.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — That portion of the flood hazard area outside the
floodway, based on the total area inundated during the regulatory base flood
plus 25% of the regulatory base flood discharge. See Figure below.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and flood fringe areas of a
delineated stream as determined by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection under N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq. (Flood Hazard
Control). See Figure below.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:487
FLOOD PLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural
stream, which has been or may be hereafter covered by flood water. Also
known as a floodway. See Figure below.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river. See
Figure below.
Distances A-B and C-D are the Flood Fringe Zones
Distance H-K is the 100 year Flood Plain & Flood Hazard Area
Distance A-D is the Floodway Line
Distance I-J is the Stream Channel
Line E is the Flood Elevation when confined within the Floodway
Line F is the Flood Elevation after encroachment
Line G is the Flood Elevation before encroachment
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area, of all buildings on a lot
divided by the total lot area.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors
of a building or group of buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings,
but excluding the following:
FLOOR AREA, NET HABITABLE (N.H.F.A.) — The finished and heated area
fully enclosed by the inside surfaces of walls, windows, doors and partitions
and having a headroom of at least 6 1/2 feet including working, living,
eating, cooking, sleeping, stair, hall, service and storage areas, but
excluding garages, carports, parking spaces, cellars, half-stories and
unfinished attics and basements.
FRONTAGE — See Lot, Frontage.
a. Cellars; or
Any floors or portions thereof contained on terraces or balconies
projecting beyond the exterior face of the building.
b.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:488
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A structure that is an accessory to the principal
building and that is used for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or service for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private garage, used for
the care, repair or equipment of automobiles, or where such vehicles are
parked or stored for remuneration within the structure.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, premises or land in which or upon which
a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair
or painting of motor vehicles is conducted or rendered. Sales of motor
vehicle accessories are permitted. This term does not include car washes
and motor vehicle showrooms for new or used motor vehicles.
GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a building other than a cellar or
basement.
GROUP HOME — Any single-family dwelling used in the placement of
children pursuant to law recognized as a group home by the Department of
Institutions and Agencies in accordance with rules and regulations adopted
by the Commissioner of Institutions and Agencies, provided, however, that
no group home shall contain more than 12 children.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the aforegoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation including, but not limited to, any
licensed profession, conducted in a dwelling unit, subordinate to its
residential use, provided that:
The occupation may be pursued in the principal dwelling unit structure
or in a secondary building which is accessory to the principal building
or structure.
a.
The use of the property for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the net habitable floor area of all
structures shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
b.
No other person other than members of the household residing on the
premises plus one secretary or other assistant shall be engaged in the
occupation.
c.
The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed;
no occupational sounds shall be audible outside the building; and no
equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio or
television reception in neighboring residences.
d.
There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation other
than one unlighted name plate identifying the home occupation, not
e.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:489
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or a studio of a resident
physician, dentist, lawyer, licensed professional planner, licensed
professional engineer, artist, licensed land surveyor, registered architect or
teacher as herein restricted, provided that no more than two persons are
employed who are not members of the family and that such office shall be
in the main building and shall not occupy more than the equivalent of 1/2
of the area of one floor of the building. For the purpose of this definition,
"teacher" shall be restricted to a person giving individual instructions in
a musical instrument, in singing or in academic or scientific subjects to
a single pupil at a time. A "home professional office" shall not include
the office of any person professionally engaged in the purchase or sale
of economic goods or services. Dancing instructions, band instrument or
voice instruction in groups, tearooms, tourists homes, beauty parlors,
hairdressing and manicuring establishments, real estate offices, insurance
offices, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments and stores, trades or
businesses of any kind not herein excepted shall not be deemed to be "home
professional offices". The "home professional office" of a physician shall not
include a biological or other medical testing or screening laboratory.
HOT TUB/SPA — A structure intended for recreational bathing, in which
all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral
part of the structure.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and which may provide additional services, such as
restaurants, reception rooms, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreation
facilities.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or groups of buildings
or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for
conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all
areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of fast food within the
dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is covered by
nonpermeable surfaces, including but not limited to, buildings, parking
areas, driveways, service areas, streets, walkways, patios, pools and plazas.
With reference to walkways, patios and plazas, the materials utilized in the
construction of such areas, may determine to be permeable based upon
commonly accepted construction standards and credible testimony received
by the Board. All required parking areas which are permitted to remain
exceeding four square feet in area, either attached or free-standing and
set back at least 15 feet from all street rights-of-way and property lines.
The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic in excess of
two passenger automobiles, which must be parked off-street.
f.
The applicant shall have applied for and received "minor" site plan
approval.
g.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:490
unimproved and all gravel areas and landscape areas shall be considered as
impervious surfaces if they are lined with weed-inhibiting plastic or other
material.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
INFORMAL REVIEW — At the request of the developer, the Planning Board
shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for a development provided
same does not require relief in form of a use variance for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for development.
The amount of any fees for an informal review shall be a credit toward fees
for review of the application for development. Neither the developer nor the
Board shall be bound by any concept plan presented or for any comments
or recommendations made during an informal review.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including but not limited to
automobiles, motorcycles, motor-drawn vehicles, omnibuses, semitrailers,
trailers, trucks, truck tractors, and other motor vehicles all as defined in
Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes, which is not operable or which is not
capable of being safely and legally operated on public roads, streets or
highways. Any vehicle which is unregistered or without current license tags
or plates shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. A vehicle located at a
facility for not more than seven days while awaiting repairs shall not be
considered to be an inoperable vehicle.
INTERNAL SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained inside of a
building and visible from outside the building, whether illuminated or nonilluminated.
INTERNALLY LIGHTED SIGN — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
LAND — Real property including improvements and fixtures on, above, or
below the surface.
LAND AREA, GROSS (G.L.A.) — The entire area of a lot or lots included in a
single proposed development or site plan, before any deductions are made
for wetlands, conservation areas, steep slopes or for any other required
purpose.
LAND AREA, NET (N.L.A.) — The remaining developable area of a lot or
lots included in a single proposed development or site plan, after deductions
are made for wetlands, conservation areas, steep slopes or for any other
required purpose.
LANDING — A level part of a staircase at the end of a flight of stairs.
LANDLOCKED — Property which has no ownership adjacent to a public
street right-of-way and is surrounded by lands belonging to others.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan on which is
shown: proposed landscape species (such as number, spacing, size at time
of planting and planting details); proposals for protection of existing
vegetation during and after construction; proposed treatment of hard and
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:491
soft surfaces; proposed decorative features; grade changes; buffers and
screening devices; and any other information that can reasonably be
required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving
authority.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, court order or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately
owned, used, developed or built upon.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
intersecting streets, or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance measured from the front lot line to the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line. On a comer lot, the lesser frontage shall be the front of
the lot and the greater frontage shall be the depth of the lot. If a comer
lot has equal frontages, the front yard shall be the yard on which the main
entry of the structure faces, and such designation of the front yard shall
be permanent. If an interior lot faces two streets, the property owner shall
select the front yard when applying for a zoning permit to build a structure
and such designation shall be permanent.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where
access to the public street is by a private right-of-way or driveway. See
Figure below.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another adjoining lot or from a public or private street or any other public
space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating from a street right-of-way, also
referred to as a "street line".
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line, or, in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots,
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:492
a line at least 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum building setback line.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
established by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for home
ownership and rental costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to 50% or less of the
median gross household income for households of the same size within the
housing region in which the housing is located, and which is subject to
affordability controls promulgated by the Council.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, including but not limited to
letters of credit and surety bonds, that may be required and accepted by the
Borough to assure that necessary improvements will function as required
for a specific period of time.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARINA — A waterfront facility predominantly used for the dockage and
moorage of recreational boats for which dockage or moorage fee is paid and
sanitary facilities and parking area provided.
MARQUEE — Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction that
projects from the exterior wall of a building, usually above an entrance, or
the front face of the building.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted pursuant to
N.J.S. 40:55D-28 et seq.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve any of
the following:
The creating of more than two lots (one new lot and the remaining
parcel), each fronting on an existing improved street or road;
a.
b. A planned development;
c. Any new street; or
The extension of any off-tract improvements.
Any subdivision application from a subdivider or owner which has
previously been subdivided or granted a "minor subdivision" shall be
classified as a major subdivision.
d.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:493
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
established by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for home
ownership and rental costs, occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income in excess of 50% but less than
80% of the median gross household income for households of the same size
within the housing region in which the housing is located, and which is
subject to affordability controls promulgated by the Council.
MOTEL — An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a
majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY AND TENANCY SIGN — A single sign relating to a
use or facility, such as a shopping center, industrial park or office complex,
where there is more than one occupancy and/or tenancy of uses, where
the multiple occupancy and tenancy use a common parking facility and/or
common private drive or roadway and where the names and professions or
business names of the various tenants and/or occupants are displayed.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — N.J.S. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimensions of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance
but that fails by reason of such adoption to conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign lawfully existing on the effective
date of an ordinance or any amendment thereto, that renders such sign
nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and
regulations of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or building, the size,
dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision
or amendment to the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity that was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to six years of age, inclusive,
and operated on a regular basis and licensed by the State of New Jersey.
NURSING HOME — A building providing shelter and/or supplemental
health care for the elderly or infirm and meeting the standards of the
New Jersey State Department of Institutions and Agencies to operate as a
"nursing home."
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a development
application or within a contiguous portion of a street or other right-of-way.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:494
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property that is the subject of a
development application nor or on a contiguous portion of a street or other
right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map
and Building Permit Act, N.J.S. 46:24-5 et seq. only to the extent that it is
consistent with the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-32 et seq. and to the extent
that it has not been supplanted by an official map adopted pursuant to
N.J.S. 40:55D-32 et seq. A map so adopted shall be deemed conclusive with
respect to the location and width of streets, drainage rights-of-way, and
flood control basins.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot that is the subject of an application for
development.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property that is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or other right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public and private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OUTBUILDING — A separate accessory building or structure not physically
connected to the principal building and located on the same lot.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any items
including, but not limited to, goods, junk, material, trailers, merchandise
and vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of
land.
PARKING LOT — An off-street area, usually improved, for the temporary
storage and circulation of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of one motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area, but not within a dedicated street.
PATIO — A level, impervious surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal
building at or within three feet of the finished grade, not covered by a
permanent roof and used primarily for passive recreation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, including but not limited to
letters of credit, surety bond that may be accepted by the Borough to ensure
that improvement required as part of an application for development are
satisfactorily completed.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or a person's
goods or apparel, such as cleaning, laundry, beauty shops, barbershops,
shoe repair, nail shops, physical therapists, eye glass sales and examination,
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:495
and similar uses, but excluding tattoo parlors and body piercing
establishments.
PIER — A structure extending over land or water for use as a landing place
or promenade. A pier may also act as the support for other structures.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous size as
specified by this chapter, to be planned, developed, operated and
maintained as a single entity according to a plan and containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision or site plan.
PORCH — A roofed open area, which may be screened, usually attached to
or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to the
MLUL prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan
have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale, and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT — A map indicating the proposed
layout of a development and related information that is submitted for
preliminary approval.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main use of
the lot.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is the main or primary building, structure or use on the lot.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to
and projects more than 12 inches from a wall of a building.
PUBLIC BEACHFRONT — The lands of the Borough of Manasquan which
lie along the Atlantic Ocean and are as indicated on the Tax Map of the
Borough of Manasquan. The public beachfront area includes the public
walkways, beach accessways and steps, dunes, storm protection jetties, and
all appurtenant and accessory public purpose structures.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:496
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements which the Board may deem
necessary or appropriate, including but not limited to streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyors
monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans, other on-site
improvements and landscaping.
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a board or
agency.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure without
permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily
designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and
travel use, and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises, normally to patrons seated within
an enclosed building, which building complies with the restaurant
requirements as to restroom facilities under the Uniform Construction
Code, unless exempt therefrom. A restaurant shall not be deemed to include
any retail food establishment that sells food primarily for take-out or
consumption on the premises but outside the confines of the principal
building, or in automobiles parked upon the premises. A restaurant also
shall not be deemed to include any snack bar at a public or community
playground, playfield, park.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any restaurant or retail food establishment
with a drive-in window.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A business establishment whose principal
business is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the
restaurant building, in cars on the premises, or off the premises.
RESUBDIVISION — (1) the further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law or (2) the alteration of any streets or the establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or by other instrument as long as only one use
exists on the combined lot.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment where the majority
of the patrons purchase prepared foods, soft drinks, ice cream, and similar
confections for take-out or consumption off-premises or on the premises but
outside the confines of the principal building, or in automobiles parked upon
the premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or
other accommodations are provided for the patrons.
RETAINING WALL — A structure more than 18 inches high erected between
lands of different elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the
washing down or erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:497
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another
special use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The lines that form the boundaries of a right-ofway.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building with not more than five guest rooms where
lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement,
but not open to the public or transients.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Any apparatus or structure constructed
or installed out of doors consistent with Section 35-44 with the purpose
of receiving television, radio or similar waves, but distinguished from
conventional radio or television antennae.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — Any apparatus capable of transmitting and/
or receiving signals from geostationary orbital satellites.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or
used for education of students up to and through the secondary level.
SCREEN — Any structure or planting consisting of fencing, berms,
evergreen trees or shrubs providing a continuous view obstruction within a
site or property.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A facility providing individual rental units for
the temporary storage of furniture, household goods, office equipment, files
and similar items and including not more than one residential unit for a
resident manager and family.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who is 55 years or older.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Housing within which residency shall be
restricted to a person 55 years or older. A person under the age of 55 may
reside in a Senior Citizen Housing Complex provided that his or her spouse
is 55 years or older.
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front
line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to any street line, beyond which no
building or portion thereof may be erected except as provided in this
chapter.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire
bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any
other structure.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION — A sign containing only the name and
occupation of a permitted home occupation.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:498
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such
building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises
or a portion of the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the
top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with
a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard
roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas fabric, plywood or other light material and designed or intended to
be displayed for a period of time not to exceed 10 days.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project
more than 12 inches from such building or structure.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or
interior of a window or located in such a manner within a building that it
can be seen from the exterior of the structure through a window.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and any other information that may be reasonably required in
order to make an informed determination pursuant to the Planning Board,
adopted pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-37 et seq.
SKETCH PLAT — A concept, informal map of a proposed subdivision or site
plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification.
STAIRWELL DORMER — A dormer which encloses the stairwell and is not
required to be set back a minimum of two feet from the exterior vertical
building wall beneath the dormer.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards.
Adopted by ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-65, regulating noise
levels, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic radiation,
noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke
and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects
or conditions and other similar matters as may be reasonably required
by the Board; or
a.
b. Required by applicable Federal or State laws or municipal ordinances.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:499
STORAGE SHED — An accessory building used for the storage of items
such as, but not limited to, tools, lawn and garden equipment, furniture, and
similar items of personal property belonging to the occupant of the principal
structure.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of the runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including
those basements used for the principal use.
STORY, HALF — The finished area of an attic where the intersection of the
roof rafters and the exterior wall occurs within four inches of the floor/
ceiling system, and in which space the maximum floor area at a ceiling
height of five feet or more, inclusive of stairwells and roofed over porches,
does not exceed 60% of the square footage of the floor directly below,
inclusive of roofed over porches.
All dormers, except stairwells, must be stepped back a minimum of 24
inches from the exterior wall face beneath it, except for stairwell dormers
located on residential principal buildings located in Flood Hazard Zone V as
reflected on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as
released on December 15, 2012.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and
channel through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET — Any vehicular way that is: (1) an existing State, County or
Municipal road; (2) shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; (3)
approved by other official action; or (4) shown on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats.
A "street" includes the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas.
STREET LINE — See Right-of-Way Lines.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:500
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or in
the utility systems or mechanical equipment of a structure, which change
materially alters the usability, capacity or function of the structure.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of land or water.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created:
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any artificially manufactured or
constructed swimming pool or wading pool permanently or temporarily
constructed, installed or maintained upon any premises for the use by
occupants of the premises or their household guests, whether maintained
above or below ground level.
TRACT — A parcel, property or area of land comprised of one or more lots
adjacent to one another established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by
law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
TRANSIENT GUEST — Persons staying not more than 30 days during any
sixty-day period.
TRANSITION BUFFER — A landscaped area intended to act as a visual
separation between two land uses of different intensity.
TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two dwellings, each
of which is separated from the other by an unpierced fire resistant wall
extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
a.
b. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
c.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
d.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons, and all of which are
found and certified by the Code Enforcement Officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development and zoning regulations of
the Borough of Manasquan and are shown and designated as separate
lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map of the Borough.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
e.
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:501
from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior
to both dwelling units.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are arranged,
designed or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary activity of any lot or parcel.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WELL — On-site subsurface source of water supply, including pumping and
treatment equipment to provide irrigation or potable water service to a lot
or lots in accordance with regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy and the Monmouth County Health
Department.
WHOLESALE SALES AND SERVICES — Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users; other wholesalers;
or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling
merchandise to, such individuals or companies, but excluding lumber and
building material sales.
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings
and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in the
ordinance is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance.
YARD LINE — a line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the required yard. See Figure below.
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-3.1
AO:502
YARD, FRONT — A space extending across the full width of the lot between
any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicularly to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to
the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line and measured
perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal
building.
ZONE — A specifically delineated area or district within which uniform
regulations govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and
buildings.
ZONING MAP — The map annexed to and made a part of this chapter,
indicating zone boundaries.
ZONING PERMIT — A document, signed by the Zoning Officer, or in his
absence, by either the Construction Official or the Code Enforcement
Officer, which either is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to
the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building or which
§ 35-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.1
AO:503
acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom duly
authorized by the appropriate agency of the Borough of Manasquan
pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-60 and 70.
Establishment of Zones
§ 35-4. ZONES ESTABLISHED.
§ 35-4.1. Zones or Districts Established. [1972 Code § 107-4; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1957-05 § 1; Ord. No. 1997-07
§§ 1, 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Manasquan is hereby
divided into the following zones or districts:
R-1 One-Family Residential
R-2 One-Family Residential
R-3 One-Family Residential
R-4 Beachfront One-Family Residential
R-5 One-Family Residential
R-M Multifamily Residential
R-PM Planned Multifamily Residential
B-1 Business
B-2 Marine Business
B-3 General Business
BR-1 Business Retail
O Office
I Industrial
P Public Parking
CON Conservation
PR Public Recreation
§ 35-4.2. Zoning Map. [1972 Code § 107-5; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No.
1657-95; Ord. No. 1796-99 § 1; Ord. No. 1925-04 § 1; Ord. No.
1947-05 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1957-05 § 2; Ord. No. 1997-07 § 3; Ord. No.
2015-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2033-08 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2047-09]
The boundaries of the designated zones and districts are shown upon a
map designated as the "Zoning Map of the Borough of Manasquan," revised
November 2008 by Paul F. Syzmanski, PP, which is made a part of this
chapter. The Zoning Map shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk,
and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a
§ 35-3.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-4.2
AO:504
part of this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the
Zoning Map and all such notations, references and other information shown
thereon were fully set forth or described herein.86
§ 35-4.3. Designation of Zones of Streets, Highways and Rights-of-
Way. [1972 Code § 107-6; Ord. No. 1097]
All streets, highways and rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting them. Where the center line of a street, highway
or right-of-way serves as a zone boundary, the zoning of such street or
highway, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the
same as that of the abutting properties up to such center line.
Use Regulations
§ 35-5. USE REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO EACH ZONE.
§ 35-5.1. Applicability. [1972 Code § 107-7; Ord. No. 1097]
The use regulations applicable to each zone within the Borough of
Manasquan are as provided for in Section 35-5. Section references
following each use specify the specific regulations governing such use.
§ 35-5.2. R-1 One-Family Residential Zone. [1972 Code § 107-8; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1743-98 § 1; Ord. No. 1783-99
§ 1; Ord. No. 1914-03 §§ 1 — 4; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 2; Ord. No.
2180-15; Ord. No. 2232-2017]
In the R-1 Zone, the following uses are permitted:
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds, public open space and
other facilities.
3. Privately owned conservation/open space areas.
4. (Reserved)
5. (Reserved)
6. (Reserved)
7. Family day care home as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5.
b. Accessory Uses:
86.Editor's Note: Zoning Map Amendments may be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 35-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.2
AO:505
1. Private residential swimming pools subject to Section 35-5 and
subsection 35-11.6.
2. Off-street parking.
3. Private garages and carports which meet all of the following
requirements:
(a) Maximum building coverage - 600 square feet.
(b) Maximum height - 15 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback - five feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback - five feet.
(e) Detached garages shall be located only in the side or rear yard
area.
(f) Private garages and carports shall be included when
calculating building coverage.
(g) Private garages and carports shall conform architecturally to
the principal building on the lot.
(h) Not more than one private garage or carport shall be
constructed on a building lot.
(i) Compliance with the setback regulations of subsection 35-9.4
as applicable to the zone district in which the property is
located.
4. Private residential tool sheds, storage buildings, greenhouses,
gazebos or pool cabanas which meet all of the following
requirements:
(a) Maximum building area - 100 square feet.
(b) Maximum height - 10 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback - three feet.
(d) Structures shall be located in the rear yard only.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback - three feet.
(f) Not more than one tool shed, storage building, greenhouse,
gazebo or pool cabana shall be constructed on a building lot.
(g) Tool sheds, storage buildings, greenhouses, gazebos and pool
cabanas will not be counted in calculating building coverage
unless such building is constructed on a slab or permanent
foundation.
(h) A private storage building not to exceed 200 square feet may
be constructed on a lot under the following conditions:
§ 35-5.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.2
AO:506
(1) There is not an attached or detached garage, storage
building, tool shed, detached greenhouse, gazebo or pool
cabana on the property.
(2) Maximum height - 10 feet.
(3) Minimum side setback - five feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard setback - five feet.
(5) Structure shall be located in the rear yard only.
(6) The storage building will not be counted in calculation of
building coverage unless such building is constructed on a
slab or permanent foundation.
(i) A temporary vinyl storage unit not to exceed 200 square feet
may be installed or constructed on a building lot under the
following conditions:
(1) There is not an attached or detached garage, storage
building, tool shed, detached greenhouse, gazebo or pool
cabana on the property.
(2) Maximum height - 10 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard setback - five feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard setback - five feet.
(5) Unit must be maintained in a state of good repair.
(6) Temporary unit permitted a maximum of six months in any
calendar year.
(j) A temporary storage unit, trailer or personal on demand
storage unit (PODS®) may be located on a building lot after
payment of the application fee as stated in Chapter 16, Fees,
under the following conditions:
(1) Maximum height - eight feet.
(2) Maximum length - 16 feet.
(3) Temporary storage unit is permitted for a maximum of 30
days within any calendar year, measured from the date of
zoning approval.
(4) Placement of the temporary storage unit on the lot must
not impair the visibility from adjacent properties.
(5) The temporary storage unit is permitted on single-family
residential properties only.
§ 35-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.2
AO:507
5. Animal shelters to house resident domestic pets which meet all of
the following requirements:
(a) Maximum building area - 30 square feet.
(b) Maximum height - five feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback - three feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback - three feet.
(e) Animal shelters shall be located only in the side or rear yard
area.
(f) Not more than one animal shelter shall be constructed on a
building lot.
(g) Animal shelters will not be counted in calculating building
coverage unless such building is constructed on a slab or
permanent foundation.
6. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
7. Fences and walls in accordance with the standards or subsection
35-7.5.
8. Radio, television and satellite dish antennas in accordance with the
standards of Section 35-34.
9. Parking or storage of boats, boat trailers, motor homes,
recreational vehicles and utility trailers in the rear yard area only;
provided that the location does not encroach within five feet of the
side yard and five feet of the rear yard.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Home occupation subject to the provisions in the definition
contained in Section 35-3.
2. Home professional office subject to the provisions in the definition
contained in Section 35-3.
3. Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, community residences for persons
with head injuries, adult family care homes for elderly persons and
physically disabled adults and all other entities described in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2 which provide services to not
more than 15 persons subject to these uses conforming with the
provisions of the aforesaid statutes. The requirements for these
uses shall be the same as for single-family dwelling units.
§ 35-5.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.3
AO:508
§ 35-5.3. R-2 One-Family Residential Zone. [1972 Code § 107-9; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1170; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 2235-2017]
The permitted uses, permitted accessory structure use and conditional uses
are the same as those in the R-1 Residential Zone, except churches and
church related facilities which are subject to the provisions of subsection
35-14.6.
§ 35-5.4. R-3 One-Family Residential Zone. [1972 Code § 107-10;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 2236-2017]
The principal permitted uses, permitted accessory uses and conditional
uses in this zone are the same as those in the R-1 One-Family Residential
Zone, except churches and church related facilities which are subject to the
provisions of subsection 35-14.6.
§ 35-5.5. R-4 One-Family Residential Zone. [1972 Code § 107-11;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 2237-2017]
The principal permitted uses, permitted accessory uses and conditional
uses in this zone are the same as those in the R-1 One-Family Residential
Zone, except churches and church related facilities which are subject to the
provisions of subsection 35-14.6.
§ 35-5.6. R-5 One-Family Residential Zone. [1972 Code § 107-12;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 2238-2017]
The principal permitted uses, permitted accessory uses and conditional
uses in this zone are the same as those in the R-1 One-Family Residential
Zone, except churches and church related facilities which are subject to the
provisions of subsection 35-14.6.
§ 35-5.7. R-M Residential Multifamily Zone. [1972 Code § 107-12.1;
Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1783-99 § 2; Ord. No. 2239-2017].
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Townhouses.
2. Multiple family residential buildings for three families or more.
3. All R-1 Zone permitted uses.
b. Accessory Uses:
1. Off-street parking facilities including garages which do not exceed
15 feet in height and meet setback regulations of subsection 35-9.4.
2. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
3. Fences and walls in accordance with the standards of subsection
35-7.5.
§ 35-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.7
AO:509
§ 35-5.8. R-PM Planned Multifamily Residential Zone. [1972 Code
§ 107-12.2; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1783-99 § 3; Ord. No.
1811-2000 § 1; Ord. No. 2240-2017]
4. Radio, television and satellite dish antennas in accordance with the
standards of Section 35-34.
5. Parking or storage of boats, boat trailers, motor homes,
recreational vehicles and utility trailers in the rear yard area only;
provided that the location does not encroach within the side yard
setback area as required by zone district regulations.
6. Common facilities and amenities serving the residents of
multifamily developments including swimming pools and other onsite
recreational facilities, common walkways, sitting areas and
gardens, and other similar uses.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. All conditional uses permitted in the R-1 Residential Zone (except
churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6).
2. Senior Citizen Housing.
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Planned Multifamily Residential Development, including accessory
commercial uses as permitted in subsection 35-5.8, paragraph b5.
b. Accessory Uses:
1. Off-street parking facilities including garages which do not exceed
15 feet in height.
2. Common facilities and amenities serving the residents of
multifamily developments including swimming pools and other onsite
recreational facilities, common walkways, sitting areas and
gardens, and other similar uses.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
4. Fences and walls in accordance with the standards of subsection
35-7.5.
5. Retail and business service and personal service establishments;
restaurants and other eating establishments, but excluding any
drive-in establishments; medical offices; and commercial
recreational businesses subject to the following standards:
(a) The uses shall serve beach area residents and visitors.
§ 35-5.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.8
AO:510
§ 35-5.9. B-1 Business Zone. [1972 Code § 107-13; Ord. No. 1097;
Ord. No. 1139; Ord. No. 1768-98 § 1; Ord. No. 1783-99 § 4; Ord. No.
1840-00 § 1; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 3; Ord. No. 2242-2017]
(b) The uses shall be developed integral to and accessory to any
multiple family residential development.
(c) The maximum floor area for such uses shall not exceed 10% of
the area of the site.
(d) All such uses shall be single story uses with apartments above
or with roof areas being developed with common facilities
serving the planned multifamily development.
(e) Ingress and egress to accessory commercial uses shall be from
public streets, the public boardwalk or from other public ways
and shall be separate from any ingress or egress to or from the
multifamily residential units.
(f) Off-street parking shall be required, but calculated at 50% of
the requirements of subsection 35-13.4, Schedule II, Minimum
Off-Street Parking Spaces.
(g) Loading and refuse areas shall be independent from the
residential developments and shall be screened from view.
(h) All fumes, odors, smoke or other similar discharges shall be
vented vertically to minimize any adverse effect on site and
area residents.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. All conditional uses permitted in the R-1 Residential Zone (except
churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6).
2. Senior Citizen Housing.
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Stores and shops for the conduct of any retain trade or business
service use.
2. Personal service establishments.
3. Banks and financial institutions.
4. Newspaper offices.
5. Business and professional offices.
6. Taxi stands, bus and railroad passenger stations, and facilities for
bicycles.
7. Telephone, telegraph and other communications facilities.
§ 35-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.9
AO:511
8. Restaurant establishments, but not including fast food drive-in
facilities.
9. Indoor theaters for movies and the performing arts, bowling alleys,
billiard parlors, gymnasiums, physical culture and health clubs and
similar recreational and cultural facilities situated wholly within a
structure.
10. Day care centers, child care centers and nursery schools.
11. Apartments over stores. Apartments developed as an upper floor
use provided that each apartment has a separate access from the
business use; has a gross floor area of not less than 800 square
feet; and meets all other applicable municipal and State
requirements, including requirements in this chapter for off-street
parking.
12. Municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds and other governmental
facilities, as necessary and appropriate.
13. Mortuaries and funeral homes:
(a) Restrictions on Uses in Subsections a1 through a13. In any
such establishments, no wholesale merchandising or
distributing shall be permitted and no merchandise shall be
carried or stored in or about the building, structure, enclosure
or land, other than that intended to be sold at retail within such
building, structure, enclosure or land. No business or use shall
be carried on in connection with any merchandising
establishments or permitted in any building, structure or upon
any land which is or is likely to be injurious, obnoxious,
offensive or dangerous by reason of noise, smoke, odor, gas,
dust or other objectionable or hazardous features or which for
any reason would hinder, interfere with or detrimentally affect
the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the Borough.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.87 Garages and similar storage buildings
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height or exceed 100 square feet in size.
2. Public and private parking.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
c. Conditional Uses:
87.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 35-5.9 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.9
AO:512
§ 35-5.10. B-2 Marine Business Zone. [1972 Code § 107-14; Ord. No.
1097; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1733-97 § 1; Ord. No. 1746-98 § 1;
Ord. No. 1783-99 § 5; Ord. No. 2243-2017]
1. Lodges, fraternal organizations and similar nonprofit organizations
in accordance with the standards of subsection 35-14.4.
2. Automobile service stations in accordance with the standards of
subsection 35-14.3.
3. Senior Citizen Housing.
4. Bed and Breakfast Guest House.
5. Churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6.
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Marinas.
2. Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail trade or business
service use.
3. Personal service establishments.
4. Business and professional offices.
5. Restaurant establishment, but not including fast food drive-in
facilities.
6. Apartments over stores. Apartments developed as an upper floor
use provided that each apartment has a separate access from the
business use; has a gross floor area of not less than 800 square
feet; and meets all other applicable municipal and State
requirements, including requirements in this chapter for off-street
parking.
7. Boat sales, boat rentals and boat servicing establishments.
8. Boat storage facilities.
9. Planned multifamily residential development as permitted in
subsection 35-5.8a2, including accessory commercial uses as
permitted in subsection 35-5.8b5.
10. Senior Citizen Housing.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.88 Garages and similar storage buildings
§ 35-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.10
AO:513
§ 35-5.11. B-3 General Business Zone. [1972 Code § 107-14.1; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1734-98 § 1; Ord. No. 1768-98 § 2; Ord. No.
1783-99 § 6; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 4; Ord. No. 2244-2017]
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height or exceed 100 square feet in size.
2. Public and private parking.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6.
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. All permitted B-1 zone uses.
2. Wholesale purchasing and distribution facilities subject to all goods
being stored and displayed wholly within structures.
3. (Reserved)
4. Automobile repair and towing facilities in accordance with the
standards of subsection 35-14.3.
5. Electrical, plumbing, carpentry, and masonry contractor shops with
only incidental outdoor storage restricted to the rear yard area.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.89 Garages and similar storage buildings
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height or exceed 100 square feet in size.
2. Public and private parking
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Conditional uses permitted in the B-1 Zone.
2. Fast food drive-in establishments in accordance with the
requirements of subsection 35-14.7.
88.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
89.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 35-5.10 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.11
AO:514
§ 35-5.12. O Office Zone. [1972 Code § 107-15; Ord. No. 1097; Ord.
No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1768-98 § 3; Ord. No. 1783-99 § 7; Ord. No.
2241-2017]
3. Car washing establishments in accordance with the requirements
of subsection 35-14.3.
4. Senior Citizen Housing.
5. Bed and Breakfast Guest House.
6. Churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6.
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Professional offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants,
licensed professional engineers, licensed land surveyors and
architects.
3. Business offices, including banks, fiduciary institutions, brokerage
offices and real estate and insurance offices, provided that no office
shall be used in whole or in part for the sale of retail goods, nor
shall any such office be used for voice instruction to groups,
tearooms, beauty parlors, hairdressing and manicuring
establishments, barbershops or mortuary establishments.
4. Such municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds or other municipal
facilities deemed necessary and appropriate by the Governing
Body.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.90 Garages and similar storage buildings
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height or exceed 100 square feet in size.
2. Public and private parking.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Senior Citizen Housing.
2. Bed and Breakfast Guest House.
90.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 35-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.13
AO:515
§ 35-5.13. I Industrial Zone. [1972 Code § 107-16; Ord. No. 1097;
Ord. No. 1925-04 § 2,3; Ord. No. 2245-2017]
§ 35-5.14. P Public Parking Zone. [1972 Code § 107-17; Ord No.
1097]
The permitted use is limited to public municipal parking.
§ 35-5.15. (Reserved)92
§ 35-5.16. CON Conservation Zone. [1972 Code § 107-19; Ord. No.
1097]
The permitted use is restricted to open space for these designated wetlands
areas.
§ 35-5.17. PR Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. [Amended
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2281-19]
a. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Warehouses, lumberyards, wholesale distributors and terminal
facilities.
2. All principal permitted B-1 Business Zone uses.
3. Such municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds or other municipal
facilities deemed necessary and appropriate by the Governing
Body.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.91 Garages and similar storage buildings
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height or exceed 100 square feet in size.
2. Public and private parking.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Churches and church related facilities subject to the provisions of
subsection 35-14.6.
91.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
92.Editor's Note: Former subsection 35-5.15, PUD Planned Unit Development Zone previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1972 Code § 107-18 and Ordinance Nos. 1097
and 1783-99 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1997-07.
§ 35-5.13 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.17
AO:516
a. Purpose. The purpose of the PR Affordable Housing Overlay Zone is to
provide an opportunity to develop affordable housing to meet present
and prospective housing needs, with particular attention to low- and
moderate-income housing, in conformance with the Fair Housing Act
(N.J.S.A. 52-27D-301), New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
("COAH") Prior Round regulations, and the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan prepared by the Borough to address its Third Round
affordable housing obligations. Permitted and conditional uses within
this zone shall include all permitted and conditional uses in the RM
Zoning District, and affordable housing development in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
b. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. The following parcels or tracts are
designated as part of the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone:
Block 82, Lot
56.01
C0001 35A Euclid Avenue
C0002 35B Euclid Avenue
C0003 35C Euclid Avenue
Block 73, Lots 78 142 Morris Avenue
81 140 Morris Avenue
83 138 Morris Avenue
85 136 Morris Avenue
87 134 Morris Avenue
89 132 Morris Avenue
91 130 Morris Avenue
93 128 Morris Avenue
c. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. All uses permitted within the zoning district in which the overlay
zone is located.
2. Affordable housing development for sale or rental housing in
accordance with the R-M Residential Multi-Family Zone including
the following:
(a) Townhouses.
(b) Multiple-family residential buildings for three or more families.
d. Accessory Uses:
1. Off-street parking facilities including garages which do not exceed
15 feet in height and meet setback regulations of Subsection
35-9.4.
2. Signs in accordance with the standards of § 35-25.
§ 35-5.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.17
AO:517
§ 35-5.18. BR-1 Business Retail Zone. [Ord. No. 1957-05 § I]
In the BR-1 Business Retail Zone, the following uses are permitted:
3. Fences and walls in accordance with the standards of Subsection
35-7.5.
4. Radio, television and satellite dish antennas in accordance with the
standards of § 35-34.
5. Common facilities and amenities serving the residents of
multifamily developments including swimming pools and other onsite
recreational facilities, common walkways, sitting areas and
gardens, and other similar uses.
e. Area, yard and building requirements. The requirements for affordable
housing development shall be the same as provided for in the R-M
Residential Multi-Family Zone; provided, however, that the minimum lot
size shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet and the maximum
permitted density for the overlay zone is 10 units/acre.
f. Affordable housing requirements. All affordable housing developments
shall provide a minimum of 20% affordable housing units for low- and
moderate-income families in accordance with affordable housing
requirements of this chapter.93
a. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail trade.
2. Personal service establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or the person's goods or
apparel, such as cleaning, laundry, beauty shops, barbershops,
shoe repair, nail shops, physical therapists, eye glass sales and
examination and similar uses, but excluding tattoo parlors and
body piercing establishments.
3. Banks and financial institutions.
4. Restaurant establishments, but not including fast food drive-in
facilities.
5. Business and professional offices developed as an upper floor use
provided that such offices have a separate access from the business
use on the first floor.
6. Apartments developed as an upper floor use provided that each
apartment has a separate access from the business use; has a gross
floor area of not less than 800 square feet; and meets all other
applicable municipal and State requirements, including
requirements in this chapter for off-street parking.
93.Editor's Note: See §§ 35-35 and 35-36 for affordable housing requirements.
§ 35-5.17 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.18
AO:518
§ 35-5.19. PR Public Recreation Zone. [Ord. No. 1997-07 § 2]
§ 35-5.20. AH-O Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. [Added
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2285-19]
7. Municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds and other governmental
facilities, as necessary and appropriate.
b. Restrictions on Uses in a1 through a7. In any such establishments, no
wholesale merchandising or distributing shall be permitted and no
merchandise shall be carried or stored in or about the building,
structure, enclosure or land, other than that intended to be sold at
retail within such building, structure, enclosure or land. No business or
use shall be carried on in connection with any merchandising
establishments or permitted in any building, structure or upon any land
which is or is likely to be injurious, obnoxious, offensive or dangerous
by reason of noise, smoke, odor, gas, dust or other objectionable or
hazardous features or which for any reason would hinder, interfere with
or detrimentally affect the health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of
the Borough.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use. All accessory structures shall be located in side or
rear yard areas and set back in accordance with zoning district
regulations in Schedule I.94 Garages and similar storage buildings
shall not exceed 15 feet in height; sheds and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet in height nor exceed 100 square feet in
size.
2. Public and private parking.
3. Signs in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
a. Permitted Uses. The permitted uses in this zone are public parks,
playgrounds, open space, recreation facilities and parking.
a. Purpose: The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone is to
provide an opportunity to develop affordable housing to meet present
and prospective housing needs, with particular attention to low- and
moderate-income housing, in conformance with the requirements of the
Court, the Fair Housing Act,95 and the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan of Manasquan Borough. Permitted and conditional uses within the
designated overlay zone shall include all permitted and conditional uses
in the underlying zoning district in which the overlay zone is located
and allow for affordable housing development within the provisions of
this subsection.
94.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 35-5.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.20
AO:519
b. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone: Tax lots with frontage on portions of
Route 71 and Main Street within the Borough of Manasquan will be
included in the overlay zone and allow for affordable housing
development with no affect to any existing zoning district regulations or
standards. A map is attached to this subsection that delineates the
overlay zone. Additionally, a list of all tax lots to be included in the
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone is provided below.96
c. Density: The maximum density permitted for all affordable housing
development in the overlay zone fronting on Main Street is 14 units per
acre. The maximum density permitted for all affordable housing
development in the overlay zone fronting on Route 71 is 10 units per
acre.
d. Principal Permitted Uses:
1. All uses permitted within the underlying zoning district in which
the overlay zone is located.
2. Affordable housing development for sale or rental housing may
include the following uses:
(a) Mixed uses with ground floor retail;
(b) Townhouses;
(c) Age-restricted units, however, age-restricted units shall be
permitted to satisfy up to 25% of the Borough's unmet need.
Any age-restricted units beyond 25% of the Borough's unmet
need shall not be permitted to count as an affordable housing
credit against unmet need for the Third Round, but may count
towards future affordable housing obligations, should future
laws or court orders so permit;
(d) Supportive and special needs housing; and
(e) Multiple-family residential buildings with five or more units.
3. Accessory Uses:
(a) Off-street parking facilities in conformance with RSIS
standards;
(b) Signs in accordance with the ordinance requirements;
(c) Fences, walls, and other accessory uses of the underlying
zoning in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
4. Common facilities and amenities serving residents of multifamily
developments including swimming pools or other on-site
recreational facilities, common walkways, sitting areas and
gardens, and other similar accessory uses.
96.Editor's Note: Said map and list are available for review in the Borough offices.
§ 35-5.20 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-5.20
AO:520
§ 35-6. (RESERVED)
Supplementary Use Regulations
§ 35-7. USE REGULATIONS.
§ 35-7.1. Dwellings to Comply with Standards of Other Legislation.
[1972 Code § 107-20; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
No house, dwelling, building, structure or enclosure, or ship, boat or vessel,
or any part of a house, dwelling, building, structure or enclosure or ship,
boat or vessel, within the Borough of Manasquan shall be used or permitted
to be used or rented to for use or rented by for use as living quarters or
sleeping quarters or for living purposes or sleeping purposes unless same
complies with applicable municipal, County and State housing standards.
§ 35-7.2. Restriction on Use of Boats. [1972 Code § 107-21; Ord. No.
1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
The following shall restrict the use of boats in all residential zones:
5. Affordable Housing Requirements: All affordable housing
developments within the overlay zone, for projects consisting of
five or more units only, shall provide a minimum of 20% affordable
housing units for very-low, low- and moderate-income households
in accordance with Manasquan Borough affordable housing
requirements. All affordable housing developments shall conform
to the standards and requirements found in the Borough of
Manasquan's Affordable Housing Ordinance (§ 35-36), including
provisions for affordability, very-low-income units, and UHAC
standards.
e. Repealer. The remainder of all other sections and subsections of the
aforementioned subsection not specifically amended by this subsection
shall remain in full force and effect.
f. Inconsistent ordinances. All other ordinances or parts thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection are hereby repealed
as to such inconsistency.
g. Severability. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision
of this subsection shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall
apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision so
adjudged and the remainder of this subsection shall be deemed valid
and effective.
h. Effective Date. This subsection shall take effect upon its passage and
publication according to law.
§ 35-5.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-7.2
AO:521
§ 35-7.3. Use of Automobiles, Trailers, Motor-Drawn Vehicles,
Recreational Vehicles and Portable Objects. [1972 Code § 107-22;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1525-90]
a. No ship, boat or vessel of any kind shall be used for any business or
commercial purpose, nor shall the owner, agent, charterer, master or
person in charge of any such vessel permit the same to be used for
business or commercial purposes while such vessel is moored, docked
or located within the Borough of Manasquan, except for vessels while
engaged in dredging or in the construction, repair or improvement of
waterfront facilities.
b. No ship, boat or vessel of any kind shall embark or disembark
passengers or parties of persons within the Borough of Manasquan if
such passengers or parties of persons are carried on such vessel for
consideration, nor shall the owner, agent, charterer, master or person
in charge of any such vessel permit the embarkation or disembarkation
of such passengers or parties within this Borough.
c. No ship, boat or vessel of any kind shall be permanently beached,
grounded or so enclosed or located as to become a permanent structure
on any parcel of land or real estate within the Borough of Manasquan.
d. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the
mooring, docking and servicing of yachts or pleasure craft of any kind
within the Borough of Manasquan while same are used as private
pleasure craft or to prevent or restrict the dry-docking and storage of
such private yachts and pleasure craft on a temporary or seasonal basis
within this Borough.
a. No trailer, motor-drawn vehicle, recreational vehicle or portable object
which can be used for dwelling or sleeping purposes shall be parked or
placed on any street or public property in the Borough of Manasquan.
No person shall occupy or use an automobile, trailer, motor-drawn
vehicle, recreational vehicle or portable object while parked or placed
anywhere within the Borough of Manasquan, either on public or private
property, for living or sleeping purposes.
b. No automobile, trailer, motor-drawn vehicle, recreational vehicle or
portable object shall be used for business or commercial purposes while
parked or placed anywhere within the Borough of Manasquan, either on
public or private property, except for temporary use at construction and
building sites where the same are occupied by contractors or engineers
engaged in building or construction projects. Any such vehicle or object
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the project for which
it is being used.
§ 35-7.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-7.4
AO:522
§ 35-7.4. Auto-Wrecking Yards or Junkyards. [1972 Code § 107-23;
Ord. No. 1097]
No land within the Borough of Manasquan shall be used as an autowrecking
yard or junkyard or for any business which involves the outdoor
storage of waste, secondhand or salvaged material.
§ 35-7.5. Walls and Fences. [1972 Code § 107-23.1; Ord. No. 1115;
Ord. No. 1973-06 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 5; Ord. No. 2180-15]
§ 35-7.6. Prohibited Uses. [1972 Code § 107-23.2; Ord. No. 1152]
a. No wall or fence shall be erected, maintained or planted to a height
greater than six feet above ground level, provided that the same is more
than 25 feet from any street line. No wall or fence shall be erected,
maintained or planted to a height greater than four feet within 25 feet
of any street line.
b. No fence or wall shall be erected, maintained or equipped with or
having barbed wire, spikes, broken glass, sharp or dangerous devices
or any electrical charge sufficient to cause a shock, except that business
and public properties within the Borough may be enclosed with fences
having barbed wire barriers, provided that all such barbed wire is kept
at least six feet above ground level.
c. The finished side of any fence shall face the outside of the property it
encloses.
d. No wall or fence shall be erected, maintained or planted on any lot
which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility on a
curve or at any street intersection.
e. No fence shall be constructed unless the owner or the person in
possession of the lands on which the fence is to be constructed shall
first obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer prior to the
commencement of construction. An application for the permit must be
submitted in writing to the Zoning Officer, together with a plan, and
must be accompanied by a fee in the amount as stated in Chapter 16,
Fees.
f. No fence or wall shall be erected, maintained or planted in the front
yard on property located in the R-4 Beachfront One Family Residential
Zone. A fence not more than six feet in height may be located in the side
and rear yards provided the fence does not extend beyond the front of
the building line of the adjacent properties. A solid fence is prohibited.
a. The following are prohibited uses:
1. Adult book or film store, which is defined as a store selling, offering
for sale, displaying or in any manner exhibiting obscene material,
as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3a.
§ 35-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-7.6
AO:523
§ 35-7.7. Driveways and Curb Cuts in Residential Zone Districts.
[Ord. No. 1852-01 § 6; Ord. No. 2174-15 § 3; Ord. No. 2208-2016;
Ord. No. 2227-2017 § 2]
§ 35-7.8. Additional Requirements for Single-Family Residential
Dwellings in All Zones. [Ord. No. 1982-06 § 1]
b. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter shall be deemed to be
prohibited uses.
a. A driveway exclusive of curb return radii shall not exceed 12 feet in
width at the curb line; provided however, if a property contains a twocar
garage facing a street, the driveway exclusive of curb return radii
shall not exceed 20 feet in width at the curb line.
Notwithstanding the above provision, an existing driveway exclusive
of curb return radii may be replaced or reconstructed for its existing
width; provided however, no repaired or reconstructed driveway
exclusive of curb return radii shall exceed 20 feet in width at the curb
line.
b. A curb return radius from a driveway at its entrance to a public street
shall be a minimum of five feet.
c. The width of a driveway exclusive of curb return radii shall not exceed
20 feet.
d. A maximum of one curb cut is permitted for each building lot.
e. The outer edge of the driveway must be setback at least one foot from
the side property line.
f. In the R-1 and R-2 Zones a driveway may be expanded to the width of
the two-car garage provided that the maximum width of the driveway at
the property line does not exceed 20 feet.
g. In the R-1 and R-2 Zones, a driveway may be expanded to the width of a
two-car garage provided that the maximum width of the driveway at the
property line does not exceed 20 feet within six feet of the garage
structure as long as the driveway material conforms to lot coverage.
a. An enclosed storage area, having a minimum of 80 square feet and 400
cubic feet, shall be provided for the storage of household personal
items. The storage area may be an interior utility closet, interior
storage room, attached garage, unattached garage or an exterior shed.
b. An exterior deck, porch, patio or similar facility, having a minimum area
of 80 square feet or 10% of the first floor area of the dwelling,
whichever is greater, shall be provided for exterior living purposes.
Front yard decks and porches are encouraged to fulfill this
requirement.
§ 35-7.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-7.8
AO:524
§ 35-7.9. Additional Requirements for Structures Containing
Multiple Family Units or Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses.
[Ord. No. 1982-06 § 1]
c. A landscaping plan showing planting, shrubbery and lawn area shall be
provided for the front yard.
d. Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear yard area of the lot in
conformance with Section 35-13. If there is insufficient space to provide
parking in the rear yard area, parking may be provided in the front or
side yards provided that:
1. If lot width is 40 feet or less, the driveway width shall not exceed
50% of the actual lot width.
2. If the parking area is located in the front yard, the balance of the
front yard area cannot be improved with concrete, macadam,
pavers or similar material except to provide a four foot walkway
between the street and the front of the dwelling.
3. The above driveway requirements are not applicable in the R-4
Beachfront One-Family Residential Zone.
a. An enclosed storage area, having a minimum of 80 square feet and 400
cubic feet, shall be provided for the storage of household personal
items. The storage area may be an interior utility closet, interior
storage room, attached garage, unattached garage or an exterior shed.
b. An exterior deck, porch, patio or similar facility, having a minimum area
of 80 square feet or 10% of the first floor area of the living unit,
whichever is greater, shall be provided for exterior living purposes.
Front yard decks and porches are encouraged to fulfill this
requirement.
c. In R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones, an exterior shower area or washing station
shall be provided.
d. An enclosed common area for the temporary storage of solid waste and
recyclable materials shall be provided. This area shall be shielded from
view of neighboring properties and the street, and be sized to
accommodate the required number of solid waste and recyclable
material containers or a dumpster for the storage of such materials.
e. Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear of the structure. Vehicle
egress shall be designed to prevent backing out onto a street.
f. A landscaping plan showing planting, shrubbery and lawn area for the
front, side and rear yards shall be provided.
g. Interior walls shall be soundproofed between all residential and
commercial units to meet a Sound Transmission Class (STC) rating of
50 or higher.
§ 35-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-8
AO:525
§ 35-8. (RESERVED)
Zone Regulations
§ 35-9. APPLICABILITY.
§ 35-9.1. Scope. [1972 Code § 107-24; Ord. No. 1097]
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each zone
as set forth in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements which
is supplemented by other sections of this chapter.
§ 35-9.2. Application of Regulations. [1972 Code § 107-25; Ord. No.
1097]
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
§ 35-9.3. Application to Existing Construction. [1972 Code § 107-26;
Ord. No. 1097]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building upon which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter and
upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on, and
a. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be
used, for any purpose other than that which is permitted in the district
in which the building or land is located.
b. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein
established for the district in which the building is located.
c. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area
regulations of the district in which the building is located.
d. No space which, for the purpose of a building or dwelling group, has
been counted or calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard,
court or other open space required by this chapter may, by reason of
change in ownership or otherwise, be counted or calculated to satisfy or
comply with a yard, court or other open space requirement of or for any
other building.
e. The minimum yards or other open spaces, including lot areas per family
required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time
of passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter erected, shall
not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space
requirements for any other building.
§ 35-8 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-9.3
AO:526
provided further that such building shall be completed within two years
from the date of passage and publication of this chapter.
§ 35-9.4. Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements. [1972
Code § 107-27; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1385; Ord. No. 1657-95;
Ord. No. 1702-96; Ord. No. 1711-96; Ord. No. 1957-05 § 4; Ord. No.
1983-06 § 1; Ord. No. 1997-07 §§ 1, 2]
The area, yard and building requirements for each zone in the municipality
are as set forth in Schedule I attached to and made part of this chapter.97
§ 35-10. (RESERVED)
Supplementary Lot, Height and Yard Requirements
§ 35-11. LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
§ 35-11.1. Building Abutting Streets. [1972 Code § 107-29; Ord. No.
1097]
No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land
which does not abut upon a public street or upon the monumented line of
the beach adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 35-11.2. Principal Buildings. [1972 Code § 107-30; Ord. No. 1097;
Ord. No. 1832-00 § 1; Ord. No. 1983-03 § 2; Ord. No. 2230-2017]
Only one principal building shall be permitted on each lot, except in
conjunction with townhouse and planned multi-family residential
development.
Two principal buildings shall be permitted on a lot in the R-4 Beachfront
One-Family Residential Zone provided that:
a. A garage with a second floor living unit shall front on First Avenue and a
single-family residential dwelling shall front on the beachfront.
b. The minimum lot width shall be 30 feet.
c. The minimum lot area shall be 4,200 square feet.
d. The building facing the beachfront shall be set back a minimum
distance of 15 feet from the monumented Borough beachfront line.
e. The garage apartment building facing First Avenue shall be set back a
minimum distance of 10 feet from that street.
97.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 35-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-11.2
AO:527
§ 35-11.3. Building Height Exceptions. [1972 Code § 107-32; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 2130-13 § 1]
f. The two buildings shall be separated a minimum distance of 35 feet
from each other.
g. The maximum height of the garage apartment building facing First
Avenue shall be 32 feet.
h. The maximum height for single family dwellings facing the beachfront
shall be 38 feet for conforming lots and 33 feet for non-conforming lots.
i. The first floor garage area of the building facing First Avenue shall
provide an interior parking area for at least two motor vehicles. Any
excess first floor area may be used for storage purposes; except for
vertical access to the second floor; provided however, no living area is
permitted on the first floor garage area.
j. The garage apartment building facing First Avenue shall have a
walkway, with a minimum width of three feet, to provide access to the
beachfront.
k. Each building shall be serviced by separate water and sewer lines.
l. No single dormer shall exceed 10 feet in length measured along the
fascia.
m. All dormers, except for a stairwell dormer must be stepped back a
minimum of two feet from the exterior wall beneath it.
n. Half story must comply with the requirements outlined in Section 35-3.
o. The property shall comply with all other standards applicable in the R-4
Zone.
a. The height limitations set forth on Schedule I of subsection 35-9.4 shall
not apply to church spires or belfries or to receiving antennas not
higher than 10 feet above the permitted height in the zone district.
b. Maximum building height for all conforming residential principal
buildings located on conforming lots in Flood Hazard Zone V and A as
reflected on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
as released on December 15, 2012, shall be 38 feet.
c. Maximum building height for all nonconforming residential principal
buildings or conforming residential principal buildings on
nonconforming lots or both, located in Flood Hazard Zones V and A as
reflected on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
as released on December 15,2012, shall be 33 feet.
d. Maximum building height for all garage apartment buildings facing
First Avenue in Flood Hazard V as reflected on the most current FEMA
§ 35-11.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-11.3
AO:528
§ 35-11.4. Flag Lots. [Ord. No. 2118-12]
The creation of flag lots is prohibited.
§ 35-11.5. Obstructions to Traffic Visibility. [1972 Code § 107-34;
Ord. No. 1097]
No wall, fence or shrubbery shall be erected, maintained or planted on any
lot which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility on a
curve or at any street intersection.
§ 35-11.6. Swimming Pools. [1972 Code § 107-35; Ord. No. 1097;
Ord. No. 1825-00 § 2]
No swimming or wading pool shall be located nearer than 10 feet to any
side or rear lot line nor shall any swimming or wading pool be located in the
front yard of any premises.
Notwithstanding the above provision, any temporary swimming or wading
pool which is not enclosed by a fence or wall having a height of at least four
feet may be located in any part of the front, side or rear yard area of any
premises provided that such pool shall be emptied of water each day not
later than 7:00 p.m. and shall not be filled with water each day earlier than
9:00 a.m.
§ 35-11.7. (Reserved)98
§ 35-11.8. Additional Lot, Height and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No.
1784-99 § 3; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 7; Ord. No. 2130-13 § 3; Ord. No.
2139-13; Ord. No. 2228-2017]
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as released on December 15, 2012,
shall be 32 feet.
a. No deck shall be constructed above the highest finished floor of any
building or structure;
b. A widows walk having a maximum floor area of 50 square feet is
permitted provided that it is uncovered and that the sole access to the
widows walk is from within the interior of the building;
c. No steps, stairs, entry porch, platform, landing, shower enclosure or
mechanical device shall be constructed, located or maintained in any
required side yard setback area except as set forth in paragraph k
below;
d. An uncovered and unscreened entry porch, platform or landing leading
to a basement, cellar or first floor which is not more than five feet wide
98.Editor's Note: Former subsection 35-11.7, Nonconforming Buildings and Lots, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1972 Code § 107-35.1 and Ordinance Nos.
1685-96, 1741-98 and 1985-99 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1956-05. See
Section 35-12 for regulations pertaining to nonconforming buildings and lots.
§ 35-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-11.8
AO:529
may project not more than three feet (not including steps) into the
required front or rear yard setback area, provided the floor of the porch
is within three feet of ground level;
e. Entry steps or stairs may be located in the required front and rear
setback areas;
f. An open terrace, deck or patio, but not including a roofed over porch or
terrace and not more than three feet above the surrounding grade may
be located in the front yard provided that the unoccupied portion of the
front yard has a depth of at least 10 feet;
g. A one story bay window may project into a front yard not more than
three feet;
h. Roof overhangs and chimneys may project not more than 18 inches into
the required side setback area;
i. A covered and unscreened front or rear entry porch, landing or
platform leading to a cellar, basement or first floor which is not more
than five feet wide and not more than three feet above the finished
grade may project not more than three feet (not including steps) into
the required front or rear yard setback area;
j. Standby generators shall be located in the rear yard only and not
project beyond the side building liens of the principal building. The
generator shall be screened so that it is not visible from adjacent
properties. For comer lots, standby generators may be located in a side
yard with prior approval from the Zoning Officer and the Technical
Review Committee of the Planning Board;
k. For existing residential principal buildings located in Flood Hazard
Zones V and A as reflected on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) as released on December 15, 2012, steps and/or
stairs required to be extended as a result of the building being raised
shall be permitted to extend into any required front, rear or side yard
setback, but not into the public right-of-way. For new residential
construction located in Flood Hazard Zones V and A as reflected on the
most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as released on
December 15,2012 and steps and/or stairs may be located in the front
and rear setback areas;
l. Ground level decks and patios may be located in the rear yard provided
that the deck or patio is not more than eight inches above the
surrounding grade and set back at least five feet from the side and rear
property lines;
m. Raised decks may be located in the required front and side yard setback
areas.
n. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs a and f above, residential
principal buildings located in Flood Hazard Zones V and A as reflected
§ 35-11.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-11.8
AO:530
§ 35-11.9. Hot Tubs/Spas. [Ord. No. 1976-06 § 2]
No hot tub/spa shall be:
§ 35-11.10. Architectural Design. [Ord. No. 2145-13 § 2; Ord. No.
2150-14 § 2]
§ 35-12. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND LOTS.
on the most current FEMA Flood Insurance Rates Map (FIRM) as
released on December 15, 2012, may construct first floor decks in the
rear and front yards at a height no greater than the first floor elevation
of the structure, but not to exceed a height of six feet from the finished
grade.
o. Maximum building height for all garage apartment buildings facing
First Avenue in Flood Hazard V as reflected on the most current FEMA
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as released on December 15, 2012,
shall be 32 feet.
a. Located in the front yard of any lot.
b. Located in the side yard of any lot.
c. Located nearer than five feet to any lot line.
d. Located nearer to the side yard than the principal building on the lot.
An enclosure for a hot tub/spa shall not exceed 10 feet in height,
measured from the average grade of the lot.
a. Elevation of an existing building or construction of a new building on
the existing foundation, the exterior siding must extend down over the
foundation to a point not less than 2 1/2 feet above the existing grade of
the property surrounding the building.
b. Elevation of an existing building or construction of a new building:
1. Any open area between the lowest finished floor and the existing
grade may be enclosed with a breakaway wall or screening all
exposed pilings must be enclosed.
2. The exterior siding must extend down over the foundation to a
point not less than 2 1/2 feet above the existing grade surrounding
the building.
3. Any exposed ground area under the building must be covered with
either concrete or stone.
4. Any storage area under the building must be enclosed.
§ 35-11.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-12.1
AO:531
§ 35-12.1. Nonconforming Buildings and Conforming Buildings on
Nonconforming Lots. [Ord. No. 1956-05 § 2]
An existing nonconforming building or a conforming building on a
nonconforming lot may be repaired, altered, enlarged or extended provided
that there is compliance with the following requirements:
§ 35-12.2. New Conforming Buildings on Nonconforming Lots. [Ord.
No. 1956-05 § 3]
A new conforming building may be built on a nonconforming lot provided
there is compliance with the following requirements:
a. The building is used exclusively for residential purposes.
b. The use of the building is permitted in the zone.
c. The nonconforming lot is separately designated on the current
municipal tax map or has been established by a subdivision approved by
a Municipal Land Use Board.
d. The proposed new building addition complies with subsection 35-9.4
(Schedule of Area Yard and Building Requirements) for the zone in
which it is located.
e. The proposed building height does not exceed 30 feet as measured
from: the top of an existing curb; or in the absence of an existing curb,
from the crown of the road; or in the case of beachfront lots, from the
elevation of the monumented beachfront line.
f. If the new building addition does not comply with paragraph d above,
then the individual front, side and rear yard setback distances of the
existing nonconforming building must be equal to or greater than 90%
of the required setback distances in the zone.
g. If the new building addition does not comply with paragraph d above,
then existing building and lot coverage cannot exceed 110% of the
maximum building and lot coverage permitted in the zone.
h. This provision may be invoked only once during any five-year period.
Any subsequent application to repair, alter, enlarge or extend a building
shall be based upon the size and location of the building at the time of
the first repair, alteration, enlargement or extension.
a. The building is used exclusively for residential purposes.
b. The use of the building is permitted in the zone.
c. The nonconforming lot is separately designated on the current
municipal tax map or has been established by a subdivision approved by
a Municipal Land Use Board.
§ 35-12.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-12.2
AO:532
§ 35-12.3. Nonconforming Buildings on Conforming Lots. [Ord. No.
1956-05 § 4; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 8]
An existing nonconforming building on a conforming lot may be repaired,
altered, enlarged or extended provided that there is compliance with the
following requirements:
d. The proposed new building complies with subsection 35-9.4 (Schedule
of Area Yard and Building Requirements) for the zone in which it is
located.
e. Building height does not exceed 30 feet as measured from: the top of an
existing curb; or in the absence of an existing curb, from the crown of
the road; or in the case of beachfront lots, from the elevation of the
monumented beachfront line.
a. The building is used exclusively for residential purposes.
b. The use of the building is permitted in the zone.
c. The conforming lot is separately designated on the current municipal
tax map or has been established by a subdivision approved by a
Municipal Land Use Board.
d. The proposed new building addition complies with subsection 35-9.4
(Schedule of Area Yard and Building Requirements) for the zone in
which it is located.
e. If the new building addition does not comply with paragraph d above,
then the following shall apply:
1. The proposed building height does not exceed 30 feet as measured
from: the top of the existing curb; or in the absence of a curb, from
the crown of the road; or in the case of beachfront lots, from the
elevation of the monumented beachfront line.
2. The individual front, side and rear yard setback distances of the
existing nonconforming building must be equal to or greater than
90% of the required setback distances in the zone.
3. The existing building and lot coverage cannot exceed 110% of the
maximum building and lot coverage permitted in the zone.
f. This provision may be invoked only once during any five-year period.
Any subsequent application to repair, alter, enlarge or extend a building
shall be based upon the size and location of the building at the time of
the first repair, alteration, enlargement or extension.
g. (Reserved)
h. This provision may be invoked only once during any five-year period.
Any subsequent application to repair, alter, enlarge or extend a building
§ 35-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-12.3
AO:533
§ 35-12.4. Structural Alterations to the Interior of Nonconforming
Structures. [Ord. No. 2119-12]
Structural alterations to the interior of nonconforming structures shall be
permitted provided that the structural alterations do not expand or extend
the footprint or height of the nonconforming structure.
Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 35-13. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 35-13.1. Proposed New Uses. [1972 Code § 107-36A; Ord. No.
1097]
All proposed new uses shall satisfy the off-street parking and loading
requirements contained in the following subsection 35-13.4, Schedule II,
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements, and Schedule III, subsection
35-13.5, Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements.
§ 35-13.2. Parking Spaces. [1972 Code § 107-36B, C, D.; Ord. No.
1657-95]
shall be based upon the size and location of the building at the time of
the first repair, alteration, enlargement or extension.
a. Parking spaces shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the building
to be served.
b. Dimension of Spaces; Aisle Width. Parking spaces shall have a minimum
width of nine feet and a minimum length of 19 feet. The minimum width
of access aisles shall conform to the following requirements:
Aisle Width
Parking Angle One-Way Two-Way
0 Degrees 12' 24'
30 Degrees 14' 24'
45 Degrees 14' 24'
60 Degrees 18' 24'
90 Degrees 24' 24'
c. Residential Zones. In residential zones, all off-street parking spaces
shall be located within the property lines. In nonresidential zones, offstreet
parking facilities shall be set back at least four feet from side and
rear yard lines and at least five feet from any right-of-way line. All
setback areas shall be appropriately landscaped to provide continuous
year round screening. If a fence is provided, the fence shall only
supplement required landscaping, not be provided in lieu of
§ 35-12.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-13.2
AO:534
§ 35-13.3. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities for
Nonresidential Uses. [1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1657-95]
§ 35-13.4. Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces.
SCHEDULE II
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
[1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
Use Required Number of Spaces
Residential Uses
Single and two-family
dwellings
2 for every dwelling unit
Townhouses (1) 2 for every dwelling unit
Garden apartments and other
multifamily developments (1)
1.75 for every zero-bedroom unit; 2 for
every other unit
Senior citizen developments 1 for every dwelling unit
Rooming houses and
boarding houses
1 for every occupant
Nonresidential Uses
Governmental offices 1 for every 400 square feet of gross floor
area
Banks, financial institutions 1 for every 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Libraries 1 for every 400 square feet of gross floor
area
landscaping. The landscape strip along any right-of-way shall be
landscaped with shrubbery not exceeding 30 inches in height, street
trees, and other suitable landscape improvements.
a. For nonresidential uses located in a residential zone and for
nonresidential uses abutting residential zone lines, off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be set back at least 15 feet from the
residential property or zone line. The setback area shall be landscaped
to create a year round landscaped visual buffer area. The buffer area
may contain a fence, but only as a complement to provided landscaping.
b. Off-street loading spaces shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 45 feet
in length, exclusive of access and turning lanes, and have a minimum
vertical clearance of 14 feet. Off-street loading areas shall be set back
at least five feet from side and rear property lines and shall not be
permitted in front yard areas. Such facilities are subject to paragraph a
of this subsection.
§ 35-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-13.4
AO:535
SCHEDULE II
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
[1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
Use Required Number of Spaces
Offices, retail stores, and
businesses providing
personal services
1 for every 300 square feet of gross floor
area for employee and patron use
Restaurants, taverns and
cafes, other than fast-service
or drive-in establishments
1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area or 1 for every 3 seats, whichever is
greater
Fast-service and drive-in
restaurants
1 for every 2 seats, 1 for every 2
employees and 1 for every 3 take-outservice
patrons estimated for peak-hour
periods
Medical and dental clinics 1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area or 5 for each doctor or dentist,
whichever is greater
Medical practitioners in other
than office buildings or
clinics
5 for every doctor, plus 1 for each
employee
Marinas 2 for every berth, plus 1 for every
employee
Nursing and convalescent
homes
1 for every 3 beds
Hotels and motels 1 for every sleeping room and 1 for every 2
employees on the maximum shift
Theaters 1 for every 3 seats
Churches, auditoriums and
other places of assembly
1 for every 4 seats
Bowling establishment 4 for every bowling lane; if additional
facilities such as bar or restaurant are
provided, additional parking shall be
provided for separate uses in accordance
with this subsection
Elementary schools and daycare
centers
1 for every 2 teachers or employees, plus 1
for every 6 seats in the assembly hall
Secondary schools 1 for every 2 teachers and employees, plus
1 for every 10 students
Social halls, clubs and lodges 1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 35-13.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-13.4
AO:536
SCHEDULE II
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
[1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
Use Required Number of Spaces
Manufacturing plants 1 for every 2 employees or 1 for every 400
square feet of gross floor area, whichever
is greater
Funeral homes, mortuaries 1 for every 100 square feet of gross floor
area in parlors or service rooms
Wholesale establishments 1 for every 2 employees or 1 for every 400
square feet of gross floor space, whichever
is greater
Billiard parlor 2 for every billiard table plus the sum of
other provided uses, or, 1 for every 2
persons allowed by law to occupy the
premises, whichever is greater
Handball and racquetball
courts
2.5 for every court
Gymnasiums, physical culture
and health clubs
1 for every 1.5 persons allowed by law to
occupy the premises
Miniature golf course 1 for every tee
Tennis courts 2 for every court for outdoor courts; 2.5 for
every court for indoor courts
Skating rinks 1 for each 1,000 square feet of lot area for
outdoor rinks. For indoor rinks, 1 for each
3 persons allowed by law to occupy the
premises
Swimming pools 1 for each 50 square feet of surface water
area
Neighborhood convenience
shopping center under
49,000 square feet
1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Day care centers, child care
centers, nursery schools
1 for each employee plus 2 for each
classroom
Community residences for
the developmentally disabled
or for victims of domestic
violence
5 plus 1 for each employee
Warehousing 1 for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, or 1 for every employee on the
maximum shift, whichever is greater
§ 35-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-13.4
AO:537
SCHEDULE II
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
[1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-95]
Use Required Number of Spaces
Mixed uses The cumulative sum of individual
requirements
Uses not specified To be determined considering parking
requirements for similar uses, maximum
employees, visitors anticipated, occupancy
codes and other appropriate factors
Note:
(1) 1 additional parking space for every 4 dwelling units must be provided
in all multi-family developments containing 16 or more dwelling units
to provide for overflow guest parking. Such spaces may be provided
in guest lots, as part of the overall parking scheme, or along interior
roads if the pavement widths are shown to be sufficient to
accommodate moving traffic in addition to the parking in accordance
with criteria established by the Borough's subdivision ordinance.
§ 35-13.5. Schedule of Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Requirements.
SCHEDULE III
OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
[1972 Code § 107-36; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1657-94]
Uses
Square Feet of Total
Floor Area
Required Off-Street
(1) Loading Berths
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Undertakers and
funeral parlors
5,000 For each additional
5,000 or major fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
Offices; hotels; From 10,000-25,000 1
retail, commercial, From 25,000-40,000 2
wholesale From 40,000-60,000 3
manufacturing; From 60,000-100,000 4
storage and
miscellaneous uses
For each additional 50,000
or major fraction thereof
1 additional
Marinas 1
§ 35-13.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-13.5
AO:538
Conditional Uses
§ 35-14. REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
§ 35-14.1. General Provisions. [1972 Code § 107-37; Ord. No. 1097]
§ 35-14.2. Senior Citizen Housing. [1972 Code § 107-38; Ord. No.
1657-95; Ord. No. 1783-99 § 9; Ord. No. 1977-06 § 1]
a. A conditional use is one listed as a conditional use in the particular
zoning district. All such uses shall meet the site plan review regulations
in addition to specific conditions and standards set forth in this Section
35-14.
b. The standards for review have been established in order to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the Borough residents. Any
conditional use found to be detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare shall be denied.
c. The Planning Board shall take into consideration the character and type
of development in the area surrounding the location for which the
request is made and determine that the proposed conditional use, as
permitted, will constitute an appropriate use in the area and will not
substantially injure or detract from the use of surrounding property or
from the character of the neighborhood.
d. The Planning Board may impose conditions in addition to those
required to ensure that the intent of this chapter and the site plan
review regulations are satisfied. These may include, but are not limited
to, harmonious design of buildings, aesthetics, planting and its
maintenance as a sight or sound screen, landscaping, hours of
operation, lighting, numbers of persons involved, noise, sanitation,
safety, smoke and fume control and the minimizing of noxious, offensive
or hazardous elements.
a. Permitted Uses: planned multifamily housing for senior citizens.
b. Minimum Lot Area: 22,000 square feet.
c. Minimum Frontage: 100 feet.
d. Front Yard Setback: 30 feet.
e. Rear Yard Setback: 35 feet.
f. Side Yard Setback: five feet.
g. Perimeter Landscape Setback: 15 feet landscaped with a variety of
plantings to create a year-round buffer.
h. Maximum Building Coverage Area: 30%.
§ 35-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-14.2
AO:539
§ 35-14.3. Servicing and Selling of Automobiles. [1972 Code
§ 107-39; Ord. No. 1097]
i. Maximum Lot Coverage Area: 45%.
j. Building Height: two stories not to exceed 28 feet.
k. Maximum Density: one unit per 4,000 square feet.
l. Off-Street Parking: to be in accordance with site improvement
standards promulgated by the State of New Jersey.
m. Senior Citizen means a person 55 years or older. A person under the
age of 55 may reside in a Senior Citizen Housing Complex provided that
his or her spouse is 55 years of age or older.
a. In no district shall a gasoline or other motor fuel service or filling
station, automatic automobile cleaning station, public garage or
commercial garage accommodating more than five motor vehicles be
erected, constructed, established, maintained or operated within 500
feet of any of the following:
1. A public school or playground or lands owned by the Board of
Education for school or playground purposes.
2. A duly organized school giving regular instruction at least five days
a week (holidays excepted) for eight or more months a year.
3. A hospital.
4. A church.
5. An orphan asylum.
6. A nursing or rest home.
7. A public library.
8. A theater or opera house or other building used for theatrical or
operatic purposes or for public entertainment.
9. A municipal building housing the public offices of the municipality.
10. Any public playground or athletic field.
b. No gasoline or other motor fuel filling appliance shall be located within
10 feet of a street line or within five feet of any adjacent property line.
c. No gasoline or other motor fuel service or filling station shall be
erected, constructed, maintained or operated within 1,000 feet of any
other such service or filling station.
d. No gasoline or other motor fuel service or filling station shall be
erected, constructed, maintained or operated in that part of the
Borough of Manasquan lying east of Watson's Creek.
§ 35-14.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-14.3
AO:540
§ 35-14.4. Lodges, Fraternal Organizations, Nonprofit Corporations
and Associations. [1972 Code § 107-40; Ord. No. 1097]
e. No existing garage accommodating or designed to accommodate more
than five motor vehicles or a gasoline or other motor fuel service or
filling station shall be deemed to become a nonconforming use through
the subsequent erection of such school or schools, hospital, church,
orphan asylum, nursing or rest home, public library, theater or opera
house or other building used for theatrical or operatic purposes or for
public entertainment, a municipal building or any public playground or
athletic field, as defined above, within the aforesaid prescribed area.
f. Plot Plans and Specifications. All applications for building permits and
all applications for exceptions or variances shall be accompanied by a
plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the size of the buildings to be erected or any
addition thereto and any existing buildings, the location of any building
upon the lot, the dimensions of all open spaces, the established building
lines within the block, specifications for or of any buildings to be
erected or any addition to any existing buildings or any other work to be
done and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this Section 35-14.
g. No business for the sale of, or otherwise dealing in, secondhand or used
motor vehicles shall be conducted, operated, maintained or carried on
within the Borough of Manasquan, unless such business is conducted,
operated, maintained and carried on by a franchised dealer actually
engaged in the business of the sale of new motor vehicles and licensed
to do so by the State of New Jersey.
a. The facilities involved shall consist of halls, meeting places or
clubhouses belonging to an association of persons formed for mutual
aid and benefit, but not for profit, providing social, recreational or
cultural opportunities for members.
b. All applications for such a permit shall furnish the following:
1. A complete list of the organization's current officers, including
their names and addresses, and the total number of members.
2. The full particulars on the operation of the proposed use.
3. Sufficient information to enable the Board to determine that the
proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit organization operated solely
for the recreation, enjoyment and use of the members of the
organization.
4. Proof that the proposed use and the proposed location will not
adversely affect the safety and comfortable enjoyment of property
rights or otherwise adversely affect the value of adjacent
properties; that the design of any structures erected in connection
with such use are in keeping with the general character of the
§ 35-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-14.4
AO:541
§ 35-14.5. Motels. [1972 Code § 107-41; Ord. No. 1097]
surrounding area; and that sufficient landscaping, including trees,
shrubs and lawn, are provided to serve as a buffer between the
use and adjoining residential properties and to ensure an attractive
appearance for the use.
5. A site plan shall be submitted showing the information required in
this subsection as well as adequate off-street parking for the use
involved and the location of all utility and service areas, which shall
be adequately screened.
6. No living quarters or sleeping accommodations of any kind shall be
permitted on premises occupied by organizations specified in this
subsection.
a. Conditions and standards applicable to motel use include:
1. Area of plot: minimum of 22,500 square feet.
2. Width of plot: minimum of 150 feet.
3. Front yard: Every lot shall have a setback of not less than 10 feet
from the street line.
4. Rear yard: minimum of 20 feet.
5. Side yards: minimum of 10 feet each where the same abut private
property, and a minimum of 15 feet where the same abuts a public
street or road.
6. Height: maximum of 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
7. Lot coverage by buildings: maximum of 50%.
8. Off-street parking: See Schedule II (subsection 358-13.4).
b. No buildings shall be erected and no permits shall be issued in
connection with the use set forth in this subsection unless a site plan for
the building lot shall first have been approved by a resolution of the
Planning Board of the Borough of Manasquan. In acting upon any such
site plan, the Planning Board shall base its decision on the following:
1. The layout of the site plan in respect to the standards and
conditions set forth in this Section 35-14.
2. The arrangement of exterior lighting to adequately illuminate
parking areas, so located and shaded as to prevent glare in
adjoining residential areas.
3. The grading, surfacing and installation of drainage structure and
landscaping of all improvements to parking areas, surface
roadways, loading and unloading areas, lawns, gardens and
courtyards.
§ 35-14.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-14.5
AO:542
§ 35-14.6. Houses of Worship and Schools. [1972 Code § 107-42;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 2246-2017]
Schools, (as defined in § 35-3.1 Definitions) churches and similar places
of worship, parish houses, convents, church schools and libraries that are
owned and operated by duly incorporated religious organizations shall be
permitted in all zones of the Borough of Manasquan, subject to the following
limitations and requirements:
c. Prohibited Activities.
1. Motels shall not maintain or permit upon their premises any
amusement devices, cabaret, nightclub or public entertainment of
any kind. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent a
motel from maintaining a coffee shop or dining room, provided that
same are a part of or are attached to the main structure of the
motel.
a. The minimum building lot size shall be one acre for each building and
accessory buildings. One parish house, convent, church school and
church library may be constructed as part of a building used as a
church or similar place of worship or in combination or singly as
accessory buildings.
b. The minimum front yard depth shall be 25 feet.
c. The minimum side yard shall be 25 feet on either side.
d. The minimum rear yard depth shall be 50 feet.
e. The minimum street frontage shall be 200 feet.
f. The maximum building height shall be two stories, not to exceed 50 feet
to the highest point of any building, exclusive of chimneys, steeples and
similar items.
g. Parking areas shall be located only in the side yards and rear yard and
not in the buffer strips required by paragraph h below.
h. Buffer strips 10 feet in width with planting, as indicated by the location
and existing trees and undergrowth, shall be maintained all along the
side lines and rear line. No trees shall be removed in the buffer strips
unless approved by the Planning Board.
i. There shall be a minimum of one separate entrance and one separate
exit from and to a public street, collector road, and arterial road.
j. No building permit shall be issued unless a site plan has been approved
in writing by the Planning Board.
k. The Planning Board, in making its determination, shall be guided by the
following standards in order that such uses may be properly related to
the orderly and harmonious development of the community.
§ 35-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-14.6
AO:543
§ 35-14.7. Fast-Service and Drive-in Restaurants. [1972 Code
§ 107-43; Ord. No. 1097]
§ 35-14.8. Bed and Breakfast Guest House. [Ord. No. 1768-98 § 4]
1. The proper relationship of the particular structures and other
features shown on the site plan to one another and to present and
proposed structures and other features in the area.
2. The proper relationship of parking areas, driveways and
approaches to roadways and traffic flow on roadways and on
private or public property in the area.
3. The proper relationship of structures and other features to the
contours of the land.
4. The proper maintenance of natural features, trees and foliage.
5. The proper development of buffer strips as required by paragraph h
above.
6. Such matters as relate to the planning and physical development of
the Borough of Manasquan.
l. The Planning Board may require reasonable performance and
maintenance guaranties, in a form satisfactory to the Board, for the
completion and maintenance of those items shown on the site plan.
a. Area, yard and building requirements shall be the same as the zone in
which it is situated.
b. Other conditions:
1. No conditional use as set forth herein shall be located closer than
500 feet, measured from the nearest point on the property line, to
any public or parochial school or closer than 150 feet from the
boundary line of any residential zone.
2. Satisfaction of site plan requirements.
3. Determine that there is appropriate provision for access facilities
adequate for the estimated traffic from public streets and
sidewalks so as to assure the public safety and to avoid traffic
congestion. Vehicular entrances and exits shall be clearly visible
from the street.
4. Determine that there are full adequate parking areas and off-street
truck loading spaces, in conformity with this chapter and all other
pertinent ordinances, for the anticipated number of occupants,
employees and patrons and that the layout of the parking is
convenient and conducive to safe operation.
§ 35-14.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-14.8
AO:544
a. Bed And Breakfast Guest House shall mean a facility providing sleeping
or dwelling accommodations to transient guests which:
1. Consists of an existing or newly constructed structure to be utilized
for residential purposes.
2. Provides individual sleeping accommodations for six to 12 guests.
3. Contains at least one living unit occupied by the owner of the
facility as a place of residence during the time when the facility is
being used for the lodging of guests.
4. Has at least 300 square feet of common area for the exclusive use
of guests, including, but not limited to, parlors, dining rooms and
libraries.
5. Prohibits cooking or smoking in guest rooms.
6. Provides guests with breakfast before noon each day. Individual
kitchen facilities and service to the general public are prohibited.
7. Does not operate as a rooming house or boarding house as defined
by N.J.S.A. 55:138-3.
8. Guest stays may not exceed 30 days during any 60 successive day
period.
b. Every Bed and Breakfast Guest House shall maintain a guest register
listing the name and permanent address of all guests, dates of arrival
and departure, and the license plate identification number of any motor
vehicle utilized by a guest.
c. Two off-street parking spaces are required for each owner living unit
plus one parking space for each guest room.
1. Off-street parking spaces shall be located in side and/or rear yard.
2. All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least five feet
from side property lines and at least 10 feet from the rear property
line. The yard areas adjacent to parking spaces and driveways shall
be landscaped to provide natural year-round screening from
adjacent properties.
d. Signs shall conform with the requirements of Section 35-25, Signs,
provided however, the maximum height of any free-standing sign shall
be three feet from ground level and no sign shall contain a telephone
number or the words "full" or "vacancy."
e. Bed and Breakfast Guest House facilities shall comply with applicable
fire safety requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
f. Bed and Breakfast Guest House facilities shall be registered with the
Bureau of Housing Inspection in the Department of Community Affairs
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 35-14.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-14.8
AO:545
§ 35-15. (RESERVED)
§ 35-16. (RESERVED)99
§ 35-17. (RESERVED)
Site Plan Review: Title; Application; Exemption
§ 35-18. SITE PLAN REGULATIONS.100
§ 35-18.1. Title. [1972 Code § 107-50; Ord. No. 1097]
Sections 35-18 through 35-23 of this chapter of the Code of the Borough of
Manasquan may be cited and referred to as the "Site Plan Ordinance."
§ 35-18.2. Purpose. [1972 Code § 107-51; Ord. No. 1097]
Sections 35-18 through 35-23 establishes a site plan review process by
the Planning Board for proposed construction in the Borough. The purpose
of the review is to ensure new development will enhance the general
appearance of Manasquan, promote the harmonious use of land and provide
for a pleasing and efficient design of structures.
§ 35-18.3. Approval Required. [1972 Code § 107-52; Ord. No. 1097]
No development shall take place within the Borough, nor shall any land
be cleared or altered, nor shall any watercourse be diverted or its channel
or floodplain dredged or filled, nor shall any parking areas, accessory or
otherwise, be constructed, installed or enlarged, nor shall any building
permit, zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or other required permit
be issued with respect to any such structure, land or parking area, except
in accordance with an approval of such development granted pursuant
to Sections 35-18 through 35-23, unless exempted in accordance with
subsection 35-18.4.
g. No Bed and Breakfast Guest House facility shall be permitted without
obtaining site plan approval pursuant to Section 35-19, Site Plan
Approval Procedure, of this chapter.
h. The minimum lot size for a Bed and Breakfast Guest House facility shall
be 7,500 square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall be 75 feet.
i. Bed and Breakfast Guest House facilities shall comply with Schedule I
(Zoning Schedule of Bulk and Coverage Controls) applicable to the zone
in which the facility is located.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Section 35-16, Regulations for Planned Unit Development,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1972 Code §§ 107-45 — 107-49 and
Ordinance Nos. 1097 and 1109 was repealed in its entirety.
100. Editor's Note: Site Plan Regulations include Section 35-18 through Section 35-23.
§ 35-14.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-18.4
AO:546
§ 35-18.4. Exemptions. [1972 Code § 107-53; Ord. No. 1097; Ord.
No. 1657-95]
§ 35-18.5. Interpretation; Variances. [1972 Code § 107-54; Ord. No.
1097]
The rules, regulations and standards set forth in Sections 35-18 through
35-23 shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection
of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
Any action taken by the Planning Board under the terms of Sections 35-18
through 35-23 shall give primary consideration to such matters and to
the welfare of the entire community. However, if the applicant can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land,
the literal enforcement of Sections 35-18 through 35-23 is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such variances
as may be reasonable, within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by Sections 35-18 through 35-23.
§ 35-18.6. Waiver of Requirements. [1972 Code § 107-55; Ord. No.
1097]
The Planning Board may waive the requirements of Sections 35-18 through
35-23 if the proposed development:
§ 35-18.7. Reservation of Public Areas. [1972 Code § 107-56; Ord.
No. 1097]
a. Single-family and two-family residential structures and structures and
uses incidental thereto, permitted as a right under applicable zoning
regulations, are exempt from the requirements of this Sections 35-18
through 35-23; however, a site plan will be required if, at the discretion
of the Building Officer, there exist soil and drainage conditions or traffic
factors which may result in environmental problems.
b. No site plan shall be required for any repairs or alterations to a building
or installation of equipment in any buildings, as such terms are defined
by the Building Code of the Borough of Manasquan.101
c. Signs which are not part of an application under subsection 35-18.3 and
are in accordance with the standards of Section 35-25.
a. Secured previous site plan approval under the terms of Sections 35-18
through 35-23.
b. Does not affect existing circulation, drainage, building arrangements,
landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan
review.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14, Building and Housing, Section 14-1, State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
§ 35-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-18.7
AO:547
§ 35-19. SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 35-19.1. Notification of Hearing Date; Submission of Application
to other Agencies. [1972 Code § 107-57; Ord. No. 1097]
The Secretary of the Planning Board shall, after an applicant for preliminary
or final approval has submitted an application in proper form with the
requisite fees, notify the applicant of the hearing date so that he can comply
with the notice requirements and refer the site plan and exhibits to the
Borough Planning Board and the County Planning Board. The Planning
Board may also designate other local, County, State or other governmental
officials or agencies to receive copies of any application for review and
recommendations.
a. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins, parks or
other public areas within the proposed development, before approving
a site plan, the Planning Board may further require that such streets,
drainageways, basins or areas be shown on the plan in locations and
sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve
the location and extent of such streets, drainageways, basins or areas
shown on the plan for a period of one year after the approval of the final
plan or within such further time as may be agreed to by the developer.
Unless during such period or extension thereof the Borough shall have
entered into a contract to purchase or instituted condemnation
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land
comprising such streets, drainageways, basins or areas, the developer
shall not be bound by such reservations shown on the plan and may
proceed to use such land for private use in accordance with applicable
development regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the streets and roads, flood control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the land development and required for final
approval.102
b. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation, provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include but not be limited to consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining site plan approval caused by the
reservation.
Site Plan Approval Procedure
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Section 1-12, Official Map.
§ 35-18.7 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-19.2
AO:548
§ 35-19.2. Sketch Site Plans. [1972 Code § 107-58; Ord. No. 1097]
Applicants for preliminary approval shall be encouraged to submit for
review by the Planning Board sketch site plans for informal discussions
and recommendations. Said sketch site plans shall be used as a basis for
changes and redesign and to avoid undue expense and delay in preparing
more detailed plans and specifications. The Planning Board shall not be
governed by any statutory time limits in its review of sketch site plans,
and it is expressly understood that compliance with the Planning Board
recommendations shall not bind the Planning Board in subsequent
deliberations.
§ 35-19.3. Preliminary Approval. [1972 Code § 107-59; Ord. No.
1097; Ord. No. 1584-92]
§ 35-19.4. Decision on Preliminary Approval to Be in Writing;
Contents. [1972 Code § 107-60; Ord. No. 1097]
Each decision of a municipal agency on any application for development
shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon.
§ 35-19.5. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [1972 Code § 107-61; Ord.
No. 1097]
Preliminary approval of a site plan shall, except as provided in subsection
35-19.6, confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period from the date of the preliminary approval:
a. The Planning Board shall act upon, at a hearing within the time periods
provided in this chapter, every application for preliminary approval of a
site plan.
b. Public notice shall be required for every application for preliminary site
plan approval in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section
31-21, Notice Requirements for Hearing, in Chapter 31, Planning
Board.
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-site and off-tract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the specific site plan.
The Borough may modify by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of a preliminary approval as they may relate to public health
and safety, provided that such modifications are in accord with
amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to approval.
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
§ 35-19.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-19.6
AO:549
§ 35-19.6. Extension of Preliminary Approval. [1972 Code § 107-62]
§ 35-19.7. Variances. [1972 Code § 107-63; Ord. No. 1097]
The Planning Board may, when exercising its powers pursuant to this
section, grant variances as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 et seq.
§ 35-19.8. Action on Final Site Plan Approval. [1972 Code § 107-64;
Ord. No. 1097]
The Planning Board shall, within the applicable time period set forth in
this Section 35-19, after a public hearing, approve the application for final
site plan approval with or without conditions, provided that the following
requirements are met:
a. The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions of such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards shall govern.
b. In the case of a site plan for a planned unit development, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to above for such period of time
longer than three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to
be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of sections awaiting final approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development,
provided that if the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards shall govern.
a. The detailed drawings and specifications meet all applicable codes and
ordinances.
b. The final plans are substantially the same as the approved preliminary
site plans.
c. All improvements have been installed or bonds posted to ensure the
installation of improvements.
d. The applicant agrees in writing to all conditions of final approval.
e. Proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for local
improvements on the property have been paid.
§ 35-19.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-19.9
AO:550
§ 35-19.9. Notice of Final Approval. [1972 Code § 107-65; Ord. No.
1097]
§ 35-19.10. Decision of Final Approval to Be in Writing; Contents.
[1972 Code § 107-66; Ord. No. 1097]
The decision of the Planning Board shall be in writing and shall include
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon.
§ 35-19.11. Effect of Final Approval. [1972 Code § 207-67; Ord. No.
1097]
Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval for
the section granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant that the
zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval and all other
rights conferred upon the applicant as part of preliminary approval shall not
be changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval.
§ 35-19.12. Time Limit on Final Approval; Extensions. [1972 Code
§ 107-68; Ord. No. 1097]
Final approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval unless
the applicant has secured a building permit to commence construction. The
Planning Board may extend final approval and the protection offered under
subsection 35-19.5 for one year. No more than three such extensions may
be granted. Applicants shall be required, as a condition of any extension, to
reestimate improvement costs and to resubmit revised bonds in accordance
therewith.
§ 35-19.13. Conditions on Final Approval. [1972 Code § 107-69; Ord.
No. 1097]
The Planning Board may, as a condition of final approval:
a. No public notice of applications for final site plan approval shall be
required.
b. Public notice shall be required for every application for final site plan
approval in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 31-21,
Notice Requirements for Hearing, in Chapter 31, Planning Board.
a. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development.
b. Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for final
approval for designated elements such as, but not limited to,
landscaping, signs, street furniture, etc., and require approval of these
elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit.
c. Condition the granting of a temporary certificate of occupancy or
zoning permit on the applicant's or developer's or subsequent heirs' or
§ 35-19.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-19.13
AO:551
§ 35-20. SITE PLAN INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 35-20.1. Required Information. [1972 Code § 107-70; Ord. No.
1097]
The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor,
architect, landscape architect or professional planner at an appropriate
scale recommended by the Borough Engineer. The site plan shall be based
on the latest Tax Map information and shall be of a standard size as required
by the Map Filing Act.
assignees' meeting certain requirements within a designated period
of time, not to exceed six months, from the date of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy or zoning permit. This may include but is not
limited to the installation of improvements, reevaluation of circulation
patterns, etc.
d. Require the furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including streets,
grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade
trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and required
by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.),
water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and,
in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and
landscaping.
e. Require provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
Governing Body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies
or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or
the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guaranty to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the
municipality for such utilities or improvements.
Site Plan Details
a. Site Plan Contents. The site plan shall contain the following
information:
1. Key map drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals on 100
feet, showing the location of the property, all streets and property
lines within 500 feet of the affected property and all buildings or
structures which are within 300 feet of the building or structure
proposed by the applicant.
§ 35-19.13 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-20.1
AO:552
2. The name and address of the owner and site plan applicant,
together with the names of the owners of all contiguous land and of
property directly across the street and within 200 feet of the
property, as shown by the most recent tax records of the Borough.
3. North point, scale and date on which plan was prepared and date of
every revision.
4. Tax Map lot and block number of the property affected.
5. Zoning district in which the property is located.
6. Complete metes and bounds survey of the property, signed, sealed
and certified by a licensed land surveyor.
7. Location of all existing buildings, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water, fire protection, electric and telephone lines, both
above and below ground, and poles, gas and underground heating
systems, pipe lines, artesian wells and other man-made features.
8. Location of all existing streets and highways on or adjacent to the
property affected, including names, right-of-way width, pavement
width, curb or curb width.
9. Location of all existing easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which they have been established.
10. Location of existing high points, watercourses, depressions, ponds,
marshes, wooded areas, underground streams, single trees not in
wooded areas with a diameter of six inches or more as measured
three feet above the base of the trunk and other significant existing
features, including previous flood elevations of watercourses,
marsh and wetlands areas as determined by survey and by the
State of New Jersey.
11. A topographical map showing existing elevations or contours at
vertical intervals of two feet for slopes of less than 10% and such
lesser intervals as may be necessary for the satisfactory study and
planning of relatively level tracts.
12. Datum to which contour elevations refer, preferably United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey.
13. The topography of the site after development.
14. All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading, and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalk
and specifications of the Borough of Manasquan.
15. Location of proposed buildings and structures and all accessory
structures, if any, including setback, sidelines and rear yard
distances, with dimensions showing present and future grade
§ 35-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-20.1
AO:553
elevations at all comers and entrances of the structures, and floor
plans thereof.
16. Design view of the proposed structure's or structures' front, side
and rear view elevations. Design view elevations are to be shown
where proposed additions or alterations affect such elevations.
17. Proposed design and location of signs and outdoor lighting.
18. The location, type and size of proposed culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, fire protection, electric and telephone lines and
poles, gas and underground heating systems, pipe lines and all
other utilities both above and below ground, including the
connection of such proposed facilities with the existing facilities
according to the standard specifications of the Borough of
Manasquan.
19. All means of vehicular access for ingress and egress to and from
the site onto public streets, showing the size and location of
driveways and curb cuts, including the possible organization of
traffic channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional
width and any other advice necessary to prevent a difficult traffic
situation. Also all pedestrian walkways and bike paths.
20. The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
21. Proposed screening and landscaping, including a plant plan, in
conformance with Shade Tree Commission policies of the Borough
of Manasquan, and proposed shade trees. If provided, all
recreation areas shall be indicated.
22. Landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain and what
will be planted, indicating botanical and common names of plants
and trees, dimensions, approximate time of planting and
maintenance plans.
23. Such additional information as may be required by the Borough
Engineer.
24. The following legends shall be on the site plan map:
(a) Site plan of
Lot__________ Block__________ Zone__________
Date__________ Scale__________
Applicant_________________________________
(b) I consent to the filing of this site plan with the Planning Board
of
§ 35-20.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-20.1
AO:554
____________________
(Owner)
____________________
(Date)
(c) I hereby certify that I have prepared this site plan and that all
dimensions and information are correct.
____________________
(Name)
____________________
(Title and License No.)
(d) I have reviewed this site plan and certify that it meets all codes
and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
____________________
(Date)
____________________
(Borough Engineer)
(e) To be signed before issuance of a building permit: I hereby
certify that all the required improvements have been installed
or a bond posted in compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances.
(If improvements installed)
____________________
(Borough Engineer)
(If bond posted)
____________________
(Date)
____________________
(Borough Clerk)
____________________
(Date)
Building permit issued
(Date)
(f) Approved by the Planning Board
(Preliminary
____________________)
(Final ____________________)
____________________
(Chairman)
____________________
(Date
25. A statement as to the type of proposed business or activity intended
in the building and the hours of operation.
26. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board a proposed
sequence of development with projected time schedule for
completion of each of the several elements. Such projection shall
include, where applicable, the removal of structures, trees and
§ 35-20.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-20.1
AO:555
§ 35-20.2. Additional Information May Be Required. [1972 Code
§ 107-71; Ord. No. 1097]
The Planning Board may require other information and data for specific
site plans. This data may include but is not limited to geologic information,
water yields, flood data, environmental information, traffic counts, road
capacities, market information, some economic data and similar exhibits.
§ 35-20.3. Compliance with Other Legislation. [1972 Code § 107-72;
Ord. No. 1097]
Information and documents for other Borough codes and ordinances, such
as environmental impact statements, soil erosion and sedimentation plans
and stormwater management plans, shall be submitted as part of site plan
approval and may be used to comply with site plan submission requirements
where applicable.
§ 35-20.4. Waiver of Information. [1972 Code § 107-73; Ord. No.
1097]
§ 35-20.5. Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling. [1972 Code
§ 107-74.1; Ord. No. 1657-95]
Provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable
materials must be made in any development for the construction of 50 or
more units of single-family residential housing and 25 or more units of
multifamily housing.
Each single-family unit or units within a two-family dwelling shall provide at
least 20 square feet of floor area for a two week accumulation of materials.
Such an area may be within the laundry, basement or garage. Each
multifamily unit or accessory dwelling unit shall provide at least 10 square
feet of area conveniently arranged and located to hold a one week
accumulation of recyclable materials. Each multifamily complex shall also
provide bins in a convenient location or locations in a common area as dropoffs
for storing recyclables in addition to other solid waste until collection
brush, temporary drainage considerations, utilities, road and
sidewalk improvements and provisions for the protection of topsoil.
27. If applicable, review and approval by the Subdivision and Site Plan
Committee of the Monmouth County Planning Board in accordance
with the Site Plan Review Resolution of the County of Monmouth,
New Jersey.
a. The Planning Board may waive submission of any required exhibits in
appropriate cases and for specific site plans.
b. Sketch site plans may be prepared by the applicant and contain
sufficient information for discussion by the Planning Board and
applicant.
§ 35-20.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-20.5
AO:556
occurs. The holding area shall provide for truck access and loading and shall
be suitably screened from view and set back from property lines.
Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes 1,000 square feet
or more of land must include provisions for the collection, disposition and
recycling of recyclable materials. The application shall provide a storage
area sized to contain a two week accumulation of recyclable material. The
storage area shall be designed for truck access for pick-up of materials and
be suitably screened from view if located outside of the building.
Principles and Standards for Site Plan Review
§ 35-21. CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
§ 35-21.1. Criteria. [1972 Code § 107-73; Ord. No. 1097]
a. The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the
adequacy of proposed development in the Borough. The Planning Board
shall review the site plan for compliance with all applicable ordinances
and the comprehensive plan for harmony with surrounding uses and the
overall plan for development of the municipality; for the promotion of
the health, safety, order, efficiency and economy of the municipality;
and for the maintenance of property values and the general welfare.
Based upon its review and the degree which it can make positive
findings, the Board may approve, conditionally approve, request
modifications or deny approval of the site plan based on the following:
1. The site plan's compliance with all provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to off-street parking and loading, signs,
lighting, open space and the generation of objectionable smoke,
fumes, noise, odors, dust, glare, vibration or heat.
2. The site plan's compliance with all requirements and standards of
the Subdivision Ordinance, including but not limited to standards
for construction, layout, dimensions and materials.103
3. The environmental impact of the development relating to the
preservation of existing natural resources on the site and the
impact on the natural resources of the surrounding properties and
neighborhood.
4. The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of
harmonious use and design, setbacks, maintenance of property
values and negative impacts.
5. The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation system.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 32, Land. Subdivision.
§ 35-20.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-21.1
AO:557
§ 35-22. IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
§ 35-22.1. Improvements. [1972 Code § 107-75; Ord. No. 1097]
Developers shall be required, as a condition for approval of a site plan, to
pay their pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary
street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage facilities and
easements therefor located outside the property limits of the tract but
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within the tract.
The following criteria shall be utilized in determining a developer's
proportionate or pro rata share of necessary off-tract improvements.
6. The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets
designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access
for fire-fighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
7. The coordination of streets so as to compose a convenient system
consistent with the Official Map, if any, and the circulation element
of the Master Plan.
8. The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities.
9. The design and location of buildings in an efficient and
aesthetically pleasing manner.
10. The adequacy of the screening and landscaping plan.
11. The location of exterior lighting in terms of safety needs, intensity
and glare.
12. The adequacy of facilities serving the development.
13. The location, size and configuration of open space areas.
14. Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water
or from excavation or grading.
b. The Planning Board may waive those requirements or details specified
to be shown on the site plan in any given application if it is determined
that said requirements or specifications are not necessary to be shown
in order to ensure that the said site plan conforms to the standards of
good planning, will have no deleterious effect on the neighboring
properties and indicates sufficient information to assure adequate
protection to health, welfare and safety of the people of the Borough of
Manasquan.
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 35-21.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-22.2
AO:558
§ 35-22.2. Certain Improvements to Be Constructed at Sole Expense
of Developer. [1972 Code § 107-76; Ord. No. 1097]
In cases where the reasonable and necessary need for an off-tract
improvement or improvements is necessitated or required by the proposed
development application and where no other property owners receive a
special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and construct such
improvements as if such were an on-tract improvement in the manner
provided hereafter and otherwise provided by law.
§ 35-22.3. Determination of Expenses to Be Paid by Developer.
[1972 Code § 107-75; Ord. No. 1097]
In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is necessitated by
the proposed development application and where it is determined that
properties outside the development will also be benefited by the
improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining the
developer's proportionate share of such improvements:
a. Sanitary Sewers. For distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith, the applicant's proportionate share shall be
computed as follows:
1. The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be
based on Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Sewerage Systems, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, and all Manasquan
Borough sewer design standards, including infiltration standards,
and all other Manasquan Borough water drain standards.
2. Developer's pro rata share.
(a) The capacity of the existing system to service the entire
improved drainage area shall be computed. If the system is
able to carry the total developed drainage basin, no
improvement or enlargement costs will be assigned to the
developer. If the existing system does not have adequate
capacity for the total developed drainage basin, the prorated
enlargement or improvement share shall be computed as
follows:
Total enlargement or improvement cost
Developer's cost
=
Total tributary gallons per day
Development gallons
(b) If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to develop
the subdivision, the enlargement share to the developer shall
be computed as follows:
§ 35-22.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-22.3
AO:559
Total project cost
Developer's cost
= Total tributary gallons per day to new system
Development tributary gallons per day
(c) The plans for the improved system or extended system shall be
prepared by the developer's engineer. All work shall be
calculated by the developer and approved by the Borough
Engineer.
b. Roadways. For street widening, alignment channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvement
uncovered elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or
existing streets and other associated streets or traffic improvements,
the applicant's proportionate cost shall be determined as follows:
1. The Borough Engineer shall provide the applicant's engineer with
the existing and anticipated peak-hour flows for the off-tract
improvement.
2. The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvement, which shall include the estimated peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development. The ratio of the peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed development to the future peakhour
traffic shall form the basis of the proportionate share. The
prorated share shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of the roadway improvement and/or
extension
Developer's cost
=
Future peak-hour traffic
Future peak-hour traffic generated by
the development
c. Drainage Improvements. For stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap or improved drainage ditches
and appurtenances thereto and the relocation or replacement of other
storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
1. The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a method
described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed Technical
Release 55, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department
of Agriculture, January 1975, as amended, and shall be computed
by the developer's engineer and approved by the Borough
Engineer.
2. The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's
tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by the
developer's engineer, subject to approval of the Borough Engineer.
The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the
§ 35-22.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-22.3
AO:560
§ 35-23. SITE PLAN FEES ESTABLISHED. [1972 Code § 107-78; Ord.
No. 1097; Ord. No. 1280]
Fees, charges and regulations for the review of site plan applications are
established under Chapter 31, Planning Board, of the Code of the Borough
of Manasquan.
§ 35-24. (RESERVED)
Signs
§ 35-25. SIGN REGULATIONS.
§ 35-25.1. Restrictions on Signs. [1972 Code § 107-79; Ord. No.
1097; Ord. No. 1273]
Except as hereinafter provided, no publicly displayed sign, symbol or notice,
with the exception of street traffic and directional signs of the Borough and
the State of New Jersey, shall be erected within the Borough of Manasquan.
developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system
calculated by the Borough Engineer.
(a) The prorated share for the proposed improvement shall be
computed as follows:
Total enlargement or improvement cost of
drainage facilities
Developer's cost
=
Total tributary cubic feet per second
Development cubic feet per second
(b) Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is
to be undertaken at some future date, the moneys required for
the improvement shall be deposited to the credit of the
Borough in a separate account until such time as the
improvement is constructed. If the off-tract improvement is not
begun with 10 years of deposit, all moneys and interest shall be
returned to the applicant.
(c) Computation of pro rata share. In any case in which an
applicant shall not provide the approving authority with the
estimates of a traffic consultant engineer with regard to
estimated improvement costs and all other information
necessary to proportion costs, the approving authority may
rely on the estimates of the Borough Engineer in order to
prorate costs.
Site Plan Fees
§ 35-22.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-25.2
AO:561
§ 35-25.2. Permitted Signs. [1972 Code § 107-80; Ord. No. 1097;
Ord. No. 1273; Ord. No. 1981-006 § 1]
a. The following signs shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
zones:
1. For each dwelling unit, one unlighted nameplate not exceeding one
square foot in area and bearing the name of the occupant.
2. For any structure other than a dwelling unit, one identification sign
not exceeding eight square feet, except a church bulletin board,
which shall not exceed 18 square feet. Signs erected for use under
this section may be illuminated with a constant source of light,
provided that the light is shielded to prevent glare and annoyance
to adjacent residential uses.
3. A sign advertising the premises upon which it is located "for sale"
or "for rent," not exceeding four square feet in area. Not more than
one sign shall be permitted.
4. Signs designating entrances or exits to or from a parking area are
permitted and shall not exceed two square feet each.
5. Development signs designed for advertising the sale or
development of the premises upon which they are erected, when
erected in connection with the development of the premises by a
builder, contractor, developer or other persons interested in such
sale or development, may be erected and maintained, provided
that:
(a) The size of any sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and
(b) Not more than one sign is placed upon any property; and
(c) Any such sign shall be removed by the developer within 30
days of the final sale of the property.
6. Directional signs indicating the location and direction of premises
in the Borough available for or in process of development in the
Borough, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed
thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or agent may be
erected, by permit, and maintained, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet and
not in excess of four feet in length; and
(b) Not more than one such sign is erected for each development;
and
(c) Any such sign shall be removed by developer within 30 days of
the final sale of the property.
§ 35-25.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-25.2
AO:562
7. Private driveway signs indicating the private nature of a driveway
or trespassing signs, provided that the size of any such sign shall
not exceed two square feet.
b. The following signs shall be permitted in B-1, B-2, C and I zones:
1. Any sign displayed flat against the wall of a building and which
does not project above the roof line. Only one sign per face of a
building for each business occupying that building shall be
permitted and the total sign area on any building face shall not
exceed two square feet for each foot of building frontage.
2. Free-standing signs supported by one or more columns or uprights
which are firmly embedded in the ground, subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) Exposed guide wires, chains or other connections shall not be
made a permanent support of a free-standing sign.
(b) The total aggregate surface area of the sign shall not exceed
nine square feet. The maximum height of the sign shall not
exceed 10 feet nor shall the sign be closer than six inches to
the ground.
(c) The sign shall be in conformity with the character of the zone
and other signs in the zone so that it blends in with the overall
architectural scheme.
(d) The sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the curbline.
3. A sign advertising the premises upon which it is located "for sale"
or "for rent," not exceeding four square feet in area. Not more than
one sign shall be permitted.
4. Development signs designed for advertising the sale or
development of the premises upon which they are erected, when
erected in connection with the development of the premises by a
builder, contractor, developer or other persons interested in such
sale or development, may be erected and maintained, provided
that:
(a) The size of any sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and
(b) Not more than one sign is placed upon any property; and
(c) Any such sign shall be removed by the developer within 30
days of the final sale of the property.
5. The total aggregate surface area of all signs on a lot in the B-1, B-2,
B-3, C and I zones shall not exceed 100 square feet.
§ 35-25.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-25.3
AO:563
§ 35-25.3. Regulations Applicable in All Zones. [1972 code § 107-81;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1273; Ord. No. 1657-95; Ord. No. 1981-06
§§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2057-09 § 9; Ord. No. 2100-11]
The following regulations shall apply to signs erected and maintained in all
zones within the Borough of Manasquan:
a. No sign shall be placed in or extend over the line of any public street,
right-of-way, curb or sidewalk area.
b. Billboards are prohibited throughout the Borough of Manasquan.
c. A permit shall not be required for the erection, alteration or
maintenance of any signs permitted in a residential district.
d. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
e. All signs, together with all supports, braces, anchors, etc., shall be kept
in continual repair, including the replacement of defective parts,
repainting, cleaning and otherwise in a presentable condition.
f. No sign shall be served by overhead utility service.
g. No sign shall be maintained at any location where, by reason of color,
illumination, position, size or shape, may obstruct, impair, obscure or be
confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may
interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic.
h. Signs shall not obstruct any window, door or other opening used as a
means of regular ingress and egress or for required legal light and
ventilation or fire escapes and other openings for emergency access
and escape.
i. Signs attached to or placed on a vehicle, including trailers, that are
parked on public or private property shall be prohibited. This provision
is not to be construed as prohibiting the identification of a firm or its
principal products on a vehicle during normal hours of business;
provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be parked on public or
private property with signs attached or placed on the vehicle for the
purpose of advertising a business or firm or calling attention to the
location of a business or firm.
j. No sign may be placed on or attached to a building or erected
independently for any purpose other than to advertise a permitted
business or use conducted on the same premises.
k. No sign shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility poles or
other signs. No flags, pennants or similar objects may be attached or
displayed on signs.
§ 35-25.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-25.3
AO:564
l. No sign shall project beyond the building in a manner placing it above
an area traversed by motor vehicles, such as but not limited to,
driveway and parking areas.
m. Illuminated signs shall be arranged as to reflect the light and glare
away from adjoining premises and away from adjoining highways.
n. No sign with red, green or blue illumination in a beam, beacon or
flashing form resembling an emergency light shall be permitted.
o. The area of a sign shall be measured around the outside edges of a
framed or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by isolated words and/or
symbols, including the background, whether open or enclosed, but the
sign area shall not include any supporting framework and bracing
incidental to the display thereof.
p. Any sign having two exposures shall be measured for area using the
surface of one side of the sign only. Both sides of the sign may be used
for display purposes.
q. All fascia or attached signs shall be firmly attached to the exterior wall
of the building and shall not project more than 15 inches from the
building.
r. Interior signs shall be permitted and no permit shall be required for
erection and/or maintenance of such signs; provided however, that an
interior sign shall not exceed 10% of the total sign area and not more
than five interior signs shall be located in any structure.
s. Street number designations, postal boxes, on-site directional and
parking signs and warning signs are permitted and shall not be
considered in calculating maximum permitted sign area. No such sign
shall exceed two square feet in area, nor shall a permit be required for
such signs.
t. Temporary signs relating to special civic or public events may be
maintained for a period not to exceed 10 days prior to the date of the
event and must be removed within five days after the event has taken
place. A permit shall not be required for the erection or maintenance of
any temporary sign.
u. Temporary contractor advertising signs may be erected on any lot with
a structure undergoing construction, repair or improvement by a
building trades contractor or architect or engineer provided that each
such contractor or engineer or architect shall be limited to erect only
one sign each, no sign shall be erected no more than two days before
work begins, and no sign shall remain erected for more than three
weeks or more than three days after completion of work, whichever is
less. Such signs may be erected as either a facade sign or a
freestanding sign and shall not exceed six square feet in area. Any
freestanding sign shall not exceed four feet in height and shall be not
closer than three feet from any property line and shall not be located in
§ 35-25.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-25.3
AO:565
§ 35-26. NONCONFORMING USES; CONTINUANCE.
§ 35-26.1. Permitted Continuance; Exceptions. [1972 Code § 107-82;
Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 1115 ; Ord. No. 1784-99 § 2]
any manner which will impede full vehicular visibility at street
intersections, driveways or exits. A sign permit is not required for such
temporary contractor signs.
v. Temporary flags, banners or streamers, erected in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter, may be maintained for a period not to
exceed 14 days, four times within any calendar year. A zoning
application must be approved by the Zoning Officer prior to the
installation of any flag, banner or streamer.
w. Banners advertising special sales or products on private property,
erected in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, may be
maintained for a period not to exceed 14 days, four times within any
calendar year. A zoning application must be approved by the Zoning
Officer prior to the installation of any such banner.
x. The display or maintenance of blow-up figurines used for commercial or
advertising purposes is prohibited.
y. Neon signs are prohibited.
z. A-frame signs are prohibited, except for the display and maintenance of
one A-frame sign not to exceed four square feet utilized for directional
purposes, provided that such directional sign may not be placed within
a public right-of-way.
aa. Painting or marking of buildings and structures for advertising or
promotional events is prohibited.
bb. Any sign which is designed so that characters, letters or illustrations
can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface
of the sign shall be prohibited in all zones. This shall include all signage
inclusive of billboards. Governmental signs erected or authorized by a
government unit shall be exempt from this amendment.
cc. Signs using mechanical devices, electrical devices or both to revolve,
flash or display movement or the illusion of movement are prohibited in
all zones. Governmental signs erected or authorized by a government
unit shall be exempt from this amendment.
Nonconforming Uses
a. The lawful use of land or buildings existing at the time of the adoption
of this chapter may continue although such use does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
§ 35-25.3 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-26.1
AO:566
§ 35-26.2. Structural Alterations to the Interior of a Nonconforming
Use. [Ord. No. 2122-12]
Structural alterations to the interior of nonconforming use shall be
permitted provided that the structural alterations do not expand or extend
the footprint or height of the structure.
§ 35-26.3. Applicability. [1972 Code § 107-83; Ord. No. 1097]
The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts
hereafter changed by amendment to this chapter.
Administration and Enforcement
§ 35-27. ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
§ 35-27.1. Enforcement Officials. [1972 Code § 107-84; Ord. No.
1097]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
the Chief of Police and any Police Officer of the Borough of Manasquan
or building is located, subject to the following conditions and
specifications:
1. Any nonconforming use of land or building which has ceased by
discontinuance or abandonment for a period of one year shall
thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter.
2. Any nonconforming building which has been destroyed or damaged
by fire, explosion, act of God or by a public enemy to the extent of
70% or more of its assessed valuation shall thereafter conform to
the provisions of this chapter. Where more than 30% of the
assessed value of the building remains after such damage, such
structure may be restored to the same nonconforming use as
existed before such damage.
3. No nonconforming use of a building may be moved to any other
part or parcel of land upon which same was conducted at the time
of the adoption of this chapter.
4. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged or structurally
altered except to make it a conforming building or except
enlargement or structural alteration in compliance with Ordinance
No. 1685-96.
b. The use of a nonconforming building may be changed only to a use of
like or similar character, or to a use conforming to the district in which
the property is located.
§ 35-26.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-27.1
AO:567
to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any persons found to be
violating the same.
§ 35-27.2. Inspections. [1972 Code 107-85; Ord. No. 1097]
The Construction Official and Code Enforcement Officer shall be
empowered to cause any building, structure or land to be inspected and
examined and to order in writing the remedying of any violation of any
provision of this chapter.
§ 35-27.3. Issuance of Permits. [1972 Code § 107-86; Ord. No. 1097]
In no case shall a construction permit be granted for the construction or
alteration of any building where the proposed construction, alteration or
use thereof would be in violation of any provision of this chapter. It shall
be the duty of the Construction Official to cause any building, plans or
premises to be inspected or examined and to order in writing the remedying
of any conditions found to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter,
and he shall have the right to enter any building or premises during the
daytime in the course of his duties.
Enforcement; Applications for Development
§ 35-28. APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
§ 35-28.1. Definition. [1972 Code § 107-86.1; Ord. No. 1240]
For the purposes of this Section 35-28, "Application for Development" shall
have the same meaning as that set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3.
§ 35-28.2. Enforcement of Conditions. [1972 Code § 107-86.2; Ord.
No. 1240]
In the event that the Construction Official or the Zoning Officer of the
Borough shall determine that any condition contained in any resolution or
court order approving an application for development is being violated, he
shall notify the owner in writing of his findings and order that any such
violation be corrected within 30 days of the notice. Any condition contained
in a resolution approving an application for development shall be deemed to
be a continuing condition, and the owner or subsequent transferees of the
premises in question shall be responsible for the maintenance, replacement
and repair of any improvements required by such condition, including but
not limited to, the replacement of any required plantings which fail to
survive.
§ 35-28.3. Appeal. [1972 Code § 107-86.3; Ord. No. 1240]
The owner shall have the right to appeal the determination of the
Construction Official or Zoning Officer to the Borough Council by
§ 35-27.1 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-28.3
AO:568
requesting such appeal in writing to the Borough Clerk no later than the
expiration of the thirty-day period provided in the notice. Upon receipt of
such request for appeal, the Borough Council shall establish a date for the
hearing of such appeal. The thirty-day period provided in the notice shall be
tolled from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal by the Borough Clerk
until the date of determination of the appeal by the Borough Council. The
Borough Council may, as part of its determination of such appeal, allow a
greater number of days for correction of the violation from the date of its
determination than the number of days remaining unexpired in the original
period of the notice.
§ 35-28.4. Failure to Comply. [1972 Code § 107-86.4; Ord. No. 1240]
If the owner fails to correct the violations noted within the time provided in
the notice, or within such further time as may be allowed by the Borough
Council in the event of an appeal, the Borough Council may order that the
violation be corrected at the owner's expense or may revoke any certificate
of occupancy granted and require that the property be vacated.
§ 35-28.5. Fines. [1972 Code § 107-86.5; Ord. No. 1240]
Any person who shall fail to correct a violation after written notice thereof,
as provided in this Section 35-28, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$500.
Violations and Penalties
§ 35-29. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
§ 35-29.1. Violations and Penalties. [1972 Code § 107-87; Ord. No.
1097; Ord. No. 1304; New]
In addition to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, other remedies
will include:
§ 35-29.2. Additional Actions. [1972 Code § 107-88; Ord. No. 1097]
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted or any building, structure or land is used in
a. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, and/
or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land, or
part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed
or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or permitted to exist, and any
architect, builder, developer, contractor, agent, person or corporation
engaged in connection therewith and who assists in the commission of
any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate violation, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
§ 35-28.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-29.2
AO:569
violation of or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Borough may
institute an action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or use.
Conflict with Other Legislation
§ 35-30. APPLICABILITY OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. [1972
Code § 107-89; Ord. No. 1097]1
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance,
such as a Construction Code, Housing Code or Licensing Ordinance, the
ordinance requiring the more restrictive regulation or the one requiring the
higher set of standards shall apply.104
Pending Applications
§ 35-31. PENDING APPLICATIONS NOT AFFECTED. [1972 Code
§ 107-90; Ord. No. 1097]
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which
any construction permit has been granted before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction for such plans shall have been started
within 60 days of enactment of this chapter and shall be diligently pursued
to completion.
Repealer
§ 35-32. REPEALER. [1972 Code § 107-91; Ord. No. 1097]
Chapter 107, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Manasquan105 is hereby
repealed. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are repealed, but only to the extent of such inconsistency.
Inclusion in Code
§ 35-33. INCLUSION IN CODE. [1972 Code § 107-92; Ord. No. 1092]
This chapter shall be codified as Chapter 35 of the Code of the Borough of
Manasquan.
104. Editor's Note: See Chapter 14, Building and Housing.
105. Editor's Note: This reference is to former Ch. 107, as adopted 10-23-1967 as Ord. No. 799,
as amended. The 1997 Code recodifies this chapter as Chapter 35.
§ 35-29.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-33
AO:570
Satellite Dish Antennas
§ 35-34. REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF SATELLITE DISH
ANTENNAS. [1972 Code § 107-93; Ord. No. 1097; Ord. No. 2180-15]
A satellite earth station, commonly referred to as dish antenna, including
any structural supports, is permitted in all zoning districts established in
this chapter providing the following conditions or requirements are met:
a. A dish antenna is permitted only as an accessory use on a lot that
contains a principal structure.
b. A dish antenna is only permitted in a rear yard and must be located in
accordance with the rear yard setback requirements established in the
zoning district in which the property is located.
c. A dish antenna shall not be located in the front, rear or side yard areas
established in the zoning district in which the property is located.
d. A dish antenna is only permitted as a ground level free-standing
structure.
e. The surface receiving area of the dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet
in diameter.
f. No dish antennas shall exceed a height of eight feet.
g. A dish antenna shall be designed and used only to serve the inhabitants
or patrons of the principal structure on the lot on which it is located.
h. No lot may contain more than one dish antenna.
i. All power control and signal cables from the dish antenna shall be
installed below the ground surface in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.
j. The dish antenna shall be located and screened to minimize motor noise
and visual impact from the street and adjacent properties. The dish
antenna must be surrounded by an enclosure which shall be a natural
or artificial buffer or fence having a height of six feet, which is planted
or constructed so as to conceal the dish antenna from view at ground
level at all property lines. If a natural buffer is utilized, it shall be
planted with such trees or plants to maintain the buffer quality during
the entire year.
k. The dish antenna shall be of open-mesh material or construction and
must be maintained to function in an environmentally safe manner.
l. Prior to the construction or erection of a dish antenna, a permit
application must be filed with the Construction Official and a permit fee
as stated in Chapter 16, Fees, shall be paid to the municipality. The
§ 35-33 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-34
AO:571
§ 35-35. MANDATORY AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
FEES.106
§ 35-35.1. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
§ 35-35.2. Basic Requirements. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
§ 35-35.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
Construction Official shall review the permit application to insure that
the above regulations are complied with and that the dish antenna is
constructed in accordance with such regulations.
Affordable Housing
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
c. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
a. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b. The Borough of Manasquan shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
106. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1821-00 and
1833-00.
§ 35-34 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-35.3
AO:572
§ 35-35.4. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
a. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a
development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a Borough
construction project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing established under the Act which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance
with sound regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a
lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of
a property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true
value for the Borough of Manasquan, as determined in accordance
with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C. 54:1-35a through C.
54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Shall mean those strategies that
minimize the impact of development on the environment, and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use
of existing infrastructure and community services.
a. Imposed Fees. Within the zoning districts specified, residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted, shall pay a fee of 0.5% of the equalized assessed
value, provided no increased density is permitted.
1. In the R-1, R-2, and R-3 One-Family Residential, R-4 Beachfront
One-Family Residential, R-5 One-Family, R-M Multi-Family
Residential, and R-PM Planned Multi-Family Residential Zones,
where a developer develops land for residential purposes and
receives no right to increased density, the developer shall pay a
development fee of 0.5% of the equalized assessed value.
2. In those circumstances where a developer secures the right to
increased density resulting from a variance granted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d (a "d" or "use" variance), then the additional
residential units realized (above what is permitted by right under
the existing zoning), the developer will incur a bonus development
fee. The developer shall pay a fee of 0.5% of equalized assessed
§ 35-35.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-35.4
AO:573
value for all base units and 6% of equalized value for all bonus
units. If there has been an ordinance adopted within two years
prior to the filing of the "d" variance application that decreases the
density permitted on the subject property, the base density, for the
purpose of calculating the 6% bonus shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing of the
"d" variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 0.5% of
the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and 6% of
the equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided
zoning on the site has not changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application.
3. Sites in the R-PM Planned Multi-Family Residential Zone that
require a percentage of housing units to be set aside for low and
moderate income households and that the Borough elects to allow
the developer to pay a fee in lieu of constructing some or all of the
number of low and moderate units otherwise required, the
developer and Borough shall enter into an agreement allowing the
developer to pay a fee in an amount equal to the cost of subsidizing
the affordable units. The fee amount shall be not less than the
subsidy required payment in lieu amount as determined by COAH
for the applicable housing region pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:97-6.4(c).
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Development.
1. Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of the Borough of Manasquan
development fee ordinance shall be exempt from the development
fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the
approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/
or building permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final
site plan approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be
vested on the date that the building permit is issued.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, provided the expansion is not
otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure subject to the
following provision for residential expansions and additions.
(a) Residential additions and expansions that result in an increase
in equalized assessed value (EAV) that are equal to, or less
§ 35-35.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-35.4
AO:574
§ 35-35.5. Nonresidential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
than, 50% of the EAV of the original structure shall not be
subject to a fee, provided that the expansion does not increase
the number of dwelling units. However, if a property owner
applies for two or more construction permits within a five-year
period, then the cumulative increase in EAV compared to the
EAV of the original structure shall be used to determine the
percentage increase in the EAV.
Example: If in Year One, the EAV is $200,000, and the property
owner constructs an addition which increases the EAV to
$300,000, then the addition is exempt from the payment of a
development fee since the increase in equalized assessed value
of $100,000 is 50% of the EAV of the original structure.
($300,000 - $200,000 = $100,000) which is equal to 50% of
the EAV of the original structure ($100,000/$200,000 = 0.50 or
50%).
If in Year Three, the property owner seeks to construct a
second addition that increases the EAV by an additional
$50,000, then the property owner would have to pay a
development fee because the cumulative increase to the
original EAV is more than 50%. In that case, the fee would be
based on the total cumulative increase in EAV of $150,000.
(Original EAV ($200,000) + EAV increase of Year One addition
($100,000) + EAV increase of Year Three ($50,000) = New EAV
($350,000). New EAV ($350,000) - Original EAV ($200,000) =
Cumulative EAV Increase ($150,000) which is equal to 75% of
the EAV of the original structure ($150,000/$200,000 = 0.75 or
75%).
4. The Borough exempts the following types of development from
residential development fees:
(a) Nonprofit organizations, which have received tax exempt
status pursuant to Section 501(c) 3 of the Internal Revenue
Code, providing evidence of that status is submitted to the
Borough Clerk and the Borough Tax Assessor together with a
certification that services of the organization are provided at
reduced rates to those who establish an inability to pay such
charges.
(b) Federal, State, County, and local governments.
(c) Reconstruction of existing owner occupied residential
structures as a result of fire, flood or natural disaster.
a. Imposed Fees.
§ 35-35.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-35.5
AO:575
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvement, at the time final Certificate of Occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
4. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
Certificate of Occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
§ 35-35.5 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-35.5
AO:576
§ 35-35.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of
the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
shall be enforceable by the Borough of Manasquan as a lien
against the real property of the owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Borough Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the Borough Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development, which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 20 days of receipt of that notice, the Borough Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy notifies the Borough Tax Assessor of any and
all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Borough Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Borough of Manasquan fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C.
40:55D-8.6).
§ 35-35.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-35.6
AO:577
§ 35-35.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
h. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Manasquan. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be
made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Borough of Manasquan. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Borough Chief Financial Officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
§ 35-35.6 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-35.7
AO:578
§ 35-35.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of
Manasquan's affordable housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Manasquan shall provide COAH with written authorization,
in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank and COAH to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Manasquan's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or State standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Manasquan
for past housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
§ 35-35.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-35.8
AO:579
§ 35-35.9. Monitoring. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
The Borough of Manasquan shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any
other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Manasquan housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of
the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on
forms designed by COAH.
§ 35-35.10. Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord. No. 2042-08 § 2]
The ability for the Borough of Manasquan to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner may entitle the
Borough of Manasquan to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.7.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. The Borough of Manasquan may contract with a private or public entity
to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with CO AH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 35-35.8 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-35.10
AO:580
Borough of Manasquan has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and
has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the
Borough of Manasquan fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification it may
be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal
trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.
1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-320). The Borough of Manasquan shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the Borough of Manasquan retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough of
Manasquan shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 35-36. AFFORDABLE HOUSING REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 1939-04
§ 2; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2282-19]
a. Purpose.
1. This section is intended to assure that very-low, low-, and
moderate-income units ("affordable units") are created with
controls on affordability and that very-low, low-, and moderateincome
households shall occupy these units. This section shall
apply except where inconsistent with applicable law.
2. The Borough of Manasquan Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. (hereinafter "Fair Share Plan").
The Fair Share Plan was endorsed by the Borough Council. The Fair
Share Plan describes how the Borough of Manasquan shall address
its fair share of very-low, low-, and moderate-income housing as
documented in the Fair Share Plan itself, the Settlement
Agreement entered into between the Borough and Fair Share
Housing Center ("FSHC") on July 3, 2018 (hereinafter "FSHC
Settlement Agreement"), and the Superior Court Order approving
same, which was entered by the Court on September 14, 2018,
after a properly noticed fairness hearing was held on September
11, 2018.
3. The Borough of Manasquan shall track the status of the
implementation of the Fair Share Plan.
b. Monitoring and Reporting Requirements. The Borough of Manasquan
shall comply with the following monitoring and reporting requirements
regarding the status of the implementation of its Superior Courtapproved
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
1. Beginning one year after the entry of the Borough's Round 3
Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and on every anniversary of
§ 35-35.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:581
that date through 2025, the Borough shall provide an annual report
of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing,
or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by the
State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal website, using forms
developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), or Local Government Services (NJLGS). The report shall
include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity,
including the source and amount of funds collected and the amount
and purpose for which any funds have been expended.
2. Beginning one year after the entry of the Borough's Round 3
Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and on every anniversary of
that date through 2025, the Borough agrees to provide an annual
report of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
municipality through posting on the municipal website with a copy
of such posting provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms
previously developed for this purpose by COAH, or any other forms
endorsed by the Superior Court Appointed Special Master and
FSHC.
3. The Fair Housing Act107 includes two provisions regarding action to
be taken by the Borough during its ten-year repose period. The
Borough will comply with those provisions as follows:
(a) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1,
2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
implementation of its plan and an analysis of whether any
unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a
realistic opportunity and whether the mechanisms to meet
unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Such posting
shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
Borough, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center, regarding
whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and
should be replaced and whether the mechanisms to meet
unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Any interested
party may by motion request a hearing before the Superior
Court regarding these issues.
(b) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements
required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third
anniversary of the entry of the Borough's Judgement of
Compliance and Repose, and every third year thereafter, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:582
satisfaction of its very-low-income requirements, including the
family very-low-income requirements referenced herein. Such
posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments
to the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center on the issue
of whether the Borough has complied with its very-low-income
housing obligation under the terms of this settlement.
(c) In addition to the foregoing postings, the Borough may also
elect to file copies of its reports with COAH or its successor
agency at the state level.
c. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this section shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private
entrance, which is created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing accessory structure on the same site, or
by an addition to an existing home or accessory building, or by the
construction of a new accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.), as has been subsequently amended.
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.108
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Borough
responsible for the administration of affordable units in accordance
with this section, applicable COAH regulations and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.)
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a lowor
moderate-income household as defined by COAH in its applicable
regulations or an equivalent controlling New Jersey state agency; in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may
be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
108. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:583
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Borough's Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an
inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address the
Borough's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to applicable COAH regulations, the FSHC
Settlement Agreement, or an order of the Superior Court.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where
the unit is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3)
the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless; Class A, B, C, D, and E boardinghomes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential
health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill
as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on a the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by
an administrative agent as a very-low-income household, low-income
household or moderate-income household.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:584
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey, that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, entity, company
or corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a
building, which include but are not limited to weatherization, roofing,
plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing
(including septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing
structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by the Department.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median household income.
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:585
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for Manasquan.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a Class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income
at 80% of the regional median as defined by the Department's adopted
Regional Income Limits published annually by COAH, a successor entity
or established by the Court.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
SUPPORTIVE AND SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING — A structure or
structures in which individuals or households reside, which is also
referred to as "alternative living arrangements." See definition of
"alternative living arrangements" above.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:586
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
d. Applicability.
1. The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and
that are proposed to be created within the Borough of Manasquan
pursuant to the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan.
2. This section shall apply to all developments that contain low-and
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and
moderate-income housing units.
e. Rehabilitation Programs.
1. The Borough of Manasquan and FSHC have agreed that the
Borough's Round 3 (1999-2025) indigenous need rehabilitation
obligation is six units. The Borough has already fully satisfied its
Round 3 rehabilitation obligation and has two additional
rehabilitation credits that can be applied to Round 4, should
applicable law allow such credits to be counted in the future. If the
Borough chooses to continue to participate in the Monmouth
County Rehabilitation Program and/or hires a separate qualified
entity to rehabilitate units in the Borough, this section will apply.
Any such rehabilitation programs will update and renovate
deficient housing units occupied by low- and moderate-income
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will comply
with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(a) All rehabilitated rental and owner-occupied units shall remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of 10 years (the control period). For owner-occupied
units, the control period will be enforced with a lien and for
renter-occupied units the control period will be enforced with a
deed restriction.
(b) The Borough of Manasquan shall dedicate an average of at
least $10,000 for each unit to be rehabilitated through this
program, reflecting the minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for
each unit.
(c) Units in the rehabilitation programs shall be exempt from
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9109 and UHAC requirements, but shall be
administered in accordance with the following:
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:587
(1) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented
prior to the end of controls on affordability, the deed
restriction shall require the unit to be rented to a low- or
moderate-income household at an affordable rent and
affirmatively marketed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and
UHAC.
(2) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser
of the current rent or the maximum permitted rent
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and UHAC.
(3) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based
on the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 or the standards issued
by a New Jersey administrative agency with proper
authority to issue such standards.
(4) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and
UHAC, except that households in owner-occupied units
shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
f. Alternative living arrangements.
1. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5:8110 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by the Superior Court;
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
2. With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Superior Court.
3. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the administrative agent for the purposes of administering
109. Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
110. Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:588
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
g. Phasing schedule for inclusionary developments.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
h. New construction.
1. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall
be very-low-income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of regional median income by household size). The
very-low-income units shall be counted as part of the required
number of low-income units within the development. At least
50% of the very-low-income units must be available to families.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units including at least 13% of the restricted units within each
bedroom distribution shall be very-low-income units.
(c) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
(1) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:589
(4) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer and
the Borough.
(d) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. This standard may be
met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a twobedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
2. Accessibility requirements:
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.111
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
(1) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
and
(2) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(3) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(4) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
(5) If all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection h2(b)(1)
through (4) above cannot be satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel must be provided between
stories within an individual unit, but if all of the terms of
Subsection h2(b)(1) through (4) above have been satisfied,
then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be
required between stories within an individual unit; and
(6) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,112 or evidence that Manasquan
has collected funds from the developer sufficient to make
10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible:
111. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
112. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:590
(i) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
(ii) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds into the Borough of Manasquan's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
(iii) The funds deposited under Subsection h2b(6) above
shall be used by the Borough of Manasquan for the
sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
(iv) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate to the Construction
Official of the Borough of Manasquan for the
conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
(v) Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meets the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,113 and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Borough's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund in care of the Borough Chief
Financial Officer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(7) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
3. Design:
(a) In inclusionary developments, very-low, low- and moderateincome
units shall be integrated with the market units to the
extent possible.
(b) In inclusionary developments, very-low, low- and moderateincome
units shall have access to all of the same common
elements and facilities as the market units.
113. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:591
4. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to very-low-income households, which very-lowincome
units shall be part of the low-income requirement.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(4) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
(5) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:592
in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner's
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenant
paid utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(i) Income limits for all units that are part of the Borough's
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and for which income
limits are not already established through a federal program
exempted from the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, shall be updated by the Borough
annually within 30 days of the publication of determinations of
median income by HUD as follows:
(1) The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a
household of four shall be 80% of the HUD determination
of the median income for COAH Region 4 for a family of
four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination
of the median income for COAH Region 4 for a family of
four. The income limit for a very-low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 30% of the HUD determination
of the median income for COAH Region 4 for a family of
four. These income limits shall be adjusted by household
size based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:593
income by household size. In no event shall the income
limits be less than the previous year.
(2) The income limits are based on carrying out the process in
Subsection h4(i)(1) based on HUD determination of
median income for the current fiscal year, and shall be
utilized by the Borough until new income limits are
available.
(j) In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established
by the Council:
(1) The price of owner-occupied very-low, low- and moderateincome
units may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the regional median income limit
for each housing region determined pursuant to
Subsection h4(i). In no event shall the maximum resale
price established by the administrative agent be lower
than the last recorded purchase price.
(2) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units
may be increased annually based on the permitted
percentage increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index
for the Central New Jersey Area, upon its publication for
the prior calendar year. This increase shall not exceed 9%
in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
i. Utilities.
1. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as
market units within an inclusionary development.
2. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set
forth in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by the NJDCA for its Section 8 program.
j. Occupancy standards. In referring certified households to specific
restricted units, the administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible
and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive
to:
1. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
2. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
3. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
4. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:594
k. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and Enforcement
Mechanisms.
1. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years, until Manasquan Borough takes action to release the unit
from such requirements; prior to such action, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
2. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
3. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Borough's administrative agent,
or an administrative agent appointed by a particular developer,
shall determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also
determine the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on
either an appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without
the restrictions in place.
4. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, a
recapture note obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's
heirs, successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt
sale after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this
section, an amount equal to the difference between the unit's
nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and the
recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
5. The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
6. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
l. Price Restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowners'
association fees and resale prices. Price restrictions for restricted
ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:595
1. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer.
2. The Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer, shall approve all resale prices,
in writing and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with
the foregoing standards.
3. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowners' association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers, unless the master
deed for the inclusionary project was executed prior to the
enactment of UHAC.
4. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer, to increase the maximum sales
price for the unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements.
Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
m. Buyer Income Eligibility.
1. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate- income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
2. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate- income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowners' association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
n. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership Unit;
Subordination.
1. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer, for a determination in writing that the
proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section,
and the Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:596
appointed by a particular developer, shall issue such determination
prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
2. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
o. Capital Improvements to Ownership Units.
1. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer, to increase the maximum sales
price for the unit on the basis of capital improvements made since
the purchase of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be
those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or that
add an additional bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales
price of an improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability
for the larger household.
2. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included
in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to
the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer, at the time of the signing of
the agreement to purchase. The purchase of central air
conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and
not included in the base price may be made a condition of the unit
resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer, the purchase of any property other than
central air conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit
resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally certify at the
time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds for the
purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at the
time of or as a condition of resale.
p. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units.
1. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:597
requirements of this section for a period of at least 30 years, until
Manasquan Borough takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must
remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be
amended and supplemented.
2. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Monmouth. A copy of the filed document
shall be provided to the Borough's administrative agent within 30
days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
3. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls described in this section despite the occurrence of any of
the following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on
the property containing the unit.
q. Rent Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases.
1. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full
amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current
lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer.
2. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer.
3. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the developer and/or landlord or to the
Borough's administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer. If the fees are paid to the Borough's administrative
agent or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, they are to be applied to the costs of administering the
controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this section.
4. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:598
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this section.
r. Tenant Income Eligibility.
1. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
2. The Borough's administrative agent, or a qualified administrative
agent appointed by a particular developer, shall certify a household
as eligible for a restricted rental unit when the household is a verylow-
income household, low-income household or a moderateincome
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed
for the unit does not exceed 35% 40% for age-restricted units) of
the household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of
the following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% 40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% 40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of
the unit.
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:599
3. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection r2(a) through (e)
above with the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, who shall
counsel the household on budgeting.
s. Municipal Housing Liaison.
1. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Borough
of Manasquan is established by this section. The Borough shall
make the actual appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
(a) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of
Manasquan.
(b) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to the
Superior Court and thereafter posted on the Borough's
website.
(c) The MHL must meet all the requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training, if such training is made
available by COAH or the DCA.
(d) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Borough of Manasquan, including the
following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to
the administrative agent, or the administrative agent
appointed by a specific developer:
(1) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(2) The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls;
(3) When applicable, supervising any contracting
administrative agent;
(4) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan;
(5) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as
required;
(6) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and administrative agents, as applicable; and
(7) Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring and
affirmative marketing as offered or approved by the
Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey (AHPNJ),
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:600
if such continuing education opportunities are made
available by COAH or the DCA.
2. Subject to the approval of the Superior Court, the Borough of
Manasquan shall designate one or more administrative agent(s) to
administer and to affirmatively market the affordable units
constructed in the Borough in accordance with UHAC and this
section.
t. Administrative agent. An administrative agent may be either an
independent entity serving under contract to and reporting to the
Borough, or reporting to a specific individual developer. The fees of the
administrative agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units
for which the services of the administrative agent are required. The
Borough administrative agent shall monitor and work with any
individual administrative agents appointed by individual developers.
The administrative agent(s) shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and
5:80-26.18 thereof, which includes:
1. Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Borough of Manasquan and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
2. Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:601
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located;
(f) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Manasquan when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(g) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Borough of Manasquan: FSHC, the New
Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action
Network, STEPS, OCEAN Inc., the Greater Red Bank, Asbury
Park/Neptune, Bayshore, Greater Freehold, Greater Long
Branch, and Trenton Branches of the NAACP and the
Supportive Housing Association.
3. Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Monmouth County Register of Deeds or the
Monmouth County Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resales and rerentals:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative agent
appointed by a specific developer, regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rerental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to very-low, low- and moderateincome
households regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental.
5. Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:602
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that
the amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this section;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air-conditioning systems;
(c) Notifying the Borough of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(d) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually from the Borough a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Borough's administrative agent, or
any administrative agent appointed by a specific developer;
(c) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together
with the telephone number of the Borough's administrative
agent, or any administrative agent appointed by a specific
developer, where complaints of excess rent or other charges
can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the Borough's
administrative agent, or any administrative agent appointed by
a specific developer, to be approved by the Borough Council
and the Superior Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:603
7. Additional responsibilities:
(a) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
(b) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
the Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this section. The
Borough's administrative agent will be responsible for
collecting monitoring information from any administrative
agents appointed by specific developers.
(c) The Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative
agent appointed by a specific developer, shall attend
continuing education sessions on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
u. Affirmative Marketing Requirements.
1. The Borough of Manasquan shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan that is compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may
be amended and supplemented.
2. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to
target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 4 and is
required to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
3. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4,
comprised of Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
4. The Borough has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals
and resales and rerentals. The Borough's administrative agent
designated by the Borough of Manasquan, or any administrative
agent appointed by a specific developer, shall implement the
Affirmative Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of
all affordable units.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:604
5. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Borough's
administrative agent, or any administrative agent appointed by a
specific developer, shall provide a list of counseling services to
very-low, low-, and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
6. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used
in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In
implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Borough's
administrative agent, or any administrative agent appointed by a
specific developer, shall consider the use of language translations
where appropriate.
7. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least 120 days prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
8. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration
Building and/or the County Library for each county within the
housing region; and the municipal building in which the units are
located; and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be
mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
9. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
v. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
1. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing an affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
Borough shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums
due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in
violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further
violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and specific
performance.
2. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
Borough may take the following action(s) against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The Borough may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is adjudged by the Superior Court to have violated
any provision of the regulations governing affordable housing
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:605
units, the owner, developer or tenant shall be subject to one or
more of the following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(1) A fine of not more than $2,000 per day or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each
and every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(2) In the case of an owner who has rented a very-low, low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Borough of Manasquan Affordable Housing Trust Fund of
the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(3) In the case of an owner who has rented a very-low, low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the Court.
(b) The Borough may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable
as if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or
moderate-income unit.
(1) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
Borough, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not
less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the
costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the
Borough, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have his right to possession terminated as well as his
title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(2) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any
prior liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The
excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the Borough
for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection
with either the court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to
reimburse the Borough in full as aforesaid, the violating
owner shall be personally responsible for the full extent of
such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-36
AO:606
the Borough in connection with collecting such deficiency.
In the event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of
the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow
by the Borough for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
Borough for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically
result in a forfeiture of such balance to the Borough. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being
held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to the
Borough, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner
or forfeited to the Borough.
(3) Foreclosure by the Borough due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the very-low,
low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to
the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing
the affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in
violation of the provisions of this plan and from whom title
and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(4) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if
insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens, the Borough may
acquire title to the very-low, low- and moderate-income
unit by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an
amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the very-low, low- and
moderate-income unit could have been sold under the
terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as
the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
(5) Failure of the very-low, low- and moderate-income unit to
be either sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the
Borough shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to
purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the Borough, with such offer to
purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
very-low, low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by
the regulations governing affordable housing units.
§ 35-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-36
AO:607
§ 35-37. (RESERVED)114
§ 35-38. (RESERVED)115
Inclusionary Zoning Provisions (Affordable Housing)
§ 35-38A. AFFORDABLE HOUSING MANDATORY SET-ASIDE. [Ord.
No. 2202-2016; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2283-19]
Accessory Apartments (Affordable Housing)
§ 35-38.1. Purpose and Scope.
§ 35-38.2. Affordable Housing Mandatory Set-Aside Requirement.
(6) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and
liable for complying with the terms and restrictions of
governing affordable housing units until such time as title
is conveyed from the owner.
w. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent
appointed pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the
Superior Court.
a. This section amends the Borough land use ordinances by establishing
regulations to ensure that any site that benefits from a rezoning,
variance or redevelopment plan approved by the Borough or the
Borough Planning/Zoning Board that results in multifamily residential
development of five dwelling units produces affordable housing at a setaside
rate of 20%, in accordance with the Borough's Third Round
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, consistent with the terms of the
Settlement Agreement reached with Fair Share Housing Center
regarding compliance with the Borough's affordable housing
obligations. This section will not apply to the Borough's RM, B-A, BR-1,
O and B-3 Zones, as said zones already have affordable housing setaside
requirements.
a. If the Borough or the Borough's Planning Board permits the
construction of multifamily or single-family attached residential
development that is "approvable" and "developable," as defined at
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,116 the Borough or the Borough's Planning Board shall
require that an appropriate percentage of the residential units be set
aside for low- and moderate-income households.
114. Editor's Note: Former § 35-37, Alternative Marking for Affordable Housing, Ord. No.
1935-04 § 2, was repealed 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2282-19. See now § 35-36.
115. Editor's Note: Former § 35-38, Municipal Housing Liaison, Ord. No. 2044-08, was repealed
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2282-19. See now § 35-36.
§ 35-36 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-38.2
AO:608
b. This requirement shall apply beginning with the effective date the
ordinance creating this section was adopted to any multifamily or
single-family attached residential development, including the
residential portion of a mixed-use project, which consists of five or more
new residential units, whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a
variance granted by the Borough's Planning Board, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of
redevelopment or rehabilitation.
c. For any such development for which the Borough's land use ordinances
(e.g., zoning or an adopted redevelopment plan) already permitted
residential development as of the effective date of the ordinance
creating this section was adopted, this requirement shall only apply if
the Borough or the Borough's Planning Board permits an increase in
approvable and developable gross residential density up to twice the
permitted approvable and developable gross residential density as of
the effective date the ordinance creating this section was adopted.
d. Nothing in this section precludes the Borough or the Borough's
Planning Board from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a
development not required to have a set-aside pursuant to this
subsection consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other applicable
law.
e. For all inclusionary projects, the appropriate set-aside percentage will
be 20%.
f. This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of
redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular
proposed project.
g. This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones otherwise
identified in the Borough's Settlement Agreement with FSHC, which
was executed by the Borough on July 3, 2018, or in the Borough's 2019
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, for which density and set-aside
standards shall be governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
As such, this section will not apply to the Borough's RM, B-A, BR-1, O
and B-3 Zones, as said zones already have affordable housing set-aside
requirements.
h. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to developments containing
four or less dwelling units.
i. All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential
developments shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions
of this section.
116. Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 35-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-38.2
AO:609
§ 35-38B. ACCESSORY APARTMENTS. [Ord. No. 2203-2016;
amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2284-19]
This section sets forth regulations governing an affordable accessory
apartment program, which is hereby enacted for the purpose of providing
the opportunity to construct affordable housing in the Borough of
Manasquan.
j. Where a developer demolishes existing dwelling units and builds new
dwelling units on the same site, the provisions of this section shall apply
only if the net number of dwelling units is five or more.
k. All inclusionary projects created under this section must comply with
the affordable housing requirements in § 35-36, Affordable Housing
Regulations.
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters, and a private
entrance, which is created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing attached accessory structure on the same site,
or by an addition to an existing home or accessory building.
b. General provisions.
1. Accessory apartments shall be permitted in all zones located in the
Borough and shall be subject to the bulk and yard requirements of
the zone in which the unit is located.
2. There shall be water and sewer infrastructure available to serve
any proposed accessory apartment.
3. An accessory apartment shall consist of no fewer than two rooms,
one of which shall be a full bathroom, and shall contain a living
space, sleeping space, cooking facilities, a kitchen sink, and
complete sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of its occupants.
4. Each accessory apartment shall be served by a separate entrance
that provides direct access to the outdoors.
5. Accessory apartments shall comply with all other applicable
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey and shall be
constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes.
6. Accessory apartments shall be exempt from the required bedroom
mix governing the provision of affordable housing as permitted in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.9.117
117. Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 35-38.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-38B
AO:610
7. Each accessory apartment shall be affirmatively marketed to the
region in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.1118 and the Borough's
Affirmative Marketing Plan.
c. Affordability.
1. The Borough shall provide a subsidy for accessory apartment
program of $25,000 for a moderate-income unit, $35,000 for a lowincome
unit and $50,000 for a very-low-income unit to subsidize the
creation of each accessory apartment. Such subsidy may be used to
fund actual construction costs or to provide compensation for the
reduced rental rates needed to ensure the affordability of the unit.
Prior to the grant of such subsidy, the property owner shall enter
into a written agreement with the Borough to ensure that: i) the
subsidy is used to create the accessory apartment; and ii) the
apartment meets requirements of this section and all applicable
regulations governing accessory apartments in effect at the time of
creation.
2. Affordability controls shall be established for each accessory
apartment created in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Such affordability controls shall remain in place for a
minimum of 10 years and shall be included in a recorded deed or
declaration of covenants and restrictions applied to the property
upon which the accessory apartment is located. Such deed or
declaration of covenants shall run with the land and limit the
subsequent rental or sale of the unit so as to ensure the continued
affordability of the unit until the expiration of affordability controls.
3. Accessory apartments shall maintain affordability for either
moderate- or low-income households in accordance with applicable
regional income limits. The maximum rent for accessory
apartments, inclusive of the cost of utilities, shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 60% of area median income.
Accessory apartments for very-low-income households shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 50% of area median
income. Accessory apartments for very-low-income households
shall be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of area
median income. The rents of accessory apartments shall be based
on the number of bedrooms in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4.
4. The rents of all accessory apartments, inclusive of utilities, created
through the Borough's accessory apartment program shall be
distributed such that the average rents do not exceed 57.5% of
median income. The average affordability of accessory apartments
within the Borough shall be verified and maintained by the
Borough's administrative agent.
118. Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 35-38B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-38B
AO:611
5. Accessory apartments may be age-restricted provided that each
age-restricted accessory apartment is applied toward the
Borough's age-restricted cap. Any accessory apartment may be
deemed ineligible to be age-restricted by the Borough if the
Borough's age-restricted cap has been met.
d. Administration.
1. The Borough of Manasquan shall administer or designate an
administrative entity to administer the Borough's accessory
apartment program. The administration of the accessory apartment
program shall include advertising and affirmatively marketing the
accessory apartments, completing income qualification activities
for prospective renters, determining monthly rents and annual
rental increases, maintaining a waiting list, distributing the subsidy
used to create or maintain the affordability of the accessory
apartments, securing certificates of occupancy, qualifying
properties for the appropriateness of accessory apartments,
administering the application process, filing deed restrictions and/
or covenants, ensuring the average affordability of the Borough's
accessory apartment program, and preparing and filing monitoring
reports as required.
2. The Borough shall only deny an application for an accessory
apartment if the project does not conform to applicable state
affordable housing provisions, the Borough's development
ordinance, or this section. All application denials shall be in writing
and shall clearly state the reason(s) for denial.
e. Application submission requirements.
1. Applicants seeking to create an accessory apartment shall submit
the following to the Borough:
(a) A site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of
§ 35-20 of the Borough Zoning Ordinance, except that the
applicant may request a waiver of information pursuant to
§ 35-20.4, Waiver of Information, of the Borough Zoning
Ordinance. Such request for waiver shall be made in writing
and shall be submitted with a sketch site plan in lieu of a full
site plan. The Borough Engineer shall evaluate the applicant's
submission package and shall advise the applicant in writing
whether the applicant's submission is sufficient or whether any
additional information is required to evaluate the applicant's
proposal.
(b) Floor plan(s) showing the location and size of the proposed
accessory apartment and the relationship of the unit to the
primary dwelling(s) within the building or located in another
structure on the same property.
§ 35-38B MANASQUAN CODE § 35-38B
AO:612
§ 35-39. TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
§ 35-39.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2179-15 § 35-38.1; Ord. No. 2184-15]
(c) Architectural elevations depicting all modifications to the
exterior building facade(s).
f. Severability.
1. If any provision of this section is determined to be invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, then such provisions shall be severed
and the remaining provisions of this section shall continue to be
valid.
a. The purpose of these regulations for the siting of telecommunications
towers and antennas is to:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
2. Encourage the location of towers in appropriate locations;
3. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the Borough;
4. Strongly encourage the joint use of approved tower facilities as a
primary option rather than construction of new or additional singleuse
towers;
5. Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impacts on the
community is minimal;
6. Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
7. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
8. Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
9. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In
furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Manasquan shall give
due consideration to the Borough Master Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 35-38B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-39.2
AO:613
§ 35-39.2. Nonapplicability to Amateur Radio Stations and to
Receive-Only Antennas. [Ord. No. 2179-15 § 35-38.2; Ord. No.
2184-15]
The provisions of this section shall not govern any antenna that is owned
and operated by a Federally licensed amateur radio station operator or
is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) regulations.
§ 35-39.3. Telecommunications Towers and Antennas on Borough
Property. [Ord. No. 2179-15 § 35-38.3; Ord. No. 2184-15]
Telecommunications towers and antennas that are located on property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Borough of Manasquan and
that are approved by the Mayor and Borough Council shall be deemed to
be a permitted use as a municipal facility in any zone district and will not
require site plan approval.
§ 35-39.4. Telecommunications Towers and Antennas on Non-
Borough Property. [Ord. No. 2179-15 § 35-38.4; Ord. No. 2184-15]
a. Telecommunications towers may be allowed as a conditional use within
the B-3 General Business Zone East of Parker Avenue in Blocks 52, 53,
54, 55 and 56 and in a northerly direction from Stockton Lake
Boulevard to Sea Girt Avenue on property that is not owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the Borough of Manasquan, subject to the
minimum standards of the zone district and the standards, regulations
and requirements set forth in this section. Site plan approval shall be
required prior to the installation of telecommunications towers on non-
Borough property.119
b. Telecommunications towers shall only be permitted on non-Borough
property where the municipal approving authority has determined the
following:
1. There is substantial evidence that there is a significant
telecommunications gap in the Borough that the proposed facility
will correct.
2. There is no Borough-owned property available and no
telecommunications towers on Borough-owned property available
where a proposed facility could locate or collocate that would
correct the telecommunications gap.
3. There are no non-Borough wireless telecommunications towers or
transmission facilities available on which the proposed facility
could locate or collocate that would correct the
telecommunications gap.
119. Editor's Note: The map referred to herein may be found in the Borough offices.
§ 35-39.2 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-39.4
AO:614
4. There is no residential use, school use, or health-care use on the lot
on which the proposed facility is to be located and that the existing
use and structure does not preclude the installation of a tower and
antenna on the same lot.
5. The application for the proposed facility is the joint application of
two or more telecommunications carriers, licensed to provide
service within the area, and that the application provides for the
collocation of two or more carriers at the site.
6. The dimensions of the entire lot on which the facility is located are
used for the purpose of determining whether the installation of a
tower complies with zone district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback, lot coverage, and other such
requirements. The dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the tower may be located on a leased parcel within such lot.
7. A plan is submitted for the periodic testing of the facility to ensure
ongoing compliance with applicable Federal and/or State
standards, the plan is subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Board.
c. Telecommunications towers shall only be permitted on non-Borough
property where the municipal approving authority has determined the
following:
1. There is no Borough-owned property available and no
telecommunications antennas on Borough-owned property
available where a proposed facility could locate or collocate that
would correct the telecommunications gap.
2. There are no non-Borough wireless telecommunications antennas
available on which the proposed facility could locate or collocate
that would correct the telecommunications gap.
3. There is no residential use, school use, or health-care use on the lot
on which the proposed facility is to be located and that the existing
use and structure does not preclude the installation of a tower and
antenna on the same lot.
4. The dimensions of the entire lot on which the facility is located are
used for the purpose of determining whether the installation of a
tower complies with zone district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback, lot coverage, and other such
requirements. The dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the tower may be located on a leased parcel within such lot.
5. A plan is submitted for the periodic testing of the facility to ensure
ongoing compliance with applicable Federal and/or State
standards, the plan is subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Board.
§ 35-39.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-39.4
AO:615
d. Each applicant for a tower and antenna shall provide to the Planning
Board, as part of its application, an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers and antennas, that are either
within the jurisdiction of the Borough or within two miles of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and
design of each tower. The Borough may share such information with
other applicants applying for approvals under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the
jurisdiction of the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough is not,
by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
e. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall meet the following
aesthetic requirements:
1. Towers shall either maintain a finish or be painted a color approved
by the Planning Board, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
4. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to
the surrounding views.
5. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations
of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the State or Federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If
such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule
is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
6. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower
shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable State or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the
§ 35-39.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-39.4
AO:616
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time.
If, upon inspection, the Borough concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner
of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower
into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
7. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation
distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the
Borough irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional
boundaries.
8. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all
franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of
a wireless communication system in the Borough have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Borough.
9. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
10. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or
towers shall comply with the requirements as set forth herein.
11. The tower, including antennas, shall be a maximum height of 150
feet above the ground level at the base of the tower and usage
criteria. The applicant shall submit structural design calculations
certified by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer that the
tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant.
f. Applicants for approval for a telecommunications tower shall submit, in
addition to any information required for applications for site plan
review, the following:
1. A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the location,
type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances, set forth
herein, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks
from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and
any other structures, topography, and parking.
2. A survey and legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel
(if applicable).
3. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, and residentially zoned properties.
§ 35-39.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-39.4
AO:617
4. The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted shall be shown on an updated
site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the
existing tower(s), if known.
5. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
6. Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
7. A description of compliance with all of the sections herein and all
applicable Federal, State or local laws.
8. A statement by the applicant as to the number of users construction
of the tower will accommodate for collocation.
9. Identification of the entities providing the back haul network for
the tower(s) described in the application and other
telecommunication service sites owned or operated by the
applicant in the Borough.
10. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed tower.
11. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event
the proposed tower is erected.
g. Pursuant to this section, the Planning Board shall, in addition to any
standards for consideration of site plans, consider the following factors
in the conditional use application:
1. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed herein.
2. Height of the proposed tower.
3. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
4. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
5. Surrounding topography.
6. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
7. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
§ 35-39.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-39.4
AO:618
8. Proposed ingress and egress to the site.
h. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of
towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the
municipal agency related to the availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower structure or alternative technology
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any
of the following:
1. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
2. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements.
3. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
4. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
5. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs not
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be reasonable.
6. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
7. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wire line system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
i. The following minimum setback requirements shall apply to all
telecommunications towers for which site plan approval is required:
1. Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, but in no event shall
the tower be located in the minimum required yard area or buffer
area of the zone district.
§ 35-39.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-39.4
AO:619
2. Guys and accessory buildings and structures must satisfy the
minimum zoning district setback and buffer requirements.
3. Separation from off-site uses/designated areas:
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in paragraph i3(b) below, except as otherwise
provided.
(b) Towers shall maintain a separation distance of 100 feet or
100% of the tower height; whichever is greater, from
residential dwelling units.
4. Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers or
other proposed towers. The separation distances shall be measured
by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of
the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet)
shall be as shown below in the Table of Required Separation
Distances Between Towers.
Table of Required Separation Distances Between Towers
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
Monopole
Less Than
75 Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75 feet in
height or greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole less than
75 feet in height
750 750 750 750
j. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in
height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing
device; provided, however, that the municipal agency may waive such
requirements, as it deems appropriate.
k. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding
towers for which site plan approval is required; provided, however, that
the municipal agency may waive such requirements if the goals of this
chapter would be better served thereby:
1. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
property used for residences.
§ 35-39.4 MANASQUAN CODE § 35-39.4
AO:620
2. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
3. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such
as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the
property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
l. In approving the tower, the Planning Board may impose conditions,
including the use of an alternative tower structure, to the extent the
municipal agency concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize
any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties or the
neighborhood in which it is located.
m. Buildings or other equipment storage structures shall comply with the
following:
1. Antennas mounted on buildings or existing elevated structures
shall not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the
building's roof or above the highest point of the structure. The
equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas
shall comply with the following.
2. The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures that are less than 65 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 200
square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet in height, shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
3. If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
4. Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
n. Antennas shall not be located on tower utility poles or light poles within
a Borough street or right-of-way unless such facilities are approved by
the Borough Council. Antennas proposed on towers, utility poles, or
light poles within a street or right-of-way not owned by the Borough
shall require approval as a conditional use. The related unmanned
equipment structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of
gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height, requirements of the
zoning district in which located, and shall be screened from view of all
residential properties.
o. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the Borough of Manasquan notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days
§ 35-39.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-39.4
AO:621
Code Comparative Table
Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
§ CCT-1. Code Comparative Table.
The Code Comparative Table provides a reference to assist in locating
sections from the 1972 Code as they are codified in the 1998 Code.
1972 Code 1998 Code
1-1 See Adopting Ordinance
1-2 1-8
1-3 See Adopting Ordinance
1-4 1-2
1-5 — 1-6 See Adopting Ordinance
1-7 1-9
1-8 1-7
1-9 1-10
1-10 1-6
1-11 See Adopting Ordinance
1-12 N.C.
1-13 See Adopting Ordinance
1-14 1-5
1-15 1-11
1-16 — 1-17 See Adopting Ordinance
2-1 2-5.1
2-2 2-5.2
2-3 2-5.3
2-4 2-5.4
2-5 2-5.5
2-6 2-5.6
2-7 2-5.7
2-8 2-5.8
shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
§ 35-39.4 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:622
1972 Code 1998 Code
2-9 2-5.9
2-10 2-5.10
2-11 2-5.11
2-12 2-5.12
2-13 2-5.13
2-14 2-5.14
2-15 2-5.15
2-16 2-5.16
2-17 2-5.17
2-18 2-5.18
2-19 2-5.19
2-20 2-5.20
2-21 2-5.21
2-22 2-5.22
2-23 2-5.23
2-24 2-5.24
2-25 2-5.25
2-26 2-5.26
2-27 2-5.27
2-28 2-5.28
2-29 2-5.29
2-30 2-5.30
2-31 2-5.31
2-31.1 2-5.32
2-32 2-5.33
2-33 2-5.34
6-1 2-25.1
6-2 2-25.2
6-3 2-25.3
6A-1 2-61.1
6A-2 2-61.2
6A-3 2-61.3
6B-1 2-52.1
6B-2 2-52.2
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:623
1972 Code 1998 Code
6B-3 2-52.3
6C-1 2-37.1
6C-2 2-37.2
6C-3 2-37.3
6C-4 2-37.4
6C-5 2-37.5
6C-6 2-37.2
6C-7 2-37.6
7-1 2-36.1
7-2 2-36.2
7-3 2-36.3
7-4 2-36.4
7-5 2-36.5
7-6 2-36.6
8-1 2-30.1
8-2 2-30.1
8-3 2-30.2
8-4 2-30.3
8-5 2-30.4
9-1 2-35.1
9-2 2-35.2
9-3 2-35.3
9-4 2-35.4
9-5 2-35.5
9-6 2-35.6
9-7 2-35.7
11-1 18-10
11-2 18-17.4
11-3 18-15.2
11-4 18-15.3
11-5 18-15.4
11-6 18-15.5
11-7 18-17.1
11-8 18-17.2
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:624
1972 Code 1998 Code
11-9 18-17.3
11-10 18-15.1
11-11 18-17.5
11-12 18-17.6
11-13 18-17.7
11-14 18-17.8
11-15 18-17.9
11-16 18-17.10
11-17 18-17.11
11-18 18-17.12
11-19 18-17.13
11-20 18-17.14
11-21 18-17.15
11-22 18-17.16
11-23 3-21.1
11-24 18-17.17
11-25 3-21.2
11-26 3-22
11-27 18-17.18
11-28 — 11-29 N.C.
11-30 18-17.19
11-31 3-23.1
11-32 N.C.
11-33 3-23.2
11-34 3-23.3
11-35 18-6.5
11-36 18-16.9
11-36.1 18-10
11-37 18-18.1
11-38 18-18.2
11-39 18-18.3
11-40 18-18.4
11-41 18-16.1
11-42 18-16.2
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:625
1972 Code 1998 Code
11-43 18-16.3
11-44 18-16.4
11-45 18-16.5
11-46 18-16.6
11-47 18-16.7
11-48 18-16.8
15-1 2-31.1
15-2 2-31.2
15-3 2-31.3
15-4 2-31.2
15-5 2-31.4
15-6 2-31.2
15A-1 2-15.1
15A-2 2-15.5
16-1 2-51.1
16-2 2-51.2
17-1 2-62.5
17A-1 2-62.1
17A-2 2-62.2
17A-3 2-62.3
17A-4 2-62.4
17A-5 2-62.5
17A-6 2-62.6
18-1 26-19
18-2 26-1
18-3 2-8.11
18-3.1 N.C.
18-4 N.C.
18-5 26-3
18-6 26-4
18-7 N.C.
18-8 26-5
18-9 26-6
18-10 2-10.4
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:626
1972 Code 1998 Code
18-11 — 18-12 N.C.
18-13 26-8
18-14 — 18-17 N.C.
18-18 26-12
18-19 26-14
18-20 18-20
18-21 2-19.1; 26-13
18-22 26-14
18-23 26-15
18-24 26-16
18-25 N.C.
18-26 26-17
18-27 26-18
18-28 N.C.
18-29 26-20
18-30 26-21
18-31 26-22
18-32 26-23
18-33 26-37
18-34 26-24
18-35 — 18-36 N.C.
18-37 18-1.7
18-38 2-19.2
18-39 — 18-40 N.C.
18-41 26-28
18-42 26-29
18-43 26-30
18-44 N.C.
18-45 26-31
18-46 26-32
18-47 2-9; 26-33
18-48 — 18-49 N.C.
18-50 26-34
18-51 26-35
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:627
1972 Code 1998 Code
18-52 2-5.8; 2-8; 26-36
18-53 26-37
18-54 26-38
18-55 26-39
18-56 2-11; 26-40
18-57 N.C.
18-58 26-42
18-59 N.C.
18-60 26-43
18-61 26-44
18-62 26-45
18-63 26-46
18-64 26-47
18-65 26-48
18A-1 1-12.1
18A-2 1-12.2
18B-1 9-3.1
18B-2 9-3.2
21-1 2-20.1
21-2 2-20.2
21-3 2-5.27
21-4 2-20.3
21-5 2-20.4
21-6 2-20.5
21-7 2-20.6
21-8 2-20.7
21-9 2-20.8
21-10 2-20.9
21-11 — 21-52 N.C.
21-53 2-65.2
21-54 N.C.
21-55 2-20.10
21-56 — 21-57 N.C.
21-58 2-20.11a
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:628
1972 Code 1998 Code
21-59 2-20.11b
21-60 2-20.11c
21-61 2-20.11d
21-62 — 21-76 N.C.
22-1 2-14.1
22-2 2-14.3
22-3 2-14.5
22A-1 2-24.1
22A-2 2-24.2
22A-3 2-24.3
22A-4 2-5-28
23-1 2-32.1
23-2 2-32.2
23-3 2-32.3
23-4 2-32.4
23-5 2-32.5
23A-1 9-1.1
24-1 9-2.1
24-2 9-2.2
26-1 — 26-4 N.C.
28-1 2-33.1
28-2 2-33.2
30-1 2-34.1
30-2 2-34.2
30-3 2-34.3
30-4 2-34.4
30-5 2-34.5
32-1 — 32-5 N.C.
33-1 22-1
37-1 24-1.1
37-2 24-1.2
37-3 24-1.3
37-4 24-1.4
37-5 24-1.5
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:629
1972 Code 1998 Code
37-6 24-1.6
37-7 24-1.7
37-8 24-1.8
37-9 — 37-10 N.C.
37A-1 4-1.1
37A-2 4-1.2
37A-3 4-1.3
37A-4 4-1.4
37A-5 4-1.5
37A-6 4-1.6
37A-7 4-1.7
37A-8 4-1.8
37A-9 — 37A-10 N.C.
38-1 6-1
38-2 6-2
38-3 6-3.2
38-4 6-3.5
38-5 6-3.3
38-6 6-3.4; 6-3.6
38-7 6-4.7
38-8 6-4.8
38-9 6-3.6
38-10 6-4.1
38-11 6-4.5
38-12 6-4.9
38-13 N.C.
38-14 6-4.10
38-15 6-4.11
38-16 6-4.12
38-17 6-4.13
38-18 6-4.14
38-19 6-4.15
38-20 6-4.16
38-21 6-4.17
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:630
1972 Code 1998 Code
38-22 6-4.18
38-23 6-4.19
38-24 6-6.4
38-25 6-7
38-26 6-8.2
38-27 6-8.3
38-28 6-8.4
38-29 6-4.5
38-30 3-2.3
38-31 6-8.6
38-31A 6-8.7
38-32 6-8.8
38-32A 3-2.4
38-33 3-2.1
38-34 — 38-35 N.C.
38-36 6-5.1
38-37 6-5.2
38-38 6-6.1
38-39 6-6.2
38-40 6-6.3
38-41 6-6.4
41-1 4-3.1
41-2 4-3.2
41-3 4-3.3
41-4 4-3.4
41-5 4-3.5
41-6 4-3.6
41-7 4-3.7
41-7.1 N.C.
41-8 4-4.1
47-1 12-1.1
47-2 12-4.1
47-3 12-4.2
47-4 12-4.3
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:631
1972 Code 1998 Code
47-5 12-4.4
47-6 12-4.5
47-7 12-4.6
47-8 12-4.7
47-9 12-4.8
47-10 12-4.9
47-11 12-4.10
47-12 12-4.11
47-13 12-4.12
47-14 12-4.13
47-15 12-3.5
47-16 12-4.14
47-17 N.C.
47-18 12-4.15
47-19 12-4.16
47-20 12-4.17
47-20.1 12-4.18 — 12.4.25
47-20.2 12-4.24
47-21 N.C.
47-22 12-5.1
47-23 12-5.2
47-24 12-5.3
47-25 N.C.
47-26 12-10
47-27 12-20.1
47-28 12-20.2
47-29 12-20.3; 12-20.4
47-30 12-20.8
47-31 12-20.9
50-1 13-4.1
50-2 13-4.2
50-3 13-4.3
50-4 13-4.4
50-5 13-4.5
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:632
1972 Code 1998 Code
53-1 14-2.1
53-2 14-2.2
53-3 14-2.3
53-4 14-2.4
53-5 14-2.5
53-6 14-2.6
53-7 14-2.7
53-8 14-2.8
53-9 14-2.9
53-10 14-2.10
53-11 14-2.11
53-12 14-2.12
54-1 14-3.1
54-2 14-3.2
54-3 14-3.3
54-4 — 54-5 N.C.
54A-1 11-5.1
54A-2 11-5.2
54A-3 11-5.3
54A-4 11-5.4
54A-5 11-5.5
54A-6 11-10
54A-7 11-5.6
54A-8 N.C.
54B-1 3-9.1
54B-2 3-9.2
54B-3 3-9.3
54B-4 N.C.
55-1 14-1.1
55-2 14-1.2
56-1 3-10.1
56-2 3-10.2
56-3 3-10.3
56-4 N.C.
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:633
1972 Code 1998 Code
57-1 — 57-2 N.C.
58-1 11-1.1
58-2 11-1.5
58-3 11-1.6
58-4 11-2.5
58-5 11-1.11
58-6 11-2.1
58-7 11-2.2
58-8 11-2.3
58-9 11-2.4
58-10 11-1.8
58-11 11-1.7
58-12 11-1.2
58-13 11-1.4
58-14 11-1.3
58-15 11-10
58-16 11-1.10
58-17 11-1.9
59-1 5-1.1
59-2 5-1.2
59-3 5-1.3
59-4 5-1.4
59-5 5-1.5
59-6 5-1.6
59-7 5-1.7
59-8 5-1.8
59-9 5-1.9
59-10 5-11
59-11 5-2.1
59-12 5-2.2
59-13 5-2.3
59-14 5-2.4
59-15 5-2.5
59-16 5-11
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:634
1972 Code 1998 Code
59-17 5-3.1
59-18 5-11
60-1 3-12.1
60-2 3-12.2
60-3 3-12.3
60-4 3-12.4
60-5 3-12.5
61-1 14-4.1
61-2 14-4.2
61-3 14-4.3
61-4 14-4.4
61-5 14-4.5
61-6 14-4.6
64-1 3-13.1
64-2 3-13.2
64-3 3-13.3
64-4 3-13.4
64-5 N.C.
65-1 18-1.1
65-2 — 65-3 N.C.
65-4 18-2
65-5 18-1.8
65-6 2-64.1
65-7 2-64.2a
65-8 2-64.2b
66-1 18-6.1
66-2 18-6.2
66-3 18-6.3
66-4 18-6.4
66-5 18-6.5
66-6 18-6.6
66-7 18-6.7
67-1 29-1.1
67-2 29-1.2
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:635
1972 Code 1998 Code
67-3 29-1.3
67-4 29-2.1
67-5 29-3
67-6 29-4
67-7 29-5
67-8 29-6
67-9 29-7
67-10 29-8.1
67-11 29-9
67-12 29-10
67-13 29-11
67-14 29-12.1
67-15 29-13
67-16 29-14
67-17 29-15
67-18 29-16
67-19 29-17
67A-1 4-15.1
67A-2 4-15.2
67A-3 4-15.3
67A-4 4-15.4
67A-5 4-15.5
67A-6 4-15.6
67A-7 4-15.7
67A-8 4-15.8
67A-9 N.C.
68-1 — 68-8 7-25; 7-26
69-1 4-5.1
69-2 4-5.2
69-3 4-5.3
69-4 4-5.4
69-5 4-5.5
69-6 4-5.6
69-7 4-5.7
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:636
1972 Code 1998 Code
69-8 4-5.8
69-9 4-5.9
69-10 4-5.10
69-11 4-5.11
69-12 4-5.12
69-13 N.C.
69-14 4-6.1
69-15 4-6.2
69-16 4-6.3
69-17 4-6.4
69-18 4-6.5
69-19 4-6.6
69-20 4-6.7
69-21 4-6.8
69-22 4-6.9
69-23 N.C.
69-24 4-6.10
69-25 3-20.1
69-26 3-20.2
69-27 N.C.
70-1 — 70-3 N.C.
71-1 5-8
71-2 5-9.1
71-3 5-9.2
71-4 5-11
71-5 — 71-7 N.C.
72-1 — 72-6 N.C.
73-1 — 73-45 See Chapter 31
73A-1 3-4.1
73A-2 3-4.2
73A-3 3-4.3
73A-4 3-4.4
73A-5 N.C.
74-1 4-7.1
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:637
1972 Code 1998 Code
74-2 4-7.2
74-3 4-7.3
74-4 4-7.4
74-5 4-7.5
74-6 4-7.6
74-7 N.C.
74-8 4-7.7
74-9 4-7.8
74-10 N.C.
74-11 4-7.9
74-12 4-7.10
74-13 4-7.11
74-14 N.C.
75-1 4-10.1
75-2 4-10.2
75-3 4-10.3
75-4 4-10.4
75-5 4-10.5
75-6 4-10.6
75-7 4-10.7
75-8 — 75-9 N.C.
76-1 3-1.1
76-2 3-1.2
76-3 3-1.3
76-4 3-1.4
76-5 3-1.5
76-6 3-1.6
76-7 3-1.7
76-8 3-1.8
76-9 3-1.9
76-10 3-1.10
76-11 3-1.11
76-12 3-1.12
76-13 3-1.13
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:638
1972 Code 1998 Code
76-14 3-1.14
76-15 3-1.15
76-16 3-1.16
76-17 N.C.
76-18 3-1.18
76-19 3-1.19
76-20 N.C.
77-1 13-5.1
77-2 13-5.2
77-3 13-5.3
77-4 13-5.4
77-5 13-5.5
77-6 13-5.6
77-7 13-5.7
77-8 13-5.8
77-9 13-5.9
77-10 13-5.10
77-11 13-5.11
79-1 4-11.1
79-2 N.C.
79A-1 10-1.1
79A-2 10-2
79A-3 10-3
79A-4 — 79A-6 N.C.
80-1 3-6.1
80-2 3-6.2
80-3 3-6.3
80-4 3-6.4
80-5 — 80-9 N.C.
80-10 3-19.1
80-11 3-19.2
80-12 3-19.3
80-13 3-19.4
80-14 3-19.5
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:639
1972 Code 1998 Code
80-15 3-19.6
80-16 3-19.7
80-17 3-19.8
80-18 3-19.9
80-19 3-19.10
80-19.1 3-19.11
80-20 3-19.12
80-21 3-22
80-22 3-19.13
80-23 — 80-24 N.C.
80-24.1 3-19.14
80-24.2 3-19.15
80-25 3-18.1
80-26 N.C.
80-27 3-3.1
80-28 3-3.2
80-29 N.C.
80-30 3-8.1
80-31 3-8.2
80-32 N.C.
80A-1 14-12.1
80B-1 3-14.1
80B-2 3-14.2
80B-3 3-14.3
80B-4 3-14.4
80B-5 3-14.5
80B-6 3-14.6
80B-7 3-14.7
80B-8 — 80B-9 N.C.
80C-1 14-11.1
80C-2 14-11.2
80C-3 14-11.3
80C-4 14-11.4
80C-5 14-11.5
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:640
1972 Code 1998 Code
80C-6 14-11.6
80C-7 14-11.7
81-1 21-6.1
81-2 21-6.2
81-3 21-6.3
81-4 21-6.4
81-5 21-6.5
81-6 21-6.6
81-7 N.C.
81-8 21-7.1
81-9 21-7.2
81-10 21-7.3
81-11 21-7.4
81-12 21-7.5
81-13 21-7.6
81-14 21-7.7
81-15 N.C.
81-16 21-7.8
81-17 21-7.9
81-18 21-7.10
81A-1 15-1.4
82-1 13-1.1
82-2 13-1.2
82-3 13-1.3
82A-1 15-2.1
82A-2 15-2.2
82A-3 15-2.3
82A-4 15-2.4
82A-5 15-2.5
83-1 14-5.1
83-2 14-5.2
83-3 14-5.3
83-4 14-5.4
83-5 N.C.
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:641
1972 Code 1998 Code
83-6 14-5.6
83-7 14-5.7
83-8 14-5.8
83-9 14-5.9
83-10 14-5.10
83-11 14-5.11
83-12 14-5.12
83-13 14-5.13
83-14 14-5.14
83-15 14-5.15
83-16 N.C.
83-17 14-5.16
83-18 N.C.
85-1 22-11
85-2 22-11a
85-3 N.C.
85-4 22-12
85-5 22-13
85-6 22-14
85-7 22-15
85-8 22-19
85-9 22-16
87-1 22-17
87-2 22-18
87-3 22-19
89-1 23-1.1
89-2 23-1.2
89-3 23-1.3
89-4 23-1.4
89-5 23-1.5
89-6 23-1.6
89-7 23-1.7
89-8 23-1.8
89-9 23-1.9
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:642
1972 Code 1998 Code
89-10 23-1.10
89-11 10-1.1a, 7
89-12 23-1.11
89-13 23-1.12
89-14 10-1.1b,6
89-15 10-1.1a, 10
89-16 10-1.1a, 30
89-17 3-17.1; 10-1.1a
89-18 10-1.1b, 11
89-19 10-1.1a, 1
89-20 10-1.1a, 8
89-21 10-1
89-22 10-11
89A-1 20-1.1
89A-2 20-1.2
89A-3 20-1.3
90-1 30-1.1
90-2 30-1.2
90-3 30-1.3
90-4 30-1.4
90-5 30-1.5
90-6 30-1.6
90-7 30-1.7
90-8 30-1.8
90-9 30-1.9
92-1 14-9.1
92-2 14-9.2
92-3 14-9.3
92-4 14-9.4
92-5 14-9.5
92-6 14-9.6
92-7 14-9.7
93-1 20-2.1
93-2 20-2.2
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:643
1972 Code 1998 Code
93-3 20-2.3
93-4 20-2.4
93-5 20-2.5
93-6 20-2.6
93-7 20-2.7
94-1 21-1.1
94-2 21-1.3
94-3 21-1.2
94-4 21-1.3
94-5 20-4.1
94-6 20-4.2
94-7 20-4.3
94-8 20-4.4
95-1 32-1.1
95-2 32-2
95-3 32-3.1
95-4 32-4.1
95-5 32-5.1
95-6 32-6.1
95-7 32-7
95-8 32-8.1
95-9 32-8.2
95-10 32-8.3
95-11 32-8.4
95-12 32-8.5
95-13 32-8.6
95-14 32-8.7
95-15 32-8.8
95-16 32-8.9
95-17 32-8.10
95-18 32-10.1
95-19 32-10.2
95-20 32-10.3
95-21 32-10.4
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:644
1972 Code 1998 Code
95-22 32-10.5
95-23 32-10.6
95-24 32-10.7
95-25 32-10.8
95-26 32-10.9
95-27 32-10.10
95-28 32-10.11
95-29 32-10.12
95-30 32-10.13
95-31 32-10.14
95-32 32-10.15
95-33 32-10.16
95-34 32-10.17
95-35 32-10.18
95-36 32-10.19
95-37 32-10.20
95-38 32-10.21
95-39 32-12.1
95-40 32-12.2
95-41 32-12.3
95-42 32-12.4
95-43 32-12.5
95-44 32-12.6
95-45 32-12.7
95-46 32-12.8
95-47 32-12.9
95-48 32-12.10
95-49 32-12.11
95-50 32-12.12
95-51 32-13.1
95-52 32-15.1
95-53 32-16.1
95-54 32-16.2
95-55 32-16.3
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:645
1972 Code 1998 Code
95-56 32-18.1
95-57 32-19.1
95-58 32-19.2
95-59 32-19.3
95-60 32-21.1
95-61 32-22.1
95-62 32-23.1
95-63 32-24.1
95-64 32-25.1
95-65 32-26.1
95-66 32-27.1
95-67 N.C.
96-1 14-10.1
96-2 14-10.2
96-3 N.C.
96-4 14-10.3
96-5 14-10.4
96-6 14-10.5
96-7 14-10.6
96-8 14-10.7
96-9 14-10.8
97-1 — 97-20 N.C.
98-1 N.C.
98-2 10-7.1
98-3 10-11
98A-1 4-14.1
98A-2 4-14.2
98A-3 4-14.3
98A-4 4-14.4
98A-5 4-14.5
98A-6 4-14.6
98A-7 4-14.7
98A-8 4-14.8
98A-9 4-14.9
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:646
1972 Code 1998 Code
99-1 18-1.1
99-2 18-1.2
99-3 18-1.3
99-4 18-1.4
99-5 18-1.5
99-6 18-1.6
99-7 18-1.7
99-8 18-1.8
99-9 18-1.9
99-10 18-1.10
99-11 18-1.11
99-12 18-1.12
99-13 18-1.13
99-14 18-1.14
101-1 N.C.
101-2 7-4; 7-47
101-3 7-5
101-4 7-6
101-5 N.C.
101-6 7-1.1
101-7 7-7.1
101-8 7-7.7
101-9 7-7.8
101-10 7-7.4
101-11 7-7.5
101-12 7-7.5
101-13 7-7.10
101-13.1 7-7.9a
101-13.2 7-7.9b
101-13.3 7-9.2
101-13.4 7-8.1
101-14 7-8.3
101-15 7-9.1
101-16 7-10
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:647
1972 Code 1998 Code
101-17 7-11
101-18 7-12
101-19 7-15
101-20 7-16.1
101-21 7-17
101-22 7-18.1
101-23 7-18.2
101-24 7-18.3
101-24.1 7-18.4
101-25 7-7.3a
101-26 7-7.3b
101-27 7-34.1
101-28 7-36.1
101-29 7-33.1
101-30 7-33.2
101-30.1 7-33.3
101-31 7-21
101-32 7-21c
101-32A 7-22
101-33 7-7.7
101-34 7-7.8
101-35 7-7.4
101-36 7-7.5
101-37 7-7.5
101-38 7-7.10
101-39 7-8.3
101-40 7-9
101-41 7-10
101-42 7-11
101-43 7-12
101-44 7-15
101-45 7-16.1
101-46 7-17
101-47 7-18.1
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:648
1972 Code 1998 Code
101-48 7-18.2
101-49 7-18.3
101-49.1 7-18.4
101-49.2 7-22
101-49.3 7-9.2
101-50 7-35.1
101-51 7-46
101-52 7-45
101-53 7-46
101-54 7-47
101-55 7-25.1
101-56 7-25.2
101-57 7-25.3
101-58 7-31
101-59 7-2.2a
102-1 7-35.1
102-2 — 102-3 N.C.
103-1 3-15.1
103-2 3-15.2
103-3 N.C.
103A-1 3-16.1
103A-2 3-16.2
103A-3 3-16.3
103A-4 3-16.4
104-1 22-2
104-2 22-3
104-3 22-4
104-4 22-5
104-5 22-6
104-6 22-7
104-7 22-11a
104-8 22-8
104-9 22-9
104-10 22-10
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:649
1972 Code 1998 Code
105-1 22-20
105-2 22-21
105-3 22-7a
105-4 N.C.
105-5 22-22
105-6 22-23
105-7 22-24
105-8 22-25
105-8A 22-26
105-8B 22-26
105-9 22-27
105-10 22-28
105-11 22-29
105-12 22-30
105-13 22-31
105-14 22-32
105-15 22-33
105-16 22-34
105-17 22-35
105-18 — 105-19 N.C.
105-20 22-36
105-21 — 105-22 N.C.
105-23 22-37
105-24 22-38
105-25 22-39
105-26 22-40
105-27 22-41
105-28 22-42
105-29 22-34
105-30 22-45
105-31 22-43
105-32 22-43
105-33 22-44
105-34 22-45
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:650
1972 Code 1998 Code
105-35 22-46
105-36 22-47
105-37 22-48
105-38 22-49
105-39 22-50
105-40 22-51
105-41 22-52
105-42 22-54
105-43 22-56
105-44 22-57
105-45 22-58
105-46 22-59
105-47 22-60
105-48 22-61
107-1 35-1
107-2 35-2
107-3 35-3
107-4 35-4
107-5 35-4.2
107-6 35-4.3
107-7 35-5.1
107-8 35-5.2
107-9 35-5.3
107-10 35-5.4
107-11 35-5.5
107-12 35-5.6
107-12.1 35-5.7
107-12.2 35-5.8
107-13 35-5.9
107-14 35-5.10
107-14.1 35-5.11
107-15 35-5.12
107-16 35-5.13
107-17 35-5.14
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:651
1972 Code 1998 Code
107-18 35-5.15
107-19 35-5.16
107-20 35-7.1
107-21 35-7.2
107-22 35-7.3
107-23 35-7.4
107-23.1 35-7.5
107-23.2 35-7.6
107-23.3 35-7.7
107-24 35-9.1
107-25 35-9.2
107-26 35-9.3
107-27 35-9.4
107-28 N.C.
107-29 35-11.1
107-30 35-11.2
107-31 N.C.
107-32 35-11.3
107-33 35-11.4
107-34 35-11.5
107-35 35-11.6
107-35.1 35-11.7
107-36 35-13
107-37 35-14.1
107-38 35-14.2
107-39 35-14.3
107-40 35-14.4
107-41 35-14.5
107-42 35-14.6
107-43 35-14.7
107-44 35-15
107-45 35-16.1
107-46 35-16.2
107-47 35-16.3
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § CCT-1
AO:652
1972 Code 1998 Code
107-48 35-16.4
107-49 35-16.5
107-50 35-18.1
107-51 35-18.2
107-52 35-18.3
107-53 35-18.4
107-54 35-18.5
107-55 35-18.6
107-56 35-18.7
107-57 35-19.1
107-58 35-19.2
107-59 35-19.3
107-60 35-19.4
107-61 35-19.5
107-62 35-19.6
107-63 35-19.7
107-64 35-19.8
107-65 35-19.9
107-66 35-19.10
107-67 35-19.11
107-68 35-19.12
107-69 35-19.13
107-70 35-20.1
107-71 35-20.2
107-72 35-20.3
107-73 35-20.4
107-74 35-21.1
107-74.1 N.C.
107-75 35-22.1
107-76 35-22.2
107-77 35-22.3
107-78 35-23
107-79 35-25.1
107-80 35-25.2
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:653
1972 Code 1998 Code
107-81 35-25.3
107-82 35-26.1
107-83 35-26.2
107-84 35-27.1
107-85 35-27.2
107-86 35-27.3
107-86.1 35-28.1
107-86.2 35-28.2
107-86.3 35-28.3
107-86.4 35-28.4
107-86.5 35-28.5
107-87 35-29.1
107-88 35-29.2
107-89 35-30
107-90 35-31
107-91 35-32
107-92 35-33
107-93 35-34
109-1 — 109-10 See Board of Health Ordinances
110-1 — 110-10 See Board of Health Ordinances
111-1 — 111-4 See Board of Health Ordinances
115-1 — 115-9 See Board of Health Ordinances
A200-1 — A200-31 See Chapter 25
Key: "See Adopting Ordinance" refers to the Adopting Ordinance printed in
the forward of the Code.
N.C. means that this Code Section has not been continued in the 1998
Code.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST FOR SUPPLEMENTATION
§ CCT-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:654
§ DL-1. Disposition List
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2078-11 4-18-2011 CAP Ordinance, Special 18
2079-11 5-2-2011 Repeals Compensation for
Municipal Prosecutor, 2-14.4 and
compensation for Municipal
Public Defender, 2-15.7
18
2080-11 5-16-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2081-11 5-16-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2082-11 6-6-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2083-11 6-6-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2084-11 6-20-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2085-11 6-20-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2086-11 7-11-2011 Add Purchasing Agent, 2-10 18
2087-11 7-18-2011 Add omnibus and limousine
parking, 7-7.11
18
2088-11 8-1-2011 Duties of the Shade Tree
Commission, 2-33.1; membership
— Environmental Commission,
2-36.2
18
2089-11 8-1-2011 Animal Control — add violations
and penalties, 5-3.2
18
2090-11 8-1-2011 Grease discharge abatement
(corrects typo in Ordinance No.
2073-10), 22-64
18
2091-11 8-15-2011 Display of Rental Certification of
Occupancy, 15-1.7
18
2092-11 Not Adopted — See Ordinance
2098-2011
18
2093-11 Defeated 18
2094-11 9-26-2011 Add fire pits, 3-23.4 18
2095-11 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2096-11 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2097-11 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:655
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2098-11 11-21-2011 Taxicabs, autocabs, 4-16 18
2099-11 12-19-2011 Solid waste management —
Additional provisions, 21-7.9
18
2100-11 12-19-2011 Changeable copy signs, 35-3.1,
35-25.3
18
2101-11 12-19-2011 Rental properties — Hearings,
15-2.3
18
2102-11 12-19-2011 Bond Ordinance, Special 18
2102-11 Bond (per Clerk), Special 19
2103-12 2-6-2012 Lease and rental fees for docks
and bulkheads, 11-1.2, 11-1.3
19
2104-12 3-19-2012 Bond (per Clerk), Special 19
2105-12 3-19-2012 Bond (per Clerk), Special 19
2106-12 Hold 19
2107-12 Bond (per Clerk), Special 19
2108-12 CAP (per Clerk), Special 19
2109-12 4-16-2012 Salary (per Clerk), Special 19
2110-12 4-16-2012 Animals — enforcement, 5-3.2;
violations and penalties, 5-3.3
19
2111-12 5-21-2012 Consumption of alcohol in public
places, 3-2.1; nudity, indecent
exposure, urination in public,
3-19.6; alcoholic beverages on
beachfront, 12-4.14
19
2112-12 Bond, Special 19
2113-12 Bond, Special 19
2114-12 5-21-2012 Senior Payroll Clerk, 26-9; Payroll
Clerk, 26-10
19
2115-12 5-21-2012 Parking time limited, 7-7.5 19
2116-12 6-4-2012 Massage therapy, 4-7 19
2117-12 Bond, Special 20
2118-12 8-20-2012 Prohibit creation of flag lots in all
zones, 35-11.4
20
2119-12 8-20-2012 Interior structural alterations in
nonconforming structures,
35-12.4
20
2120-12 — Deferred - now 2121-12 20
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:656
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2121-12 9-17-2012 Sales of dogs and cats, 5-12 20
2122-12 10-1-2012 Structural alterations to interior
of nonconforming use, 35-26.2
20
2123-12 10-1-2012 Through streets, 7-10; stop
intersections, 7-11
20
2124-12 10-15-2012 Bond, Special 20
2125-12 10-15-2012 Parks and recreation-Criminal
history, background checks for
volunteer coaches, 10-4
20
2126-12 10-15-2012 Bond, Special 20
2127 Bond, Special 20
2128 Bond, Special 20
2129 Bond, Special 20
2130-13 2-9-2013 Zoning-Definitions, 35-3.1;
building height exceptions,
35-11.3; additional lot, height and
yard requirements, 35-11.8;
Schedule I, Footnotes (c), (e), (f)
5, 6, 7
20
2131-13 2-9-2013 Taxicabs, 4-16.4 20
2132-13 4-8-2013 Sea Watch Beach-Parking Permit,
12-11.2; Locker permits, 12-12.1
20
2133-13 4-8-2013 Brush, weeds, dead trees, trash -
Cost of removal assessed as lien,
13-5.6
20
2134-13 5-6-2013 Amends Ch. 14, temporary
relocation of buildings and
structures
20
2135-13 6-17-2013 CAP, Special 21
2136-13 8-5-2013 Bond, Special 21
2137-13 8-5-2013 Acquisition of equipment, Special 21
2138-13 8-19-2013 Water main improvements,
Special
21
2139-13 9-16-2013 Amends standby generators,
35-11.8
21
2140-13 9-16-2013 Improvements-tennis courts,
Special
21
2141-13 10-7-2013 Flood damage preventiondefinitions,
29-3
21
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:657
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2142-13 10-21-2013 International Property
Maintenance Code/2012, 13-1.1 —
13-1.3
21
2143-13 11-18-2013 Hazard Mitigations Program
Coordinator, 2-19.3
21
2144-13 12-2-2013 Bond, Special 21
2145-13 12-30-2013 Architectural design, definitions,
35-3.1; supplementary
requirements, 35-11.10
21
2146-13 12-30-2013 Water and sewer rates, 22-2, 22-3 21
2147-14 2-4-2014 Salary, Special 22
2148-14 2-4-2014 Payments by check by phone;
returned check service charge,
2-65.3
22
2149-14 3-3-2014 Salary, Special 22
2150-14 4-7-2014 Amend zoning-definitions, 35-3.1;
add architectural design, 35-11.10
22
2151-14 4-7-2014 Borough Recreation Director,
26-26
22
2152-14 4-21-2014 Salary, Special 22
2153-14 4-21-2014 Temporary closing of Riddle Way,
7-2.3
22
2154-14 4-21-2014 Bond, Special 22
2155-14 5-5-2014 Salary, Special 22
2156-14 5-5-2014 CAP, Special 22
2157-14 5-19-2014 Salary, Special 22
2158-14 6-16-2014 Salary, Special 22
2159-14 6-16-2014 Flood damage preventiondefinitions,
29-3; flood hazard
reduction, 29-12.1, 29-12.2
22
2160-14 7-21-2014 One-way streets, 7-9.1 23
2161-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
2162-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
2163-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
2164-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
2165-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
2166-14 7-21-2014 Bond, Special 23
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:658
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2167-14 9-15-2014 Bond, Special 23
2168-14 10-8-2014 Salary, Special 23
2169-14 9-15-2014 Bond, Special 23
2170-14 12-30-2014 Standing Committees, 2-5.20;
Administrative and Finance
Committee, 2-5.26; Beach
Committee, 2-5.27 Building,
Planning and Zoning Committee,
2-5.28; Public Safety Committee,
2-5.29; Public Works Committee,
2-5.30; Recreation and
Environment Committee, 2-5.31;
Liaisons not assigned to
Committees, 2-5.32; Advisory
Committee, 2-5.23
23
2171-14 12-30-2014 Taxicabs-Licensing Application,
4-16.4 — 4-16.6
23
2172-14 12-30-2014 Water and Sewer Service-Base
rates, 22-2
23
2173-15 3-16-2015 Amends beach fees, 12-2.4,
12-11.1, seasonal parking permit
23
2174-15 4-20-2015 Amends § 13-1.3(m), 20-4.1 and
35-7.7
23
2175-15 4-6-2015 Amends 2-65.4, application fee
and security deposit for use of
municipal beachfront facilities
23
2176-15 4-6-2015 Appropriation public works,
Special
23
2177-15 4-6-2015 Appropriation Revaluation,
Special
23
2178-15 4-20-2015 Salaries, Special 23
2179-15 5-18-2015 Amends Ch. 35, Zoning, creates
35-39, Telecommunication Towers
and Antenna
23
2180-15 5-4-2015 Establish Ch. 16, Fees 23
2181-15 5-18-2015 Amends penalties Ch. 3; 3-21-1,
3-19.6, 3-28.3; Ch. 6, 6-8.8
23
2182-15 6-15-2015 Amends exemption fees for Fire
and First Aid members - Ch. 14,
14-1.2, 14-5.4, 14-10.2, 14-11.4
23
2183-2015 6-30-2015 CAP Bank, Special 24
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:659
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2184-2015 7-20-2015 Amends Ch. 35, Zoning, adds
35-39, telecommunications towers
and antennas
24
2185-2015 8-3-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police regulations,
3-2.1, 3-19.6, 3-28.7, penalties;
6-8.8 penalties
24
2186-2015 8-3-2015 Establish energy and natural gas
aggregation program, 2-69
24
2187-2015 8-17-2015 Bond, Special 24
2188-2015 8-17-2015 Bond, Special 24
2189-2015 8-17-2015 Bond, Special 24
2190-2015 8-17-2015 Bond, Special 24
2191-2015 9-21-2015 Bond, Special 24
2192-2015 9-21-2015 Amends Ch. 15, Rental Property;
15-1.2, Inspections, applications,
fees
24
2193-2015 9-21-2015 Bond, Special 24
2194-2015 9-21-2015 Bond, Special 24
2195-2015 9-21-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-11, Stop
intersections
24
2196-2015 9-21-2015 Bond, Special 24
2197-2015 10-19-2015 Acquisition of equipmentappropriation,
Special
24
2198-2015 9-21-2015 Bond, Special 24
2199-2015 12-21-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-5.20, Standing Committees
designated; 2-5.26, Administration
and Finance Committee; 2-5.27,
Beach Committee; 2-5.28,
Building, Planning and Zoning
Committee; 2-5.29, Public Safety
Committee; 2-5.30, Public Works
and Property Committee; 2-5.31,
Special Services Committee;
2-5.23, Advisory Committees
24
2200-2015 12-21-2015 Amends Ch. 22, Water and Sewer
Utility; 22-2, base water and
sewer service; 22-3, water and
sewer usage charge; Amends Ch.
16, Fees
24
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:660
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2201-2016 2-1-2016 Amends Ch. 10, Parks and
Recreation; 10-3.1, special events,
applications, Walk/Run/Race
25
2202-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 35, Zoning; creates
35-38A inclusionary zoning
provisions
25
2203-2016 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. 35, Zoning; creates
35-38B, accessory apartments
25
2204-2016 3-21-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-25.3
handicapped parking in municipal
parking lots and Board of
Education Property; 7-31.1, traffic
regulations for Municipal parking
lots and Board of Education
property, South Street Municipal
Lot
25
2205-2016 3-21-2016 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
adds 2-70, Fee for Charging an
Electric Vehicle at Borough-
Owned or Operated Charging
Station; amends Ch. 16, Fees
16-1.1
25
2206-2016 3-21-2016 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
adds 2-65.9, Fee for Charging
Electric Vehicles at Borough-
Owned or Operated Charging
Stations; amends Ch. 16, Fees
16-1.1
25
2207-2016 Withdrawn 25
2208-2016 9-6-2016 Amends Ch. 20, Streets and
Sidewalks; 20-4.1 and Ch. 35
Zoning, 35-7.7, Driveways and
Curb Cuts in Residential Zones
25
2209-2016 5-16-2016 Amends Ch. 4, General Licensing;
4-14.5 Towing and Storage Fees
and Charges; Amends Ch. 16,
Fees, 16-1.1
25
2210-2016 5-16-2016 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-20.6 Special Law Enforcement
Officers
25
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:661
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2211-2016 5-16-2016 Amends Ch. 29, Flood Damage
Prevention, 29-12.2, Specific
Standards, residential
construction
25
2212-2016 9-6-2016 Bond, Special 25
2213-2016 8-15-2016 CAP, Special 25
2214-2016 8-1-2016 Bond, Special 25
2215-2016 8-1-2016 Bond, Special 25
2216-2016 10-3-2016 Amends Ch. 5, Animal Control;
5-9.2 License Required
25
2217-2016 11-21-2016 Amends Ch. 22 Water and Sewer
Utility; 22-53 Time Limits for
Installation; 22-57.1, Meter
Reading, 22-58 Tests; Amends Ch.
16, Fees; 22-57.1 Meter Reading;
22-58 Tests
26
2218-2016 11-21-2016 Amends Ch. 11 Docks and
Bulkheads; 11-1.2 Term of Lease,
Payment; 11-1.3 Rental Fees;
Amends Ch. 16 Fees; Ch. 11
Docks and Bulkheads, 11-1
Borough-Owned Docks
26
2219-2016 12-5-2016 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-5.2 Standing Committees
Designated; 2-5.26 Administration
and Finance Committee; 2-5.27
Beach and Recreation Committee;
2-5.28 Building and Zoning
Committee; 2-5.29 Public Safety
Committee; 2-5.30 Public Works
Committee; 2-5.31 Streets and
Buildings Committee; 2-5.32
Liaisons Not Assigned to
Committees
26
2220-2016 12-19-2016 Amends Ch. 22 Water and Sewer
Utility; 22-2 Base Water and
Sewer Service Rate; 22-3 Water
and Sewer Usage Charge;
Amends Ch. 16 Fees; 16-1 Fee
Schedule; Ch. 22 Water and
Sewer Utility; 22-2 Base Water
and Sewer Service Rate; 22-3
Water and Sewer Usage Charges
26
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:662
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2221-2016 12-5-2016 Bond, Special 26
2222-2017 2-6-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
adds 2-19.4 Superintendent of
Recreation, Officers and
Employees, Additional Positions
created
27
2223-2017 4-17-2017 CAP Bank, Special 27
2224-2017 5-1-2017 Amends Ch. 12 Beaches and
Beachfronts; 12-11.2 Sea Watch
Season Parking Permits; amends
12-12.1 Sea Watch Beach Season
Locker Permits
27
2225-2017 9-5-2017 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing;
4-14.5 Towing and Storage Fees
and Charges; amends Ch. 16
Fees; 16-1 Schedule of Fees
27
2226-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-3.1
Definitions
27
2227-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 20 Streets and
Sidewalks; 20-4.1 Driveways and
Curb Cuts in Residential Zone
Districts; amends Ch. 35 Zoning;
35-7.7 Driveways and Curb Cuts
in Residential Zone Districts
27
2228-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-11.8
Additional Lot, Height and Yard
Requirements, Flood Elevations
27
2229-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; Schedule I
Bulk and Coverage Controls,
Zoning Districts
27
2230-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-11.2
Principal Building Lot, Height and
Yard Requirements
27
2231-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-8.3
Vehicles Over 4 Tons Excluded
from Certain Streets and Parking
of Commercial Vehicles in
Residential Areas
27
2232-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.2 R-1
One-Family Residential Zone, Use
Regulations Applicable to Each
Zone
27
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:663
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2233-2017 Not adopted 27
2234-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 14 Building and
Housing; 14-13 Construction
Permit and Zoning Permit
27
2235-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.3 R-2
One-Family Residential Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2236-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.4 R-3
One-Family Residential Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2237-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.5 R-4
One-Family Residential Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2238-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.6 R-5
One-Family Residential Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2239-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.7 RM
Residential Multi- Family Zone,
Use Regulations
27
2240-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.8 RPM
Planned Multifamily
Residential Zone, Use Regulations
27
2241-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.12 O
Office Zone, Use Regulations
27
2242-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.9 B-1
Business Zone, Use Regulations
27
2243-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.10
B-2 Marine Business Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2244-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.11
B-3 General Business Zone, Use
Regulations
27
2245-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-5.13 I
Industrial Zone, Use Regulations
27
2246-2017 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-14.6
Houses of Worship and Schools,
Conditional Uses
27
2247-2017 10-16-2017 Bond, Special 27
2248-2017 11-20-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-21 Speed
Limits Established
27
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:664
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2249-18 2-5-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-5.20 Standing Committee
Designated; 2-5.26 Administration
Committee; 2-5.27 Finance
Committee; 2-5.28 Recreation
Committee; 2-5.29 Code
Committee; 2-5.30 Public Safety
Committee; 2-5.31 Public Works
Committee
28
2250-18 2-5-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11 Stop
Intersections
28
2251-18 3-19-2018 Grant of Easement to New Jersey
Natural Gas, Special
28
2252-18 3-19-2018 Grant of Easement to Verizon New
Jersey Inc., Special
28
2253-18 — Not adopted 28
2254-18 — Not adopted 28
2255-18 — Not adopted 28
2256-18 3-19-2018 Bond, Special 28
2257-18 4-16-2018 CAP Bank, Special 28
2258-18 4-2-2018 Bond, Special 28
2259-18 4-16-2018 Amends Ch. 6 Alcoholic
Beverages; 6-4.2 Sundays; 6-4.4
Hours for Sale or Delivery for Off-
Premises Consumption; 6-4.6
Closing Provisions
28
2260-18 Bond, Special 28
2261-18 8-6-2018 Amends Ch. 5 Animal Control;
creates 5-13 Permitting the
Managed Care of Free-Roaming
Cats, 5-13.1 — 5-13.5
28
2262-18 — Not adopted 28
2263-18 — Not adopted 28
2264-18 — Not adopted 28
2265-18 8-6-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-69.3 Use of Reverse Energy
Auction
28
2266-18 8-20-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-19.3 Hazard Mitigation Program
Coordinator
28
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:665
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2267-18 Bond, Special 28
2268-18 8-20-2018 Amends Ch. 16 Fees; 16-1 Test
Fees Meter Reading Fees; amends
Ch. 22 Water and Sewer Utility,
renames 22-53 to Time Limits for
Installation; renames 22-57.1 to
Meter Reading; amends 22-58
Tests
28
2269-18 10-15-2018 Amends Ch. 24 Environment
Regulations; creates 24-1.9
Release of Balloons
28
2270-18 11-19-2018 Salary, Special 28
2271-18 12-3-2018 Amends Ch. 35 Zoning; 35-3.1
Definitions
28
2272-18 12-28-2018 Amends Ch. 22 Water and Sewer
Utility; 22-2 Water and Sewer
Service Rate; 22-3 Water and
Sewer Usage Charge; Chapter
XVI, Fees, 16-1 amends Water and
Sewer Service Rate, amends
Water and Sewer Usage Charges
28
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2273-19 Withdrawn 29
2274-19 2-19-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 29
2275-19 2-19-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 29
2276-19 2-4-2019 General Licensing
Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Ch. 4; Ch.
16
29
2277-19 2-4-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 29
2278-19 3-18-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 20 29
2279-19 Bond NCM 29
2280-19 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 29
2281-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 35 29
2282-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 35 29
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § DL-1
AO:666
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2283-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 35 29
2284-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 35 29
2285-19 3-18-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 35 29
2286-19 5-6-2019 Broad Street Project NCM 29
2287-19 5-6-2019 Union Avenue
Project
NCM 29
2288-19 6-3-2019 Beaches and
Beachfront
Amendment
Ch. 12 29
2289-19 Bond Amendment NCM 29
2290-19 Bond NCM 29
2291-19 6-3-2019 Beaches and
Beachfront
Amendment
Ch. 12 29
2292-19 6-17-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 20 29
2293-19 7-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 16 29
2294-19 8-5-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 16 29
2295-19 8-19-2019 Bond NCM 29
2296-19 10-7-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 29
2297-19 Bond NCM 29
2298-19 10-21-2019 Fees Amendment;
Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 16; Ch.
20
29
2299-19 Withdrawn 29
2300-19 Withdrawn 29
2301-19 Withdrawn 29
2302-19 Withdrawn 29
2303-19 11-18-2019 Bond Amendment NCM 29
2304-19 11-18-2019 Bond NCM 29
2305-19 12-2-2019 Docks and
Bulkheads
Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Ch. 11; Ch.
16
29
2306-19 12-16-2019 Water and Sewer
Utility Amendment
Ch. 22 29
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:667
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2307-20 2-3-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 16 1
2308-20 2-18-2020 Retail Food
Establishments
Amendment;
Miscellaneous Fees
Amendment
Ch. BH4;
Ch. BH5
1
2309-20 2-18-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
2310-20 3-2-2020 Traffic Amendment;
Beaches and
Beachfront
Amendment
Ch. 7; Ch.
12
(footnotes
only)
1
2311-20 Pending
Adoption
2312-20 Pending
Adoption
2313-20 Pending
Adoption
2314-20 Pending
Adoption
2315-20 3-2-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 16 1
Board of Health
Chapter BH1
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN OPERATED
§ BH1-1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. No. 4]
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coin-operated
dry-cleaning establishments, authorizing inspection of and operations
connected therewith and fixing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to Revised Statutes 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the code is
adopted by reference and made a part thereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ BH1-2. Title. [Ord. No. 4]
The code established and adopted by Sections BH1-1 through BH1-4 is
described and commonly known as the "Coin-operated Dry Cleaning
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962)."
§ DL-1 MANASQUAN CODE § BH1-3
AO:668
§ BH1-3. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 4]
Three copies of the Coin-operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1962) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this local
Board of Health upon the introduction of Sections BH1-1 through BH1-4,
and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public until
final action is taken on Sections BH1-1 through BH1-4.
§ BH1-4. (Reserved)
Permits, Fees
§ BH1-5. Permits. [Ord. No. 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise to engage in the operation
of an establishment where one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means
provide self-service dry-cleaning facilities without first having applied to
and procured a permit from the Board of Health of this municipality so
to do, or without complying with any and all of the provisions of the
Coin-operated Dry Cleaning Establishments Code of New Jersey (1962) as
adopted or amended by the Board.
§ BH1-6. Fees for Permits. [Ord. No. 5]
§ BH1-7. Application for and Issuance of Permits. [Ord. No. 5]
Application for and issuance of the permits referred to in BH1-5 above
shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Coin-operated Dry
Cleaning Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962), as adopted or amended
by the Board of Health of this municipality. Such permits are not
transferable.
§ BH1-8. Suspension, Revocation or Reinstatement of Permits.
[Ord. No. 5]
Permits issued under authority of Sections BH1-5 through BH1-10 may
be suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this
municipality.
a. The fee for permits as required by Section BH1-5 above, for the purpose
of raising revenue for regulation and control, to be paid annually to this
municipality is hereby fixed at $25 per year.
b. All permits issued under authority of Sections BH1-5 through BH1-10
shall expire on the 31st day of December each year.
c. Permit fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
§ BH1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-9
AO:669
§ BH1-9. Interstate Commerce Not Affected. [Ord. No. 5]
No provision of Sections BH1-5 through BH1-10 shall be applied so as to
impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity
of the State or Federal government.
§ BH1-10. (Reserved)
Chapter BH2
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
Adoption of Standards
§ BH2-1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. No. 3]
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof, prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks, authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith and fixing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to Revised Statutes 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the code is
adopted by reference and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ BH2-2. Title. [Ord. No. 3]
The code established and adopted by Sections BH2-1 through BH2-4 is
described and commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending
Machine Code of New Jersey (1961)."
§ BH2-3. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 3]
Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this local
Board of Health upon the introduction of Sections BH2-1 through BH2-4,
and will remain on file there until final action is taken on Sections BH2-1
through BH2-4 for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH2-4. (Reserved)
Permits and Licenses
§ BH2-5. Permits and Licenses Required. [Ord. No. 6]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to:
a. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other
means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
§ BH1-9 MANASQUAN CODE § BH2-5
AO:670
§ BH2-6. Permit and License Fees. [Ord. No. 6; Ord. No. 1-82; Ord.
No. 1-88]
§ BH2-7. Application for and Issuance of Permits and Licenses.
[Ord. No. 6]
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
Section BH2-5 above shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the
Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted
or amended by the Board of Health of this municipality. Such permits and
licenses are not transferable.
§ BH2-8. Suspension, Revocation or Reinstatement of Permits and
Licenses. [Ord. No. 6]
Permits and licenses issued under authority of Sections BH2-5 through
BH2-10 may be suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health
of this municipality pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the
Board of Health.
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Board of Health of this municipality so to do, or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by
the Board.
b. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means,
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this
municipality or without complying with any and all of the provisions of
the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as
adopted or amended by the Board.
a. The fees for permits and licenses are required by Section BH2-5 for the
purpose of raising revenue for regulation and control to be paid
annually to this municipality, are hereby fixed as follows: Permit fee,
$10 per year. License fee, $30 for each machine per year.
b. All permits and licenses issued under authority of Sections BH2-5
through BH2-10 shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
Permits and license fees shall be paid to the Borough of Manasquan.
§ BH2-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-9
AO:671
§ BH2-9. Interstate Commerce not Affected. [Ord. No. 6]
No provision of Sections BH2-5 through BH2-10 shall be applied so as to
impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity
of the State or Federal government.
§ BH2-10. (Reserved)
Chapter BH3
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
§ BH3-1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. No. 2]
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. The code is
adopted by reference and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ BH3-2. Title. [Ord. No. 2]
The code established and adopted by Sections BH3-1 through BH3-4 is
described and commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of
New Jersey (1953)."
§ BH3-3. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 2]
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this local Board of Health
upon the introduction of Sections BH3-1 through BH3-4 and will remain on
file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH3-4. (Reserved)
Chapter BH4
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Adoption of Standards
§ BH4-1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [Ord. No. 7]
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
§ BH2-9 MANASQUAN CODE § BH4-1
AO:672
The code is adopted by reference and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH4-2. Title. [Ord. No. 7]
The code established and adopted by §§ BH4-1 through BH4-4 is commonly
known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)."
§ BH4-3. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 7]
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this Local Board of
Health upon the introduction of §§ BH4-1 through BH4-4 and will remain on
file there until final action is taken on §§ BH4-1 through BH4-4 for the use
and examination of the public.
§ BH4-4. (Reserved)
Licensing
§ BH4-5. License Required. [Ord. No. 8]
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) without first having procured a
license from the Local Board of Health so to do or without complying with
any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the
same as contained in the aforementioned Retail Food Establishment Code
of New Jersey (1965).
§ BH4-6. License Fees. [Ord. No. 8; Ord. No. 77-2; Ord. No. 2-82;
Ord. No. 2-88; Ord. No. 2018-07 § 2; amended 2-18-2020 by Ord. No.
2308-20]
Prior to the issuance of any license under §§ BH4-1 through BH4-9, the
applicant shall be required to pay an annual license fee of $150 to cover
costs incurred by the Board of Health in the issuance of the license and
inspections incidental thereto. No fee shall be charged to a nonprofit
organization which shall make an application for a license under §§ BH4-1
through BH4-9, provided that an appropriate person or officer of the
organization shall file with the Secretary of the Board of Health a statement,
signed under oath, indicating that the organization applying for the license
is, in fact, a duly qualified nonprofit organization under the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
§ BH4-7. Suspension, Revocation or Reinstatement of License.
[Ord. No. 8]
a. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of §§ BH4-5 through
BH4-9 may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this
municipality for the violation by the licensee of any provisions of
§ BH4-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-7
AO:673
§ BH4-8. Interstate Commerce not Affected. [Ord. No. 8]
No provision of §§ BH4-5 through BH4-9 shall be applied so as to impose
any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the
state or federal government.
§ BH4-9. (Reserved)
Chapter BH5
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
§§ BH4-5 through BH4-9 or the Retail Food Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1965), or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade,
calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation to
whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper
manner or in violation of any law of the United States, the State of New
Jersey or of any ordinance of this municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is or are of an unfit
character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license
has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public or is
being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was
issued.
b. A license issued under the terms and provisions of §§ BH4-5 through
BH4-9 shall not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing
thereon shall have been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at
least three days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall
also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for
revoking, canceling or suspending such license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
being deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the
business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the
Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to
answer and may thereafter be heard; and upon due consideration and
deliberation by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or
if the Board of Health concludes that the charges have been sustained
and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by
the licensee.
c. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Borough,
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ BH4-7 MANASQUAN CODE § BH5-1
AO:674
§ BH5-1. Birth, Marriage, Civil Union, Domestic Partnership or
Death Certificate. [Ord. No. 2018-07 § 3; amended 2-18-2020 by
Ord. No. 2308-20]
The fee for issuing a certification or certified copy of a birth certificate,
marriage certificate, civil union certificate, domestic partnership certificate,
death certificate or other vital statistics record shall be $25 for the first copy
and $2 for each additional copy.
§ BH5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH5-1
AO:675

ZONING
35 Attachment 1
SCHEDULE I
ZONING SCHEDULE OF BULK AND COVERAGE CONTROLS
Manasquan, New Jersey
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum
Height
(Feet/
Stories)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Front
Side
Each
Corner Rear
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Frontage
(Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (e) % %
R-1 One-Family
Residential
7,000 50 25(g) 59(i) 15(i) 35(f) 35-2 1/2 25 35
R-2 One-Family
Residential
5,000 50 25(g) 5(i) 15(i) 20(f) 35-2 1/2 30 45
R-3 One-Family
Residential
3,400 40 25(g) 5(i) 7(i) 20(f) 35-2 1/2 35 50
R-4 One-Family
Residential
4,200 30 (a) 5(i) 7(i) (a)(f) 35-2 1/2(h)
(j)
35 50
R-5 One-Family
Residential
2,700 40 10 5(i) 7(i) 20(f) 35-2 1/2 35 50
R-M
Multifamily
Residential (b)
40,000 100 25 20(i) 20(i) 25(f) 35-2 1/2 25 50
R-PM Planned
Multifamily
Residential (c)
60,000 400 15 15(i) 15(i) 15 35-2 1/2(h) 40 60
R-PM OneFamily
Residential
2,700 40 (a) 5(i) 7(i) (a)(f) 35-2 1/2(h) 35 50
B-1 Business 5,000 30 10 3(d) 7 5 40-3 40 60
B-2 Marine
Business
40,000 100 25 10 25 20(f) 35-2 1/2 35 40
B-3 General
Business
20,000 100 25 10 25 20(f) 35-2 1/2 35 60
35 Attachment 1:1 Publication, Feb 2020
MANASQUAN CODE
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum
Height
(Feet/
Stories)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Front
Side
Each
Corner Rear
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Frontage
(Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) (e) % %
BR-1 Business
Retail
5,000 30 10 3(d) 7 5 40-3 40 60
O Office 5,000 50 25 5 15 20(f) 35-2 1/2 30 60
I Industrial 10,000 75 25 10 15 20(f) 35-2 1/2 35 60
P Public Parking Not Applicable
CON Conservation Not Applicable
Notes: See following pages
Schedule I Zoning Schedule of Bulk and Coverage Controls - Continued
Notes to Schedule I
(a) Aggregate depth of front and rear yards shall not be less than 30 feet and no yard shall be less than 10
feet. A minimum setback of 15 feet shall be required from the monumented Borough beachfront line;
(b) Maximum permitted density shall be 10 dwelling units per acre;
(c) Maximum permitted density shall be 16 dwelling units per acre;
(d) None required if fireproof construction;
(e) Permitted height for conforming lots only. For nonconforming lots the height shall be determined only
after Planning Board review to assure compliance with the intent and purpose of the Zoning Law
expressed in Section 35-1;
(f) For accessory structures and uses, a 5-foot setback is permitted unless more restrictive regulations are
established elsewhere in this ordinance;
(g) Front yard setback distance may be reduced to the average of front yard setbacks of principal
structures on all developed properties on the same side of the street within 200 feet of the property as
documented by a map prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor;
(h) The building height and building envelope for individual dwelling units, either attached or detached,
shall comply with footnote (f) of this Schedule I;
35 Attachment 1:2 Publication, Feb 2020
ZONING
(i) Chimneys, stacks, vents, roof overhangs and gutters shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches
into or over any required side yard setback line in the residential zones. Any projection over eighteen
(18) inches shall be considered part of the principal structure and shall conform to all required side
yard setback requirements;
(j) The maximum height for single-family dwellings facing the beachfront shall be thirty-eight (38) feet
for conforming lots and thirty-three (33) for non-conforming lots.
(Ord. No. 2130-13 §§ 2, 6; Ord. No. 2229-2017)
35 Attachment 1:3 Publication, Feb 2020