Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council
[Adopted 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
including the Revised Ordinances of Madison, New Jersey - 1970, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after July 4, 1976.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Madison by impressing thereon the seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Borough to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while the said Code is in effect.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Madison,
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Madison, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 200, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Madison, Parts I and II," which,
together with the Board of Health ordinances adopted as the "Code of
the Borough of Madison, Part III," and an Appendix, shall hereinafter be
known and referred to as the "Code."
B. Insofar as the provisions contained in Parts I and II of this Code are
substantially the same as provisions contained in the "Revised
Ordinances of Madison, New Jersey - 1970," as adopted May 11, 1970,
by Ordinance No. 9-70, this revision, codification and consolidation
shall be deemed a recodification of the Revised Ordinances of Madison,
New Jersey - 1970 and is intended as a continuation of the provisions
contained in said Revised Ordinances.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-5. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Madison, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
application of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Madison" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-14A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by ordinance of the Mayor
and Council, who may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5 MADISON CODE § 1-10
1:4
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
of Madison to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided
in § 1-15 of this ordinance.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section, or a part thereof,
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding
of any section, or part thereof, to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 8, 1976 (Ordinance No.
4-76).
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:5
§ 1-15. Violations of Code; penalties.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. Any ordinance creating positions of employment with the Borough and/
or establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries or
compensation of officers and employees. Ordinance No. 550, adopted
January 22, 1951, as amended, is hereby specifically saved from repeal.
L. Any ordinance making any change or revision in the Zoning Map
adopted December 9, 1968, by Ordinance No. 26-68.
M. An ordinance relating to the paving, curbing, grading, relaying and
repairing of sidewalks and gutters, adopted February 14, 1906, as
Ordinance No. 55.
N. Any ordinance providing for the naming of streets or the numbering of
buildings.
A. Unless a specific penalty is provided elsewhere in Parts I and II of this
Code, in state law or in other ordinances of the Mayor and Council for a
particular violation, any person, firm, partnership, association of
persons, club, corporation or other organization, including any agent,
servant or employee thereof, found guilty of violating any provision of
Part I or II of this Code, or any supplement thereto, or who shall engage
in or exercise any business or occupation or do anything for which a
license or permit is required thereby without having a valid license or
permit therefor as required, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following: a fine of not to exceed
$2,000; by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that a
fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
§ 1-14 MADISON CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
$100. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 19-2006]
B. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes, in the form of deletions, revisions or additions to
the original ordinances, have been made in the preparation of this
revision and codification. (Chapter and section number references are
to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the
Code. References to former sections and Articles generally relate to the
Revised Ordinances of Madison, New Jersey - 1970.)1
(1) In accordance with the revision of the statutory provisions
concerning local municipal courts, the term "Recorder" or
"Magistrate" or "Municipal Magistrate" or other similar title is
changed to "Judge" or "Judge of the Municipal Court" wherever it
may appear in the Code of the Borough of Madison.
1. Editor's Note: The following additions, amendments and deletions were made to the Code
pursuant to § 1-16B. A complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the
Administrator-Clerk. A. The following sections were added or amended: §§ 4-2C, 7-1, 12-1,
12-3, 12-4, 18-7F, 18-8F, 22-4, 30-2, 30-6B and C, 30-7A, 30-10C, 30-11A(2) and B, 30-12B,
30-15A, 30-17B, 30-18A(2), B(5) and C(4) (a), 30-27C, 32-1B, 34-5E, 34-7B, 34-12B(2),
34-13A and B, 56-12, 70-2, 79-2, 89-2, 89-16, 99-1, 101-7A(3) and E, 101-11, 113-4A,
113-11C, 113-12, 120-2, 120-6, 147-1D(1), E(4) and F, 155-9, 166-1 through 166-9,
166-12, 168-3, 168-8A, 168-9H, 168-11, 168-24, 185-4, 185-5, 185-12, 185-14, 185-15,
185-18, 185-19, 185-24 through 185-28, 185-29, 185-30B, 185-31, 185-32, 185-35, 185-37,
185-38, 185-40, 185-41, 185-42, 185-44, 185-45, 185-46, 190-1, 195-4, 195-11E(7),
195-16B(10), 195-31B(1) and 195-88I(1). B. The following sections were deleted: (1)
Sections 31.2 through 31.12, 41.3(4), 53.36, 57.4(2), 57.4(5), 57.5(30), 61.6(f), 61.7, 85.3
and 85.5 of the 1970 Revised Ordinances. (2) Sections 3, 5 and 9 of Ord. No.28 adopted
10-1-1898.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel Policies—See Ch. 30. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 4-1. Creation of position.
The position of Borough Administrator of the Borough of Madison is hereby
created, and employment of a qualified person for that position is hereby
authorized.
§ 4-2. Appointment; term of office; removal from office;
qualifications. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.15-76; 11-13-1995
by Ord. No. 49-95; 3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 6-2007]
The Borough Administrator shall qualify, be appointed and serve a term of
office in accordance herewith:
A. Appointment. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
B. Term of office. The term of the first Borough Administrator appointed
after the adoption of this chapter shall expire December 31, 1971.
Subsequent appointments thereafter shall be for four-year terms with
provisions for suspension or removal as set forth in Subsection C.
C. Removal.
(1) The Borough Administrator may be removed at any time by a twothirds
vote of the Borough Council. The resolution of removal shall
become effective three months after its adoption by the Borough
Council. The Borough Council may provide that the resolution shall
have immediate effect; provided, however, that the Borough
Council shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any
unpaid balance of his or her salary and his or her salary for the next
three months following adoption of the resolution, unless the cause
for such removal is the result of the conviction of said
Administrator of an indictable offense of a subject matter relating
to his or her employment.
(2) The Borough Administrator, upon receipt of a resolution of removal
properly approved, may reply within 10 days of receipt and request
a public hearing. A public hearing, if any, shall be held not earlier
than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is received by
the Borough Council. The findings of the hearing and the decision
of removal shall be by written resolution approved by a two-thirds
vote of the Borough Council.
§ 1-16 MADISON CODE § 4-2
4:8
§ 4-3. Absence or disability.
During any approved absence or disability of the Borough Administrator,
an officer or employee of the borough may be appointed by the Borough
Council to temporarily perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position.
§ 4-4. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Administrator shall be fixed by the
Borough Council in a Salary Ordinance of the borough.2
§ 4-5. Duties and responsibilities.
(3) If the Borough Administrator is restored to his or her position, he or
she shall be entitled to any compensation lost by reason of such
suspension. Also, if after once being formally appointed to a fouryear
term he or she is not subsequently reappointed, the Borough
of Madison shall pay his or her salary for three calendar months
following the failure to reappoint.
D. Qualifications. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the
basis of administrative qualification. A master's degree in public
administration, or similar advanced degree, including other master’s
degrees, or law degree, with a minimum of five years of work
experience in government is required. No elected member of the
Borough Council or Mayor may receive such appointment during his or
her term of office nor within one year after the expiration of said term.
A. The Borough Administrator shall act as the chief administrative officer
of the borough. His duties shall include the development of rules and
regulations for administrative procedures governing purchasing
practices, operation of all departments, personnel management and
general coordination of departments, offices, boards and agencies of
the borough, all for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness and
efficiency of the borough government and promoting its economic
operation. All rules and regulations promulgated by the Borough
Administrator shall be subject to the approval of a majority vote of the
Borough Council. The Borough Administrator shall perform the duties
hereinafter enumerated and such other duties as may be assigned to
him by the Mayor with the consent of the Borough Council. [Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 49-95]
B. He shall act as the chief administrator of the borough government and,
as such, will supervise all salaried personnel of the borough through the
respective department heads, unless otherwise provided for by law or
by this chapter. He shall not engage in any other occupation or
2. Editor's Note: For information pertaining to the Salary Ordinance, see Ch. 42, Salaries and
Compensation.
§ 4-2 ADMINISTRATOR § 4-5
4:9
employment while employed by the borough, except as assigned by the
Mayor and Council.
C. He shall coordinate the functions of all departments, boards, agencies,
offices, officials and employees of the borough and shall maintain
liaison with the Board of Education of the Borough of Madison,
authorities and commissions.3
D. He shall collect all data and prepare a proposed budget annually for
consideration by the Mayor and Council on or before February 10 of
each year, after obtaining requests for appropriations from all
departments of the borough and consulting with all department heads.
Said proposed budget shall be accompanied by the proper
supplemental detail in support of the proposed budget appropriation
with a comparison of the prior year's expenditure and an analysis of the
proposed expenditures with recommendations regarding the feasibility
thereof. Upon adoption of the budget, current accounts of the
expenditures made shall be kept on a monthly basis, based upon the
supplemental detail of the adopted budget. [Amended 11-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 49-95]
E. He shall require the Finance Director to furnish annually an accounting
of fixed assets owned by the borough and recommend the sale of any
surplus, obsolete equipment, materials and supplies. [Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 49-95]
F. He shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records not required
by law to be kept by another officer of the borough and establish and
ensure the maintenance of a coordinated filing system for all borough
departments, offices, boards and agencies.
G. He shall:
(1) Keep the Mayor and Council currently informed on all matters
within his jurisdiction by submitting such reports as he deems
advisable or as requested by the Mayor and Council.
(2) Prepare and present to the Mayor and Council an annual report on
borough matters.
(3) Make such other reports as from time to time the Mayor and
Council may require.
H. He shall:
(1) Advise the Mayor and Council on all matters of administration,
organization and personnel and assign office personnel to the
performance of various duties in various departments.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which contained specific duties and responsibilities,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 49-95.
This ordinance also provided for the relettering of Subsections E through L as Subsections
D through K, respectively.
§ 4-5 MADISON CODE § 4-5
4:10
§ 4-6. Limits of authority.
Nothing herein shall derogate from or authorize the Borough Administrator
to exercise the powers and duties of elected officials of the borough and of
the boards and agencies thereof established pursuant to law.
Chapter 5
ALLIANCE ADDRESSING SUBSTANCE ABUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 91.
§ 5-1. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
47-20105]
The Madison Alliance Addressing Substance Abuse is hereby established for
the aforementioned purposes.6
(2) Study, recommend, implement and enforce personnel organization
and policy of the borough, and implement vacation policy as
established by the Borough Council for all departments, except as
otherwise provided by statute for Police and Fire Departments.4
I. He shall:
(1) Study, recommend, implement and enforce procedures and policy
of the borough and its departments for receipt, dissemination and
collation of and responses to communications and requests for
information, after consultation with department heads.
(2) Receive, distribute and follow up requests for information and
complaints from citizens and keep the Mayor and Council informed
on such matters.
J. He shall prepare an agenda for and arrange meetings and conferences
of the Mayor and Council and other agencies of the borough when so
requested by the Mayor and Council.
K. He shall attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council, unless excused
by that body.
4. Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to personnel policies and vacations, see Ch. 30,
Personnel Policies.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Alliance Against
Substance Abuse" to "Alliance Addressing Substance Abuse."
6. Editor's Note: The preface of Ord. No. 22-90 listed the purposes as follows: "The Alliance
shall work toward the prevention of alcohol and drug abuse by: "(1) Ensuring
communication, cooperation and coordination of efforts to schools, law enforcement,
business groups and other community organizations for the purpose of reducing alcohol
and drug abuse; provided, however, that the foregoing is accomplished in accordance with
§ 4-5 ADMINISTRATOR § 5-2
4:11
§ 5-2. Advisory committee.
The Alliance will be recognized as an advisory committee and will report to
the Mayor and Council.
§ 5-3. Membership.
The Alliance shall consist of 15 to 20 members and shall include broad
representation from all segments of the Madison community, including,
without limitation, the following:
§ 5-4. Appointment.
All members of the Alliance shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council.
A. Mayor's representative.
B. Health educator.
C. Council liaison.
D. Chief of Police or designee.
E. School Board member.
F. Superintendent of Schools or representative.
G. Student Assistance Coordinator: Project Pride.
H. Parent-Teacher Association representative.
I. High School and Junior High School Administration members.
J. Representative of the local bargaining unit for teachers.
K. Representative(s) of local business.
L. Recreation Department representative.
M. Teen Center Board representative.
N. Representative(s) of local civic associations.
O. Representative(s) of local religious groups.
existing laws and regulations. "(2) Cooperating with local school districts to facilitate the
provision of comprehensive and effective alcohol and drug abuse education programs in
grades Kindergarten through 12. "(3) Supporting local school district procedures for the
intervention, treatment and discipline of students abusing alcohol or drugs in conjunction
with Project Community Pride and assisting in raising community awareness of these
procedures. "(4) Developing and promoting comprehensive alcohol and drug abuse
education, support and outreach efforts for parents in the community. "(5) Developing and
promoting comprehensive alcohol and drug abuse community awareness programs. "(6)
Developing a comprehensive plan to provide matching funds equivalent to the amount of
funding received from the Drug Enforcement and Demand Reduction Fund."
§ 5-2 MADISON CODE § 5-5
4:12
§ 5-5. Terms; vacancies.
The initial members shall be appointed within 60 days after the effective
date of this chapter, and their terms shall commence on the day of their
appointment. With respect to the initial members, five shall be appointed
for initial terms of one year; five shall be appointed for initial terms of
two years; the remaining members shall be appointed for initial terms of
three years. The term of each member appointed shall be designated in his
appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be
for the full three-year term. There are no restrictions on reappointment and
all vacancies shall be filled, for the unexpired term, by the Mayor with the
advice of Council.
§ 5-6. Meetings.
The Alliance shall hold regular meetings with a calendar of meetings
established in advance. Minutes of all meetings shall be taken to serve as
public record. A majority of Alliance members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
Chapter 6
ATTORNEY AND ENGINEER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 6-1. Municipal Attorney.
A. Office of Municipal Attorney created. Pursuant to the authority of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, there is hereby created the office of Municipal
Attorney, also known as Borough Attorney.
B. Appointment and term. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and
consent of the Council, the Municipal Attorney, also referred to as the
Borough Attorney, who shall be licensed to practice law in the State of
New Jersey, for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year.
C. Powers and duties. The Municipal Attorney shall serve as legal advisor
to the Mayor and Council; represent the Borough in all legal matters;
advise and assist the Mayor, Council, Borough Administrator and
department heads as required in the administration of the Borough
government; represent the Borough in all litigation, arbitration,
administrative hearings and appeals and other such proceedings;
attend Council meetings; draft ordinances and resolutions and such
other legal instruments as relate to the business of the Borough; give
opinions and rulings on questions of law and render such other
§ 5-5 ATTORNEY AND ENGINEER § 6-1
6:13
§ 6-2. Municipal Engineer.
Chapter 7
TAX ASSESSOR
professional legal services as may be required by statute or as
requested by the Mayor and Council from time to time, whether by
ordinance, resolution or otherwise.
D. Compensation. The compensation to be paid the Municipal Attorney
shall be as the Mayor and Council shall hereafter from time to time
prescribe by the Annual Salary Ordinance.7 In addition to the salary, for
litigation, administrative proceedings, legal services related to labor
matters, extraordinary proceedings and/or unforeseeable matters or
services, the Municipal Attorney shall be paid such reasonable fees and
costs as may be necessary and required in accordance with his or her
professional services contract.
A. Office of Municipal Engineer created. Pursuant to the authority of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there is hereby created the office of Municipal
Engineer.
B. Appointment and term. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and
consent of the Council, the Municipal Engineer, who shall be a person
licensed as a professional engineer in the State of New Jersey. The term
of office shall be three years commencing January 1. Whenever a
vacancy should occur, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term
only.
C. Powers and duties. The Municipal Engineer shall provide professional
engineering advice and assistance to the governing body; maintain the
Borough Official Map and Borough Zoning Map;8 prepare plans and
specifications for public works authorized by the governing body or the
Borough Administrator and make such inspections of the work of public
contractors as may be necessary or desirable; when so directed,
monitor the performance of public works contracts, report to the
governing body thereon and certify the amounts due and payable
thereunder; and provide any and all other professional engineering
advice and assistance as may be required by statute or as assigned by
the governing body or the Borough Administrator.
D. Compensation. The Municipal Engineer shall receive such salary and/or
other compensation as may be established by separate salary
ordinances or amendments thereto for the position of Municipal
Engineer.9
7. Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
8. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the Borough offices.
9. Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 6-1 MADISON CODE § 7-1
7:14
§ 7-1. Establishment of position.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146, there is established a Tax Assessor for the
Borough of Madison.
§ 7-2. Qualifications.
The Tax Assessor shall be a person qualified for appointment to that position
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. and any amendments thereto.
§ 7-3. Term.
The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from the first
day of July next following his appointment. Any vacancy other than due to
expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 7-4. Compensation.
The Tax Assessor shall receive salary or compensation as the Borough
Council may establish by ordinance or amendments thereto.
Chapter 9
CASH MANAGEMENT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Financial Officer — See Ch. 17.
§ 9-1. Purpose; plan established.
§ 9-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CASH MANAGEMENT PLAN — That plan as approved by resolution by the
Council of the Borough of Madison.
A. It is in the best interest of the Borough of Madison to earn additional
revenue through the investment and prudent management of its cash
receipts. Chapter 8 of the Laws of 1983, approved January 18, 1983, is
an Act concerning the Local Fiscal Affairs Law and amends N.J.S.A.
40A:5-2 and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-14, and this law requires that each local unit
shall adopt a cash management plan.
B. The following shall constitute the Cash Management Plan for the
Borough of Madison, which shall deposit and manage its funds pursuant
to this plan.
§ 7-1 TAX ASSESSOR § 9-2
7:15
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance for the Borough of
Madison.
FISCAL YEAR — The twelve-month period ending December 31.
§ 9-3. Designation of depositories.
At least once each fiscal year at its organization meeting, the Council shall,
by resolution, designate the depositories for the Borough of Madison in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-14.
§ 9-4. Annual audit.
The Cash Management Plan shall be subject to the annual audit conducted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-14.
§ 9-5. Authority to invest.
The Council, at its organization meeting, shall pass a resolution designating
the borough's official(s) who shall make and be responsible for municipal
deposits and investments.
§ 9-6. Investment instruments.
The Director of Finance shall invest, at his discretion, in any investment
instruments as approved by the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services, and in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.1.
§ 9-7. Records and reports.
§ 9-8. Cash flow.
A. The Director of Finance shall report all investments in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.2.
B. At a minimum, the Director of Finance shall:
(1) Keep a record of all investments.
(2) Have the ability to obtain from our commercial bank, on a daily
basis, the status of the borough's cash in its bank accounts.
(3) Report investments to the Borough Administrator, Finance
Committee Chairman and the Utilities Committee Chairman on a
monthly basis.
A. The Director of Finance shall ensure that the borough's accounting
system provides regular information concerning the borough's cash
position and investment performance.
B. All moneys shall be turned over to the Director of Finance or his staff
members and deposited in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.
§ 9-2 MADISON CODE § 9-8
7:16
Chapter 9A
ADVISORY AUDIT COMMITTEE
§ 9A-1. Establishment.
The Advisory Audit Committee is hereby established, to be known as the
"Advisory Audit Committee of the Borough of Madison" (hereafter referred
to as the "Committee"). The Committee shall consist of no more than five
members, excluding the ex-officio members.
§ 9A-2. Purpose; responsibilities.
The Committee's purpose and responsibilities are as follows:
§ 9A-3. Membership.
All members of the Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Madison.
All members shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall be
C. The Director of Finance is authorized and directed to invest surplus
funds of the borough as the availability of the funds permit. In addition,
it shall be the responsibility of the Director of Finance to minimize the
possibility of idle cash by depositing the borough's moneys in interestbearing
accounts wherever practical and in the best interest of the
Borough of Madison.
A. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding records
and recordkeeping procedures.
B. The Committee will review the financial reporting and disclosure
process.
C. The Committee will monitor accounting policies and principles.
D. The Committee will recommend the hiring of an auditor with the
consent of the Mayor and Council.
E. The Committee will evaluate the performance and independence of
external auditors.
F. The Committee will discuss risk management policies and practices
with the CFO, Borough Administrator, and the Assistant Borough
Administrator.
G. The Committee will review the auditor’s findings and recommendations
and ensure that timely action is taken to remediate any material issues
mentioned.
H. The Committee will hold a minimum of three public meetings annually
which shall be open to the public and shall take place at the Madison
Municipal Building unless otherwise noted.
§ 9-8 TAX ASSESSOR § 9A-3
7:17
comprised of the following persons, up to a maximum of five members
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council:
§ 9A-4. Terms of office.
§ 9A-5. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice and
consent of the Council.
A. One Finance Chairperson or Co-Chairperson member of the Council.
B. Up to four Madison residents who have accounting and/or auditing
expertise and experience. In addition to direct practitioners, individuals
who have been involved in an audit, or are familiar with audits, are also
eligible for appointment.
C. The CFO, Borough Administrator and Assistant Borough Administrator
shall be ex-officio members of the Committee.
A. The Council Finance Chairperson or Co-Chairperson shall serve
annually.
B. The resident members shall serve for a term of three years (staggered
terms). The terms of office shall commence upon the day of each
member's appointment, unless otherwise specified at the time of
appointment, and be for the initial respective periods of one, two, and
three years. The term of each appointee shall be designated in his or
her appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies,
shall be for the full three-year term, to take effect on January 1 next
succeeding such appointment.
C. The Mayor shall designate the Council Finance Chairperson or Co-
Chairperson, on a rotation basis, as Committee Chairperson, and the
Committee shall select a Secretary to record minutes. The Committee
shall establish its meeting schedule, which shall be duly published. The
Committee will meet at least three times a year. A first meeting each
year should have as an agenda item a discussion concerning the
identification and appointment of an audit firm, which will have to be
approved by a majority of the Council. A second meeting should take
place with the auditors when they are on site, but prior to completing
their audit. Ideally, this second meeting will occur shortly after, if not
prior to, the start of the audit. The third meeting will again include the
auditors to review their findings. The Committee is responsible for an
annual report to the Council concerning the audit and any
recommendations with regard to financial reporting, recordkeeping
and risk management. Such report shall be written, oral, or both,
depending on the preferences of the Council.
§ 9A-3 MADISON CODE § 9A-6
7:18
§ 9A-6. Indemnification.
Members of the Standing Advisory Audit Committee shall be indemnified
pursuant to Chapter 14 (Defense and Indemnification of Municipal Officials
and Employees) of the Madison Borough Code.
Chapter 10
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Council bylaws — See Ch. A236.
§ 10-1. Procedure. [Amended 10-10-1978 by Ord. No. 36-78]
The following procedures are hereby established covering the payment of
bills, claims and/or demands upon the Borough of Madison:
A. A voucher on a form prescribed by the Administrator shall be presented
for each bill, claim or demand.
(1) Such bill, claim or demand shall be paid only upon the audit,
warrant and approval of each of the following in the order listed:
(a) The requisitioning officer, except when the claim does not arise
from a requisition.
(b) The Finance Officer, or other designated person authorized by
resolution of the Council.
(c) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the committee under
whose jurisdiction the claim falls.
(2) In the case of checks drawn to cover payroll and payroll-related
items, the check may be drawn and signed in anticipation of the
approvals required in Subsection A(1)(b) through (c) above, or in
anticipation of ratification by Council resolution.
B. Disbursement, except for payroll, shall be made by check signed by
three officials of the borough consisting of one person in each of the
following three categories:
(1) The Mayor or, in the Mayor's absence, the Council President or, in
the absence of both, the Chairman of the Finance Committee.
(2) The Borough Clerk or Deputy Borough Clerk.
(3) The Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer.
C. Payroll checks may be signed in accordance with the preceding
subsection or by the Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer alone.
§ 9A-6 CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF § 10-1
10:19
Chapter 11
CLERK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 11-1. Office continued.
The office of Borough Clerk, as provided for by law and as established by
prior ordinances, is hereby continued.
§ 11-2. Qualifications.
Any person appointed to the office of Borough Clerk shall hold a registered
municipal clerk certificate as provided for by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.1 et seq.,
and such person shall not be required to be a resident of the Borough of
Madison.
§ 11-3. Appointment and term.
§ 11-4. Compensation.
The Borough Clerk shall receive such salary and/or other compensation
as may be established from time to time by separate salary ordinances or
amendments thereto.
D. The Treasurer shall prepare for each regularly scheduled meeting of
the Council a list of all bills, claims and demands to be paid, and this list
shall be submitted to the Chairman or Acting Chairman of the
committee under whose jurisdiction the claims fall for his or her
approval, and then, to the Council as a whole for its approval by motion.
Such list shall be made a part of the minutes of the meeting. A copy
shall be filed with the Clerk as a public record open to examination in
his office.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and 9-133.1, the Borough Clerk
shall be appointed by the Borough Council and shall have a term of
office of three years, which shall run from January 1 in the year in which
he or she was appointed.
B. Any person reappointed as Borough Clerk shall hold office during good
behavior and efficiency as provided for under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.7.
§ 10-1 MADISON CODE § 11-5
11:20
§ 11-5. Construal of provisions.
This chapter is intended to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133
to 9-134, governing the office of Municipal Clerk, and all provisions of this
chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent therewith.
Chapter 11A
CONTRACTS, PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
§ 11A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — For purposes of this chapter, a business entity whose
contributions are regulated by this chapter means:
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE —
A. An individual, including the individual's spouse, and any child/children;
A firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership; limited
liability company; organization; association; and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and
B above and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who has received
or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described
in Subsection A above, more than $100,000 in compensation or income
of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation: wages,
salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends,
profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock,
stock options or gifts), in any twelve-month period prior to the award
of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this chapter; and
E.
All persons who are an affiliate of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and E above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C. 101(2).
F.
A. Every candidate for Borough of Madison elective municipal office;
Every candidate committee established by or for the benefit of a
candidate for Borough of Madison elective municipal office;
B.
§ 11-5 CLERK § 11A-1
11:21
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable
services" as such terms are used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — Has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By
way of illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans,
and in-kind contributions.
§ 11A-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Every joint candidates committee established in whole or in part by or
for the benefit of a candidate for Borough of Madison elective municipal
office;
C.
D. Every political party committee of the Borough of Madison;
E. Every political party committee of Morris County; and
Every political committee, continuing political action committee, or
other form of association or organization that regularly engages in the
support of candidates for the Borough of Madison municipal or Morris
County elective offices or Borough of Madison municipal or Morris
County political parties or political party committees.
F.
The terms in the foregoing definition have the meaning prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7.
G.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the
Borough of Madison and any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure "professional services" as such term is defined at
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
"professional services"), nor "extraordinary unspecified services" as
such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking
garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "extraordinary unspecified services") from any business
entity if such business entity has solicited or made any contribution to:
(1) A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the Borough of
Madison or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract; or
(2) To any Borough of Madison or Morris County political committee or
political party committee; or
(3) To any continuing political committee or political action committee
that regularly engages in the support of Borough of Madison
municipal or Morris County elections and/or Borough of Madison
municipal or Morris County candidates, candidate committees,
§ 11A-1 MADISON CODE § 11A-2
11:22
joint candidates committees, political committees, political parties,
political party committees, (hereinafter "PAC"), in excess of the
thresholds specified in Subsection C within one calendar year
immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the Borough of
Madison or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the
rendition of professional services or extraordinary unspecified services
shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution, to:
(1) A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the Borough of
Madison, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract; or
(2) To any Borough of Madison or Morris County political committee or
political party committee; or
(3) Any PAC between the time of first communication between that
business entity and the municipality regarding a specific
agreement for professional services or extraordinary unspecified
services, and the later of the termination of negotiations or
rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the performance or
specified time period of that contract or agreement.
C. Monetary thresholds.
(1) The monetary thresholds of this chapter are:
(a) A maximum of $300 per calendar year each for any purpose to
any candidate or candidate committee for mayor or governing
body, or $500 per calendar year to any joint candidates
committee for mayor or governing body, or $300 per calendar
year to a political committee or political party committee of the
Borough of Madison;
(b) A maximum of $500 per calendar year to a Morris County
political committee or political party committee; and
(c) A maximum of $500 per calendar year to any PAC.
(2) However, for each business entity party to a contract for
professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection A, or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in
Subsection A, when such business entity's contribution is
aggregated with all "persons" defined in § 11A-1, Definitions,
above, by virtue of their affiliation to that business entity party, a
maximum of $2,500 to all Borough of Madison candidates,
candidate committees, joint candidates committees, and holders of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, all Borough of Madison or Morris County political
§ 11A-2 CLERK § 11A-2
11:23
§ 11A-3. Contributions made prior to effective date
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this
chapter.
§ 11A-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this chapter may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this chapter if it were an initial contract.
§ 11A-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
committees and political party committees as described herein
combined, without violating Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Borough of Madison Mayor or governing body, if the contract
requires approval or appropriation from the Mayor or governing
body; or
(2) The Mayor of the Borough of Madison, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this chapter, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of the obligations described in a
contract for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this
chapter.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or extraordinary unspecified services from any business entity,
the Borough of Madison or its purchasing agents and departments, as
the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business
entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has
not made a contribution in violation of § 11A-2 of this chapter. The
Borough of Madison, its purchasing agents and departments shall be
responsible for informing the Borough Council that the aforementioned
sworn statement has been received and that the business entity is not in
violation of this chapter, prior to awarding the contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the Borough
of Madison any contributions that constitute a violation of this act that
are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration of a
contract. The Borough of Madison, its purchasing agents and
§ 11A-2 MADISON CODE § 11A-5
11:24
§ 11A-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services
or extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 11A-1 of
this chapter if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable
ELEC report is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the
recipient of such contribution.
§ 11A-7. Exemptions.
§ 11A-8. Violations and penalties.
departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body
within 10 business days after receipt of said report from the business
entity, or at the next Borough Council meeting following receipt of said
report from the business entity, whichever comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the Borough of Madison, or
prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall
be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any
other provision of law.
A. The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in
§ 11A-2A do not apply to contracts which:
(1) Are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after public
advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4; or
(2) Are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.
B. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a fair and
open process under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a Borough of Madison
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
§ 11A-5 CLERK § 11A-8
11:25
§ 11A-9. Citizens' private right of action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge
violations of this chapter, every person aggrieved by a violation of the
ordinance, or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough of Madison has
the right, consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of
this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain
declaratory, injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not
limited to, attorneys' fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of
this chapter.
§ 11A-10. Indexing.
The monetary thresholds of the definition of "business entity: in § 11A-1 and
in § 11A-2C of this chapter shall be increased effective March 1 of each
elective municipal office in the Borough of Madison, or a holder
of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or any Borough of Madison or Morris County political
committee or political party committee, or any PAC;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates § 11A-8A(1) through (8)
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Borough of Madison
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this chapter, or who conspires with another person to
violate any provision of this chapter, or who, with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating a violation of this chapter, solicits another
person to commit it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person
in planning or committing it, shall be subject to punishment, including
fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the
ordinances of the Borough of Madison.
§ 11A-8 MADISON CODE § 11A-10
11:26
calendar year by the percentage increase, in the prior calendar year, of the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) for the New York-
Northern New Jersey-Long Island region, rounded to the nearest $10. The
Clerk of the Borough of Madison shall, by no later than April 1 of each
calendar year, prepare and publish the revised thresholds on the official
municipal website and in an official municipal newspaper.
Chapter 12
COURT, JOINT MUNICIPAL
§ 12-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., a single Joint
Municipal Court is hereby established for the Borough of Chatham,
Township of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and
Township of Morris. The jurisdiction of the Joint Municipal Court shall
be coextensive with the territories of the Borough of Chatham, Township
of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and Township of
Morris.
§ 12-2. Joint Court Committee.
A Joint Court Committee shall be formed consisting of two representatives
appointed by the respective governing bodies of the Borough of Chatham,
Township of Chatham, Borough of Madison, Township of Harding and
Township of Morris. The Joint Court Committee shall operate as set forth
in the agreement for the creation and operation of a Joint Municipal Court
pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act,10 dated
October 29, 2013, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 12-3. Agreement.
The agreement for the creation and operation of a Joint Municipal Court,
pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, dated
October 29, 2013 (as it may be amended from time to time) is hereby
ratified and approved. Said agreement is on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk, Hartley Dodge Memorial, 50 Kings Road, Madison, New
Jersey, and is available for inspection during normal business hours.
§ 12-4. Effective date.
The expanded Joint Municipal Court shall be effective and commence on
January 1, 2014, and shall remain in effect until December 31, 2017, unless
subsequently extended, renewed or terminated by one or more of the
participating municipalities pursuant to the Agreement for the Creation
and Operation of a Joint Municipal Court pursuant to the Uniform Shared
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq.
§ 11A-10 CLERK § 12-4
11:27
Services and Consolidation Act,11 dated October 29, 2013 (as it may be
amended from time to time).
§ 12-5. Withdrawal of members.
A municipality may withdraw from participation in the Joint Municipal
Court by delivering written notice to the Joint Municipal Court and all
participating municipalities of its intention to withdraw in accordance with
the agreement authorized by this chapter.
§ 12-6. Additional members.
Additional municipalities may join the Joint Municipal Court. Any
amendment to include an additional municipality shall require approval
by all participating municipalities as required by law and the agreement
authorized by this chapter.
§ 12-7. Joint Court staff.
Joint Court personnel and independent contractors shall be appointed
pursuant to the appropriate statutory authority, rules of the Court and/or
the Joint Court operations agreement, as applicable.
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 14-1. General conditions; civil actions.
A. Subject to the limitations set forth in the subsequent sections of this
chapter, whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against
any person (hereinafter referred to as "employee" or "official") holding
or formerly holding any office, position or employment with the
Borough of Madison for any action or omission arising out of or in the
course of the performance of the duties of such office, position or
employment, the Borough shall defray all costs of defending such
action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with
costs of appeal, if any, and shall save harmless and protect such persons
from any financial loss resulting from the litigation. The Borough shall
provide for defense of and indemnify any present or former employee or
official of the Borough who becomes a defendant in a civil action if the
person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had
an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law; and
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq.
§ 12-4 MADISON CODE § 14-1
11:28
§ 14-2. Criminal actions.
The Borough shall not defray the costs of defending any criminal action
against any Borough employee or official except as may be authorized by
state statute or other municipal ordinance or resolution of the Borough
of Madison, and in those circumstances, the responsibility for defraying
the costs of defending such employee or official shall be applicable only
when such criminal proceedings shall have been dismissed or result in
a final disposition in favor of the employee or official. Further, in the
event that the Borough indemnifies the employee or official, the cost of
that indemnification shall not exceed the hourly rate paid to the Borough
Attorney. Nonetheless, should the Borough Council determine that there is
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. However, the Borough shall not indemnify any employee or official
against the payment of punitive damages, penalties, or fines, but may
provide for the legal defense of such claims in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter. The Borough may refuse to provide
for the defense and indemnification of any civil action referred to in this
chapter if the Borough Council determines that:
(1) The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty
authorized or imposed by law;
(2) The act or omission was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct, or actual malice; or
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would
create a conflict of interest between the Borough and the
employee(s) or official(s) involved.
C. In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former employee
or official if the Borough Council concludes that such representation is
in the best interest of the Borough and that the person to be defended
acted or failed to act in accordance with the standards set forth in this
chapter.
D. Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall fully cooperate with the Borough. The Borough may
provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by authorizing its
Attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended or by employing
other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the Borough
under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer to
provide the defense. The Borough Attorney or other attorney selected
by the Borough Council shall represent the Borough official or
employee, at a cost not to exceed the hourly rate which the Borough
compensates its Borough Attorney.
§ 14-1 CLERK § 14-2
11:29
good cause to dismiss the employee or official arising out of the incident
or related incidents of the criminal prosecution, the Borough will not
reimburse the employee or official for legal defense and costs of defending
the suit, even though criminal proceedings against the employee or official
may be dismissed or the employee or official found not guilty.
§ 14-3. Ethics proceedings.
The Borough will not provide a defense for employees or officials who
are charged with ethical offenses or violations. The Borough Council may,
however, authorize the Borough to reimburse the employee or official for
the reasonable cost of the defense of ethics proceeding, including
investigation, costs and reasonable legal fees, as further defined in this
chapter, provided that the ethics proceeding is dismissed or is finally
determined in favor of the employee or official. In addition, the Borough
may indemnify an employee or official if the Mayor and Council, by a
majority vote, finds that a Borough employee or official who is found to
have committed an ethical offense acted in a manner that was reasonably
debatable at the time that the violation occurred and that the employee or
official's actions or omissions did not constitute willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
§ 14-4. Limitations.
A. The Borough shall not be obligated to defend and indemnify its
employees or officials if:
(1) The alleged act or omission was not within the scope of
employment or authority, or the act or omission does not arise out
of and is not directly related to the employee's or official's lawful
exercise of his or her authority or duty in furtherance of the
employee's or official's authority or duty;
(2) The claim arises from circumstances under which the Borough
itself would not be liable for the acts of its employees or officials
under the doctrine of respondent superior;
(3) The act or omission constitutes a criminal offense, ethical offense,
actual fraud, intentional or willful misconduct, actual malice, or an
intentional or wrongful act or omission;
(4) There exist policies of insurance, either obtained by the Borough or
by any other, by virtue of which the employee or official is entitled
to a defense in question from any insurer, including coverage
pursuant to the Joint Insurance Fund or Municipal Express Liability
Policies;
(5) If the action or proceeding was brought by the Borough itself
against the employee or official;
§ 14-2 MADISON CODE § 14-4
11:30
§ 14-5. Counterclaims or affirmative actions.
If the Borough employee or official files any counteraction, or counterclaim,
or asserts any affirmative claims in the legal proceedings, the Borough shall
not be obligated to reimburse the employee or official for any attorney's
fees or costs attributed to such counteraction, counterclaim, or affirmative
claim.
§ 14-6. Notice of claims to be provided to Borough.
A Borough employee or official shall not be entitled to indemnification or
reimbursement pursuant to this chapter unless, within 15 calendar days
of the time he or she is served with any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading, he or she delivers the original or a copy thereof
to the Borough. Any Borough employee or official who receives notice of
a claim or is named as a party in any civil suit, ethics proceeding, or
criminal proceeding either in his or her official capacity or in an individual
capacity for events arising out of or connected directly or indirectly with
the performance of his or her duty as a Borough employee or official shall
promptly advise the Borough Administrator and the Borough Attorney of
the claim or that the civil suit or criminal proceeding has been commenced
and shall supply a copy of any and all notices and pleadings pertaining
to the matter. The Borough employee or official shall thereafter cooperate
with the appropriate Borough agents, attorneys, servants and employees in
effectuating the provisions of this chapter.
(6) If the Borough employee or official has failed to substantially
cooperate with the Borough and its agents, servants, attorneys, and
employees in connection with the matter; or
(7) If it is not deemed appropriate by the Borough Council pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 10 of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act,
N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq., or any other statute or applicable law.
B. Specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter are the
following classes of employees, officials, or former employees or
officials:
(1) Any municipal employee or official providing any form of
professional medical services, such as doctors and nurses, insofar
as said civil action arises out of or concerns those professional
medical services.
(2) Any part-time professional municipal employee or official, such as
the Borough Attorney, Assistant Attorney, Auditor and Engineer,
insofar as said civil action arises out of or concerns those
professional services. This exclusion does not pertain to full-time
professional employees such as the Borough Engineering
Administrator and Finance Officer.
§ 14-4 CLERK § 14-7
11:31
§ 14-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — Any person elected, appointed or employed
by the Borough, paid or unpaid, in any way connected with the municipal
government of the Borough of Madison, except for persons appointed to
committees having no powers other than to advise. "Employee" shall include
all persons on the municipal payroll. These terms shall not mean:
Chapter 15
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 15-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission shall be:
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
B.
Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough; or
C.
Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
D.
A. To study the future of the downtown district in regard to its economic
growth and development.
B. To develop plans for the redevelopment of the downtown district
(§ 15-1.1 below).
C. To advise the downtown community on improvements requiring private
sector action.
D. To advise the Mayor and Council on improvements requiring local
government action.
E. To coordinate redevelopment activities in the downtown district and
foster closer working relationships among all interested segments of
the Madison community.
F. To analyze and plan for the impact on the downtown district of potential
redevelopment in the Borough.
§ 14-7 MADISON CODE § 15-1.1
11:32
§ 15-1.1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — Includes both the traditional downtown area
which principally corresponds to the CBD Zoning Districts and also the
additional commercial areas of the Borough of Madison which correspond
to the CC and Gateway Zoning Districts, as shown on the Zoning Map of the
Borough of Madison.12
§ 15-2. Membership.
A. Numbers of members. Membership shall consist of 19 regular
members, one advisory/alternate member, and one ex-officio member.
[Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 12-2015]
B. Classification of members. The regular members, known collectively as
"Commissioners," advisory/alternate members and the ex-officio
member shall consist of the following:
(1) Public officials: two regular members, Mayor and a Council liaison,
as appointed and approved by the Borough Council.
(2) Madison resident: one regular member. This member shall be a
resident of the Borough of Madison.
(3) Senior citizen: one regular member who shall be an active member
of the Senior Citizen Advisory Committee.
(4) Merchant, commercial property landlord and/or business owner;
four regular members: These members shall be either an owner or
tenant merchant operating a business that is based in Madison and/
or an owner (landlord) of commercial property within the
Downtown District. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 12-2015]
(5) Organizational representatives: seven regular members. These
members shall represent the views of major organizations
important to the Madison Community. [Amended 4-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 12-2015]
(a) Chamber of Commerce: one representative who shall be
recommended by the Board of Directors of the Madison
Chamber of Commerce.
(b) Higher education: one representative who shall represent the
views of the three colleges and universities in the greater
Madison area.
12.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 15-1.1 CLERK § 15-2
11:33
(c) Nonprofit: one representative who shall be an active member
of a least one recognized nonprofit organization operating in
Madison.
(d) Giralda Farms: one representative who shall be an employee of
one of the corporations or other tenants of Giralda Farms.
(e) Board of Education: one representative who shall be a sitting
member of the Madison Board of Education and a Madison
resident.
(f) Planning Board: one representative who shall be a sitting
member of the Madison Planning Board and a Madison
resident.
(g) Arts: one representative who shall be a member of the Madison
Arts and Culture Alliance or other arts related organization
based in the Madison area. [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No.
12-2015]
(6) At-large commissioners: four regular members. These members
shall be any individual, resident or nonresident, with an identifiable
interest in the activities and mission of the Downtown Development
Commission.
(7) Media: one advisor who shall be an employee of a local media
outlet. This person will also act as the alternate and vote in the
absence of a voting Commissioner.
(8) Ex-officio member, one member, who shall be an active volunteer;
ex-officio member, one member, who shall be a Drew student; exofficio
member, one member, who shall be the Communications and
Technology Coordinator. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No.
12-2015; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018; 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
16-2018]
C. The Mayor, Council Liaison and all regular members of the Commission,
except the ex-officio member, shall exercise voting power (19
members). The advisory member may participate in discussions but
may not vote except in the absence of or disqualification of a regular
member. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 12-2015]
D. Appointment. Appointments of all regular and advisory members shall
be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least
15 days prior to the date of the second regular public meeting of the
Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to
confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made by the
Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at the
meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be
required, with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a
tie.
§ 15-2 MADISON CODE § 15-2
11:34
§ 15-3. Voting powers.
§ 15-4. Officers.
E. Terms. Regular and the advisory member shall serve for terms of three
years. The term of any public official, including Planning Board and
Board of Education commissioners, shall not extend beyond the current
term of public office. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 41-2014]
F. Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy, the Commission will recommend a
successor who may be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council to fill the unexpired term. Vacancies shall be
filled with persons within the same class as the vacancy.
A. Voting members. The voting members of the Commission shall be the
Mayor, the Council representative and all regular members.
B. Nonvoting members. The ex-officio member and the advisory member
shall participate in discussions. The ex-officio member shall not vote.
The advisory member may serve as alternate and vote only in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A. Number of officers. The officers of the Commission shall be a Chair,
Vice-Chair, Treasurer, Secretary and one Member-At-Large.
B. Election. The Chair, Vice-Chair, Secretary, Treasurer and Member-At-
Large shall be elected annually in the month of January by the
Commission and shall hold their respective offices for one year or until
their successors are elected. No individual may occupy more than one
office.
C. Nominations.
(1) At the December meeting of each year, the ex-officio member, who
will be the election officer, will then accept nominations for the
position of Chair, Vice-Chair, Secretary, Treasurer and Member-At-
Large.
(2) All nominations, whether oral or written, must be made, seconded
and then accepted by the individual nominated. At the beginning of
the January meeting, the election officer will accept any
nominations from the floor and call the roll to determine those
eligible to receive ballots and cast votes. The election officer will
prepare the ballots indicating the officers' title and a space in
which the eligible voters can write in their choice for each officer's
position. The election officer will distribute the ballots to those
eligible to vote. Upon completion of the actual vote, the election
officer will collect the ballots and will then tabulate the results. The
results will be verified by the Council liaison and by any member of
the Commission who is not running for election and who has been
appointed by the election officer. The results for each office will
also be posted so all present may view the final count.
§ 15-2 CLERK § 15-4
11:35
§ 15-5. Meetings.
D. Vacancies. All vacancies occurring prior to the expiration of the term of
any of the offices shall be filled at the next meeting by the Commission
who shall elect an officer to fill the unexpired term.
E. Removal. Any officer elected by the Commission may be removed by the
Commission whenever, in its judgment, the best interests of the
Commission will be served thereby. Such removal shall occur upon a
two-thirds majority vote of the eligible Commissioners.
A. Schedule. The Commission shall meet at least 10 times a year. The time
and place of the monthly meetings shall be fixed annually by resolution
of the Commission.
B. Notice. Notice of the annual schedule and of any special or additional
meetings shall be made to the public pursuant to the Open Public
Meetings Act.13 Any cancellation or change of meeting shall be made by
the Executive Committee. Commissioners will be notified at least 48
hours in advance.
C. Open meetings. The meetings of the Commission shall be open to the
public unless it is determined by the Chair of the Commission, or by a
majority of the members, that a closed session is required to discuss
any of the following categories or matters:
(1) Any matter involving the purchase, lease or acquisition of real
property with public funds where said purchase or lease could
adversely affect the public interest if discussion of such matters
were disclosed;
(2) Any matter of pending or anticipated litigation;
(3) Any matter of contract negotiations;
(4) Any matter falling within the attorney/client privilege; and
(5) Any matter involving the potential employment, appointment,
termination or employment, terms and conditions of employment,
evaluation of performance, promotion or disciplining of any specific
public officer, employee and/or consultant.
D. Quorum. A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
E. Absence from meetings. All regular members are expected to attend all
meetings. When a member has exceeded two unexcused absences, the
Commission may request the resignation and recommend a
replacement to the Mayor for approval by the Council.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 15-4 MADISON CODE § 15-6
11:36
§ 15-6. Powers.
The Downtown Development Commission shall have the powers necessary
to effectuate the purposes herein described, said powers including, but not
limited to, the following:
§ 15-7. Proposals to be submitted to Council.
The Commission shall submit to the Council for its consideration any major
recommendation, plan or action proposed pursuant to § 15-6 above. The
Council shall communicate with the Commission its intent with respect to
any such submission within 30 days of the receipt of same.
§ 15-8. Limitation of powers.
The Commission is specifically prohibited from exercising any power of
condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of the
municipality and from creating any debt against the municipality.
§ 15-9. Borough departmental assistance.
A. To adopt bylaws.
B. To propose and/or enter into agreements and contracts with persons,
firms, corporations or governmental entities, which agreements and
contracts may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the
purposes and objectives of the Commission.
C. To recommend and/or enter into contracts for professional services
which may be required to carry out the planning and coordination
functions of the Commission.
D. To coordinate the various public and business activities in the
downtown district, to establish an annual calendar of major downtown
events and to recommend to the Council such ordinance changes as
may be necessary to carry out the advisory purposes of the
Commission.
A. General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the
Mayor and Council, insofar as may be practicable, the employees and
professional staff of the Borough of Madison, including the Borough
Attorney, shall be available to assist the Commission in the performance
of its duties.
B. Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff assistance
shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any project that
requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff and
professionals shall be reviewed by the full Commission and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to commencement of
the project.
§ 15-6 CLERK § 15-10
11:37
§ 15-10. Remuneration.
The members of the Commission shall receive no salary or other
compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed, subject to approval
by the Council, for expenditures incurred in performance of duties as a
member of the Commission. In no event shall such reimbursement exceed
the amount budgeted by the Council for such purposes.
§ 15-11. Appropriations; annual report.
§ 15-12. Conflict of interest.
Chapter 16
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 16-1. Creation; purpose.
There is hereby created and established an Environmental Commission for
the protection, development or use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Borough of Madison
pursuant to provisions of Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 of the State of
New Jersey.14
A. The Council may appropriate annually, during the life of the
Commission, a sum of money to assist in carrying out the purposes and
objectives set forth herein. The annual expenditures of the Commission
shall not exceed the total sum of the appropriation from the Council
plus other moneys received by the Commission from other sources,
including but not limited to gifts and donations.
B. The Commission shall make an annual report to the Council setting
forth in detail its operations and transactions for the preceding 12
months. In addition, the Commission shall regularly circulate to the
Mayor and Council copies of its meeting minutes. All records, reports
and data shall be available to the Council for inspection at any time.
A. Disclosure of interest. No Commissioner shall have or shall acquire any
interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any project which
the Commission is promoting or in any contract or proposed contract
for materials or services or in any lease, mortgage, sale or contract of
any nature whatsoever relating to any such project or to the
Commission without forthwith making written disclosure to the
Commission of the nature and extent of the interest. Such disclosure
shall be entered in writing upon the minutes of the Commission.
B. Voting. No Commissioner having an interest as described in § 15-12A
shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 15-10 MADISON CODE § 16-2
16:38
§ 16-2. Membership; qualifications; terms; vacancies.
§ 16-3. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the following duties: to
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members,
appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a member of the Borough
Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the Borough of
Madison.
B. The members shall serve without compensation.
C. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Commission.
D. The terms of the first Commissioners shall be for one, two or three
years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his appointments so
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years
and until appointment and qualification of their successors.
E. The Mayor or Council of the borough may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel.
F. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
G. There shall be two alternate members appointed by the Mayor who
shall be residents of the Borough of Madison. Alternate members shall
be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed
shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2
so that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote first. Procedures concerning filling vacancies and
removal from office shall be the same as for regular members. [Added
3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95]
A. Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council in areas of
conservation and environmental protection, which shall include but not
be limited to pollution control of all types; waste disposal, including
sewage, garbage and solid waste; open space preservation, with
§ 16-2 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 16-3
16:39
§ 16-4. Acquisition of property.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Borough
Council, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the
Borough of Madison, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease,
for any of its purposes; and shall administer the same for such purposes,
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the Borough of Madison.
§ 16-5. Appointment of employees.
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
require, provided that such appointments shall be within the limits of funds
appropriated for such purposes by the Borough Council.
§ 16-6. Meetings.
emphasis on outdoor recreation needs, aesthetic flora and fauna
preservation and beautification; and water resources.
B. Plan local conservation programs and inform the public about those
programs.
C. Prepare, print and distribute informational materials, such as books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes, within the limits of funds appropriated to
the Commission.
D. Keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
E. Recommend, from time to time, to the Planning Board, plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Borough of Madison for
development and use of such areas.
F. Operate conservation programs on lands donated or purchased for
conservation purposes by the Borough of Madison.
G. Do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and assigned
to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission.
A. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairman or, in his absence or disability, at the call of the Vice
Chairman.
B. At all meetings a quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of
the Commission.
§ 16-3 MADISON CODE § 16-6
16:40
§ 16-7. Appropriations by Council.
The Council, in its discretion, may annually fix, determine and appropriate
sums sufficient for the care, custody, leasing and maintenance of such land
acquired for these uses and purposes herein stated, if necessary, and for the
expenses of the said Commission.
Chapter 17
FINANCIAL OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 30.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 17-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Chief Financial Officer, as provided for by law, is hereby
established.
§ 17-2. Qualifications.
Any person appointed to the office of Chief Financial Officer shall be a
certified municipal finance officer or shall promptly engage in a course of
study so as to qualify for and obtain such a certification prior to January 1,
1991, as provided for by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., and such person shall
not be a member of the Borough Council.
§ 17-3. Appointment; term.
§ 17-4. Compensation.
The Chief Financial Officer shall receive such salary and/or other
compensation as may be established by separate salary ordinances or
amendments thereto for the position of Finance Director.
C. The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and shall make an
annual report to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Madison on
or before the 15th day of December.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Borough Council.
B. Any person who has served as Chief Financial Officer for a period of not
less than five consecutive years shall, upon compliance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8, be granted tenure of office and
shall continue to hold office during good behavior and efficiency, and
shall not be removed from office except as permitted and provided for
in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8.
§ 16-6 FINANCIAL OFFICER § 17-5
17:41
§ 17-5. Duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for discharging all duties
as provided by law for a chief municipal financial officer, serve as the
Finance Director responsible for management and operation of the Finance
Department and perform such other duties as specified in a job description
prepared by the Borough Administrator.
§ 17-6. Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of chief financial officer, the Borough
Council may appoint a temporary chief financial officer in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13.
§ 17-7. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter is intended to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-104.1
to 140.13, governing municipal finance officers, and all provisions of this
chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent therewith.
Chapter 18
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 34.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
Fire zones — See Ch. 103.
§ 17-5 MADISON CODE § 17-7
18:42
ARTICLE I
General Organization
§ 18-1. Composition of Department.
The Madison Fire Department shall consist of a paid Fire Chief, two paid
Captains, two Volunteer Battalion Chiefs, paid fire fighters and volunteer
fire fighters and shall be divided into a Paid Division and a Volunteer
Division, as hereafter set forth.
§ 18-2. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Council of the Borough of Madison may, by resolution, from time to time
adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to ensure the proper
and efficient operation of the Madison Fire Department.
§ 18-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-2
18:43

ARTICLE II
Paid Division
§ 18-3. Creation of position of paid fire fighter; definition.
§ 18-4. Composition of Paid Division. [Amended 2-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 2-2000]
The Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department shall consist of a paid
Fire Chief (hereinafter referred to as "Fire Chief"), two paid Captains
(hereinafter referred to as "Captains") and eleven paid fire fighters
(hereinafter referred to as "fire fighters") or such number of fire fighters as
shall hereafter be fixed and determined by ordinance.
§ 18-5. Fire Chief.
A. The position of paid fire fighter is hereby created in the Borough of
Madison, New Jersey.
B. The term "paid fire fighter" shall mean and include any person who may
hereafter be appointed to such position by the Council of the Borough of
Madison and who shall be regularly employed by the borough at a fixed
annual salary for the purpose of extinguishing fires and protecting
persons and property therefrom.
A. Office established; appointment; term of office.
(1) The office of Fire Chief of the Fire Department is hereby
established in the Borough of Madison.
(2) The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Council of the Borough of
Madison and shall hold office during good behavior and capacity to
carry out his duties in an efficient manner.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Fire Chief shall have jurisdiction and supervision over all
personnel comprising the Madison Fire Department, both paid and
volunteer, and all apparatus and equipment used by said
Department.
(2) He shall supervise and direct, either personally or through his
subordinates, the operations and activities of the Madison Fire
Department with respect to the prevention, control and
extinguishing of fires.
(3) He shall have supervision of the Madison Fire Department
Headquarters, subject to the control of the Council of the Borough
of Madison and the Trustees of the Hartley Dodge Foundation, and
shall not allow said quarters to be used for any activities or in a
manner not conducive to the efficient and good order of the
§ 18-3 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-5
18:45
§ 18-6. Captain.
Department or which might result in any damage to said quarters
or the equipment therein.
(4) He shall observe and direct that all fire apparatus and equipment
are kept in good and proper working condition and shall report
promptly to the Council any failure or breakdown in any apparatus
or equipment, or any damage thereto.
(5) He shall establish such reasonable rules and regulations pertaining
to the operations of the Department and the conduct of its
personnel and issue such orders to the members of the Fire
Department as may, in his judgment, be necessary or requisite for
the efficient operation of the Fire Department and which are not in
conflict with the provisions of any law or ordinance.
(6) He shall consult with and advise the Council of the Borough of
Madison with respect to any matters pertaining to Fire Department
policy, personnel changes, the purchase of equipment and supplies
or other matters generally relating to the efficient operation of said
Department or the failure thereof, or otherwise, as requested by
said Council.
(7) He shall make reports to the Council concerning the operations of
the Department in such form and detail as the Council may
prescribe.
(8) He shall supervise and/or direct, either personally or through
subordinates, the training of fire personnel and provide for such
instruction and drills in the use of apparatus and equipment and in
Fire Department operations as may be necessary to maintain the
Department in an efficient state.
(9) He shall have the authority to relieve from duty any member of the
Paid or Volunteer Division of the Madison Fire Department for any
violation of law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Department or
for any dereliction of duty and to present charges thereof to the
Council of the Borough of Madison, in accordance with law and the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Compensation. The Fire Chief shall receive such compensation for his
services as the Council of the Borough of Madison may from time to
time establish and prescribe by salary ordinance and resolution.15
A. Position established; appointment; terms.
(1) The position of Captain of the Fire Department is hereby
established in the Borough of Madison.
15.Editor's Note: For information pertaining to the Salary Ordinance, see Ch. 42, Salaries and
Compensation.
§ 18-5 MADISON CODE § 18-6
18:46
(2) The Captain(s) shall be appointed by the Council of the Borough of
Madison and shall hold office during good behavior and capacity to
carry out the duties in an efficient manner.
B. Powers and duties. Subject to the superior authority and orders of the
Fire Chief of the Madison Fire Department, the Captains shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To answer and respond to alarms of fire and to aid in the
extinguishment of fire.
(2) When so ordered, to respond to emergency calls and to render first
aid and assistance to those in need thereof.
(3) To supervise and direct the activities of members of the Fire
Department while performing their duties in accordance with the
Department's rules and regulations and standard operating
procedures.
(4) To have charge over and direct the operation of fire apparatus,
equipment and appliances in use in the Fire Department and to
ascertain that the same are properly cleaned and maintained in
working order at all times.
(5) To supervise and/or conduct drills and to perform inspections and
other work of the Fire Department when so ordered to do so.
(6) In the absence of the Chief of the Fire Department, to supervise
and direct the response of fire apparatus to alarms, the
replacement and operation of apparatus and equipment and the
procedures to be followed by Fire Department personnel.
(7) When so requested, to assist the Fire Chief in the performance of
the administrative work of the Department.
(8) To personally carry out or secure the enforcement of Department
rules and regulations and/or such orders as may be given by the
Fire Chief, or to carry out or secure the enforcement of such orders
as may be given by the Incident Commander at the scene of an
incident or drill.
(9) To drive fire apparatus and operate pumps and fire equipment as
required.
(10) Subject to designation and/or appointments as provided for by the
applicable provisions of this Code, to perform the duties of Fire
Official in accordance with Chapter 101, Fire Department, of this
Code and/or to perform the duties of Fire Subcode Official.
(11) To perform such other duties as directed by the Fire Chief in
connection with the supervision and administration of the Fire
Department.
§ 18-6 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-6
18:47
§ 18-7. Qualifications for appointment as fire fighter.
No person shall be appointed as a fire fighter in the Paid Division of the
Madison Fire Department of the Borough of Madison unless he complies
with the following, in addition to any state or federal laws:
§ 18-8. Appointment preference to members of Volunteer Division.
Whenever any appointments are hereafter made to the position of fire
fighter of the Madison Fire Department, preference shall be given to
persons who are members of the Volunteer Division of the Madison Fire
Department who shall have served as active fire fighters for not less than
two years next preceding the making of such appointment or are exempt
fire fighters of the Department, provided that such persons are between the
ages of 21 and 40 years at the time of such appointment.
§ 18-9. Temporary appointments.
The Council of the Borough of Madison may, however, employ persons to
perform the duties of fire fighters temporarily, in case of emergency, or for
C. Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Captain shall be as
provided for in the job description established by the Fire Chief and as
provided for by law.
A. He is a citizen of the United States.
B. He is sound in body and in good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey
that he is eligible to enter the retirement system.
C. He is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. He is of good moral character. No person shall be so appointed who has
been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude which, in the
judgment of the Council of the Borough of Madison, would be
prejudicial to the morale of the Fire Department.
E. He is 18 years of age and under the age of 35 years, except as provided
in § 18-8 hereof, subject to any provisions of law applicable to persons
who are members or veterans of the armed services of the United
States.
F. He is physically and mentally sound and emotionally stable and
possesses the necessary ability to understand and obey orders and to
perform the duties required of a fire fighter of the Madison Fire
Department to the satisfaction of both the Fire Chief and the Council of
the Borough of Madison.
G. He is the holder of an automobile driver's license issued by the State of
New Jersey.
§ 18-6 MADISON CODE § 18-9
18:48
parts of years where their services are not needed throughout the entire
year and discharge them at the expiration of such temporary employment.
They may be compensated for such services at such rate as the Council may
from time to time establish by ordinance and resolution.
§ 18-10. Salaries.
The annual salaries of members of the Paid Division of the Madison Fire
Department shall be such as the Council of the Borough of Madison may
hereafter establish by ordinance and salary resolution.16
§ 18-11. Hours of duty.
Any person who is employed by the Borough of Madison as a Captain or
fire fighter shall be on actual duty for an average of 42 hours per week;
provided, however, that the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the
Fire Department is empowered, in times of emergency, to summon and
keep on duty any member of the Paid Division as shall be necessary, within
the discretion of such Fire Chief or officer, to cope with such emergency;
provided, further, that any member of the Paid Division kept on duty during
any emergency shall receive, during the next 12 months thereafter,
compensatory time off-duty equivalent to that during which emergency duty
was performed.
§ 18-12. Absence without leave.
§ 18-13. Suspension or removal from office or employment.
A. No fire fighter or Captain shall absent himself from duty without the
permission of the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the Fire
Department, nor shall any on-duty fire fighter or Captain leave his post
while on duty or at the termination thereof until relieved by a properly
designated successor or substitute.
B. Any person holding the position of Captain or fire fighter in the Borough
of Madison who shall be absent from duty without just cause for a term
of five days continuously, without leave of absence, shall, at the
expiration of such five days, cease to be a member of the Paid Division
of the Madison Fire Department.
A. No member of the Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department shall
be removed from office or employment in the Madison Fire Department
for political reasons or for any other cause than incapacity, misconduct
or disobedience to the rules and regulations established for the
government of the Madison Fire Department.
B. No member of the Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department who is
permanently employed by the Borough of Madison at a fixed annual
16.Editor's Note: For information pertaining to the Salary Ordinance, see Ch. 42, Salaries and
Compensation.
§ 18-9 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-13
18:49
§ 18-14. Duties of fire fighters.
The duties of a fire fighter shall be as follows:
salary and whose sole occupation is that of a member of the Paid
Division of the Madison Fire Department shall be suspended, removed,
fined or reduced from office or employment therein except for just
cause as hereinbefore provided and then only after written charge
or charges of the cause or causes of complaint have been preferred
against such member of the Paid Division, signed by the person or
persons making such charge or charges and filed with the Fire Chief
or other officer in charge of the Madison Fire Department and after a
copy thereof has been served upon such member of the Paid Division
within 15 days after the filing thereof and after the charge or charges
have been publicly examined by the Council of the Borough of Madison
upon reasonable notice to the person charged, which examination shall
be commenced not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days after said
copy of such charge or charges shall have been so served.
C. The Fire Chief or, in his absence, the officer in charge thereof may
relieve any member of the Paid Division from active duty as a member
of the Department pending the preference of formal charges against
him and public examination thereof by the Council. A copy of any
charges preferred against a member of the Paid Division shall also be
filed with the Council of the Borough of Madison by filing a copy thereof
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
D. If any member of the Paid Division shall be relieved from duty pending
trial on charges, such trial shall be commenced within 30 days after
service of a copy thereof upon him; otherwise, the charges shall be
dismissed and the member of the Paid Division returned to duty.
E. It is the intent of this section to give every person against whom a
charge or charges, for any cause, may be preferred under this chapter a
fair trial upon said charge or charges and to give such person every
reasonable opportunity to make his defense, if he has or chooses to
make any. In the event of failure of compliance with any provision of this
section, such charge or charges shall be dismissed.
A. To answer and respond to alarms of fire and to aid in the
extinguishment of fire.
B. When so ordered, to respond to emergency calls and to render first aid
and assistance to those in need thereof.
C. When so ordered, to make inspections of properties and assist in fire
prevention.
D. To familiarize himself thoroughly with all forms of fire apparatus and
equipment.
§ 18-13 MADISON CODE § 18-14
18:50
§ 18-15. Supervision of Paid Division.
The Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department shall be under the
supervision and subject to the direction of the Chief of the Madison Fire
Department or, during his absence or incapacity, of the senior Captain. In
the event of the absence or incapacity of both the Fire Chief and Captains,
the Paid Division shall be under the supervision and subject to the direction
of the senior Volunteer Battalion Chief. The senior Volunteer Battalion Chief
shall only have charge over the Paid Division at the scene of an incident,
drill and any departmental functions outside of fire headquarters. In the
event of the absence of both the Fire Chief and the Captains from fire
headquarters, the senior fire fighter on duty shall be in charge of the day-today
operations of the firehouse. Supervision of the Paid Division is subject to
the departmental rules and regulations and standard operating procedures
and is under the general control of the Council of the Borough of Madison.
§ 18-16. Leave of absence for sickness, injury or death in the family.
E. When so ordered, to engage in drills and the operation of fire
equipment.
F. When so ordered, to attend fire schools and courses of study in Fire
Department procedures.
G. When so specifically appointed or assigned, to drive Fire Department
apparatus and to operate pumps and other equipment.
H. As directed, to clean, supervise and otherwise care for the Fire
Department quarters and all fire apparatus and equipment therein.
I. To perform such other duties as may be ordered by the Fire Chief or
other officer in command thereof, as set forth in the rules and
regulations of the Madison Fire Department.
A. Report of sickness or injury; physician's statements.
(1) No fire fighter or Captain shall absent himself from duty by reason
of sickness or injury without notifying headquarters. He shall
promptly report such sickness or injury to the personnel on duty
before his next tour of duty, if possible, or in any event within 24
hours. If such sickness or injury is of three or more shifts' duration,
such member shall furnish:
(a) A physician's statement to the Chief of the Fire Department,
within a week.
(b) An additional physician's statement once each week thereafter
during the period of such disability, giving the cause and
nature of the illness or injury and the progress thereof and his
opinion as to the unfitness of the absentee to perform his
duties.
§ 18-14 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-16
18:51
§ 18-17. Vacation leave.
(2) Unless expressly exempted from this provision, in whole or in part,
by the Fire Chief or other officer in charge thereof, no fire fighter or
Captain who shall be absent from duty because of any injury or
illness requiring the services of a physician shall report to active
duty unless he shall first present to the Chief of the Fire
Department or other officer in charge thereof a final physician's
statement indicating that he is again fit for active duty.
B. Every member of the Paid Division shall be entitled to a leave of
absence from duty, with pay, for reason of sickness or disability, on the
following basis:
(1) During the first year of employment as a fire fighter, one workday of
sick leave shall be granted for each completed calendar month of
service.
(2) Each member of the Paid Division shall be entitled to 12 workdays
of sick leave with pay in each calendar year after he has completed
one full year of satisfactory continuous service.
C. Unused sick leave may be accumulated as outlined in the contract
agreement between the Borough of Madison and the bargaining unit.
D. The Council of the Borough of Madison may grant a leave of absence,
with pay, to any member of the Paid Division who shall become injured,
ill or disabled from any cause in the line of duty so as to be physically
unfit for duty during the period of such disability and physical unfitness
for duty, where such injury, illness or disability shall be evidenced by
the certificate of a physician designated by the Borough Council to
examine him. No such leave of absence with pay shall exceed one year
commencing from the date of such injury, illness or disability.
E. In the event of a death in the immediate family of a member of the Paid
Division of the Madison Fire Department, a leave of absence, consisting
of three working days with pay, will be granted to the member.
Immediate family shall be construed as meaning and including wife,
husband, child, father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law, sister or
brother. For all other relatives, a one-day leave will be granted.
F. The Fire Chief of the Borough of Madison shall be entitled to 13 days of
sick leave each year.
A. Every member of the Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department
shall be granted a vacation annually, with pay, on the following basis: as
determined in the agreement between the Borough of Madison and the
bargaining unit.
B. The authority for the approval of each member's vacation schedule is
vested in the Fire Chief. Preference in the selection and assignments of
§ 18-16 MADISON CODE § 18-17
18:52
§ 18-18. Overtime pay; standby duty and compensation.
vacation periods will be given by rank; in the case of equal rank,
preference shall be given according to length of service in that rank.
C. No member shall take his vacation in installments of one or two days at
a time, except where length of service would permit extra vacation
days. He shall take his vacation during a single continuous period
unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief.
D. All vacation time must be used during the calendar year in which the
same is earned and cannot be accumulated; provided, however, that
when a member delays his vacation time upon orders of the Fire Chief,
such vacation time may be rescheduled in the calendar year which
immediately follows.
E. The vacation period will commence on January 1 in any calendar year
and must be used by December 31 of said year, except as provided in
Subsection D.
F. The provisions hereof shall apply to probational fire fighters, and
probationary time shall be included in the computation of any period of
continuous service.
G. "Continuous service" shall mean unbroken service as determined by the
borough records. Approved leaves of absence do not constitute a break
in service.
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsections B, C, D and E of this section,
when ordered by the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the
Department, any Captain or fire fighter who may perform fire duty in
excess of 42 hours in any regularly assigned workweek shall be
compensated therefor at the rate of overtime established by and set
forth in the Salary Ordinance;17 however, whenever any Captain or fire
fighter not assigned to standby shall perform fire duty upon any
occasion not within his regularly assigned workweek by reason of an
alarm, drill or an emergency, he shall be compensated as outlined in the
contract agreement between the Borough of Madison and the
bargaining unit.
B. Standby basis shall consist of being available and ready for active
service at such times, not within the regular working hours or the
regular tours of duty established for the various positions of
employment, as the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the Paid
Division shall order and designate.
C. In order that adequate coverage and protection to persons and property
may be maintained at all times, whenever an alarm of fire is sounded or
during an emergency as determined by the Fire Chief or other officer in
17.Editor's Note: For information pertaining to the Salary Ordinance, see Ch. 42, Salaries and
Compensation.
§ 18-17 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-18
18:53
§ 18-19. Records of absences.
The Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the Fire Department shall keep
accurate records of the absences of every member of the Paid Division and
shall furnish a list thereof to the Borough Clerk prior to the fifth day of the
ensuing month, the same to be placed with the personnel files.
§ 18-20. Leaving the borough.
No member of the Paid Division of the Madison Fire Department shall leave
the borough in uniform except when on authorized duty. No member of the
Paid Division, while on duty, shall at any time leave the borough without
notifying the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the Department.
§ 18-21. Special duty.
Whenever the public fire services require it, the Fire Chief or other officer in
charge of the Fire Department may detail any member of the Paid Division
to any special or particular duty connected with the fire services of the
borough and, for such purposes, may send such members outside of the
borough limits, together with any apparatus or equipment required in the
performance of such special or particular public fire services. These shall
include rendering emergency services in any other community requiring
assistance by reason of fire or disaster or training, fire school or drilling
with another Department or the Morris County Fire Academy.
charge of the Department, the off-duty member of the Paid Division
assigned to perform standby shall immediately report to fire
headquarters and, pursuant to the order and direction of the Fire Chief
or other officer in charge of the Department, shall remain on duty until
relieved. For such services, the person or persons so designated to
perform such duty shall be compensated therefor at 1 1/2 times his
regular hourly salary rate for the time during which duty is actually
performed, but in any event for not less than one hour of time.
D. Off-duty fire fighters and Captains of the Paid Division of the Madison
Fire Department, as and when so ordered by the Fire Chief or other
officer in charge of said Paid Division, shall maintain themselves in a
reserve or on a standby basis, in order that they may be readily
available to perform active duty during a fire or an emergency or to
otherwise render services within the scope of their employment. The
provisions hereof shall not apply to a Captain during any period when
he is in charge of the Paid Division by reason of the incapacity or
absence from the borough of the Fire Chief or otherwise.
E. Whenever any member of the Paid Division shall be placed and remain
available on a standby basis, as provided in this section, he shall receive
a minimum compensation as per the contract agreement between the
Borough of Madison and the bargaining unit.
§ 18-18 MADISON CODE § 18-22
18:54
§ 18-22. Prohibited acts.
Every member of the Paid Division of the Borough of Madison shall be
subject to reprimand, suspension from duty without pay, reduction in rank
or dismissal, according to the nature or aggravation of the offense, for any
of the following causes or for the violation of any other rules and regulations
which may be adopted by the Council for governing the Paid Division:
A. Intoxication or consumption of intoxicants while on duty.
B. Willful disobedience of orders.
C. Uttering indecent, profane or harsh language.
D. Showing disrespect to a superior officer.
E. Absence without leave, absence from duty without cause or not
performing duty properly.
F. Gross ignorance of the law or the regulations of the Department.
G. Violation of any criminal law.
H. Making known the contents of any order or other information of a
confidential or departmental nature other than to the person concerned
therewith to whom the same may be directed.
I. Unbecoming conduct or engaging in or assisting in the performance of
any act which is prejudicial to or subversive of good order and the
discipline of the Department.
J. Publicly adversely commenting on the official action of a superior
officer.
K. Failure to report a known violation of any law of this state or ordinance
of the borough pertaining to fire, water supply, buildings or public
safety.
L. Neglect or shirking of duty; failure to take proper action to prevent
damage to property or injuries to persons or to accomplish the
extinguishment of fires; willful damage to or gross neglect of fire
apparatus or equipment.
M. Unnecessary speeding or violation of laws pertaining to the driving and
operation of fire apparatus and equipment on streets, highways or
other public places or on private property.
N. Unauthorized use of borough apparatus or equipment or removal
thereof from headquarters or permitting the same to be done by others.
O. Engaging in an altercation with, committing an assault upon or
knowingly inflicting injury upon any officer or fellow member of the Fire
Department or any borough official, property owner, tenant or
bystander. This provision shall not apply to injuries unavoidably
§ 18-22 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-22
18:55
§ 18-23. Possession or consumption of intoxicating liquors and
narcotics.
No member of the Paid Division of the Borough of Madison shall have in his
possession or keep for the consumption at fire headquarters or have on his
person while on duty or in uniform any intoxicating liquor or narcotic. No
fire fighter of the Borough of Madison shall, while on duty or in uniform,
drink any intoxicating liquor or ingest any narcotic.
§ 18-24. Impairment of duty from medications.
No member of the Paid Division shall report for duty after taking or take
in any form while on duty any medicine or drug which might in any way
be detrimental to performance of his duties without the express permission
of the Fire Chief of the Fire Department or other officer in charge. In this
respect, members of the Paid Division are required to learn from their
physicians the nature of any medicine prescribed for them.
§ 18-25. Examination of unfit members.
Any member of the Paid Division who shall report for duty in an unfit
condition or who, while on duty, shall become physically unfit, believed to
be due to the use of intoxicants, drugs or narcotics, shall immediately be
reported to the Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the Department and
shall be examined immediately by a reputable physician.
inflicted during, incidental to or resulting from the lawful performance
of duty while attempting to restrain interference with performance of
duty or to prevent the theft of or damage to property and equipment.
P. The unlawful taking or retention of or the willful damage to property of
persons while performing fire duty.
Q. Failure to properly receive and respond to an alarm of fire.
R. Failure to properly observe and obey any of the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations as set forth by the Council of the
Borough of Madison.
§ 18-22 MADISON CODE § 18-25
18:56
ARTICLE III
Volunteer Division
§ 18-26. Composition; control by Council.
§ 18-27. Membership qualifications; confirmation; disciplinary
action; prohibited acts.
Qualifications for membership and admission to membership in the fire
companies comprising the Volunteer Division shall be as prescribed by the
bylaws of the respective companies, subject to the provisions of any laws
of the State of New Jersey pertaining thereto; provided, however, that no
person elected to membership in any volunteer fire company comprising the
Volunteer Division of the Madison Fire Department shall engage in any Fire
Department activities; take part in the extinguishment of fires; use, handle,
wear or be transported upon any borough fire apparatus or equipment; or
avail himself of the privileges of Fire Department headquarters, until such
person shall have been confirmed as a member of such Division by the
Council of the Borough of Madison. Such approval may be revoked or any
member of a volunteer company may be suspended by the Council from
active duty with the Fire Department for just cause, upon complaint by the
Fire Chief, any other officer of the Department or any citizen of the borough,
after just cause, upon complaint by the Fire Chief, any other officer of the
Department or any citizen of the borough, after due notification to such a
member and a hearing. Just cause shall include but is not limited to the
following:
A. The Volunteer Division of the Madison Fire Department shall consist of
the Madison Hook and Ladder Company No. 1, the Madison Hose
Company No. 1 and such other volunteer fire companies as the Council
may hereafter officially designate and appoint to combat and extinguish
fires in the Borough of Madison, New Jersey. [Amended 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 8-2001]
B. Said companies shall be under the general control of the Council of the
Borough of Madison and shall be subject to such ordinances and rules
and regulations as shall now be in effect or may hereafter be enacted by
said Council.
A. Willful damage to apparatus, equipment or any borough property.
B. Willful damage or injury to the person or property of others.
C. The unlawful taking or retention of property of the borough or of others.
D. Willful disobedience or refusal to obey the orders of the Fire Chief and/
or other superior officer of the Fire Department while attending fires,
while participating in drills or performing other departmental duties,
while being transported upon borough fire apparatus or when using or
handling borough fire equipment.
§ 18-26 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-27
18:57
§ 18-28. Volunteer Battalion Chiefs.
E. Being transported upon or using borough equipment, attending fires,
participating in drills or performing other departmental duties while
intoxicated.
F. Acting in a disorderly manner at fires, drills or any public gatherings.
G. Committing an assault upon any fellow member or officer of the Fire
Department, borough official or other person.
H. Conviction of a crime.
I. Neglect of duty or long-continued failure to perform Fire Department
duties or render fire services to the Borough of Madison.
J. Unnecessary speeding or violation of laws pertaining to the driving and
operation of personal vehicles while responding to an alarm or
emergency on streets, highways or other public places or on private
property.
K. Unauthorized use of borough apparatus or equipment or removal
thereof from headquarters or permitting the same to be done by others.
L. Making known the contents of any order or other information of a
confidential or departmental nature other than to person concerned
therewith to whom the same may be directed.
M. Unbecoming conduct or engaging in or assisting in the performance of
any act which is prejudicial to or subversive of good order and the
discipline of the Department.
A. Position established; appointment; term.
(1) The position of Volunteer Battalion Chief of the Fire Department is
hereby established in the Borough of Madison.
(2) The Battalion Chiefs shall be appointed for one-year terms by the
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Fire Chief. The Fire
Chief's recommendation is subject to the eligibility requirements of
membership in the Volunteer Division and such training and
experience as required in the Department's rules and regulations.
B. Powers and duties. Subject to the superior authority and orders of the
Fire Chief or, in his absence, the senior Captain of the Fire Department,
the Battalion Chiefs shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To answer and respond to alarms of fire and to aid in the
extinguishment of fire.
(2) When so ordered, to respond to emergency calls and to render first
aid and assistance to those in need thereof.
§ 18-27 MADISON CODE § 18-28
18:58
§ 18-29. Duties of volunteer fire fighters.
The duties of a volunteer fire fighter shall be as follows:
(3) To supervise and direct the activities of members of the Fire
Department while performing their duties in accordance with
Department rules and regulations and standard operating
procedures.
(4) To have charge over and direct the operation of fire apparatus,
equipment and appliances in use in the Fire Department.
(5) To supervise and/or conduct drills.
(6) In the absence of the Fire Chief and the Captains of the Fire
Department, the Battalion Chiefs are to supervise and direct the
response of fire apparatus to alarms, the placement and operation
of apparatus and equipment, in accordance with the Department's
rules and regulations and standard operating procedures.
(7) To personally carry out or secure the enforcement of Department
rules and regulations and/or such orders as may be given by the
Fire Chief or Captains of the Department or to carry out or secure
the enforcement of such orders as may be given by the Incident
Commander at the scene of an incident or drill.
(8) To perform such other duties as directed by the Fire Chief or other
officer in charge of the Fire Department in connection with the
supervision of the Fire Department.
C. Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Volunteer Battalion
Chief shall be as provided for in the Department's rules and regulations
as provided for by law.
D. Volunteer Battalion Chiefs shall not perform any administrative work of
the Fire Department unless specifically ordered by the Fire Chief or
Captains.
A. To respond to alarms of fire and to aid in the extinguishment of fire.
B. When so ordered, to respond to emergency calls and to render first aid
and assistance to those in need thereof.
C. To familiarize himself thoroughly with all forms of fire apparatus and
equipment.
D. When so ordered, to engage in drills and the operation of fire
equipment.
E. When so ordered, to attend fire schools and courses of study in Fire
Department procedures.
F. As directed, to clean, supervise and otherwise care for the Fire
Department quarters and all fire apparatus and equipment therein.
§ 18-28 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 18-29
18:59
§ 18-30. Supervision of Volunteer Division.
The Volunteer Division of the Madison Fire Department, whether on the
scene of an incident or drill, in fire headquarters or attending any
departmental function, shall be under the supervision and subject to the
direction of the Fire Chief or, during his absence or incapacity, of the senior
Captain. In the event of the absence or incapacity of both the Fire Chief
and Captains, the volunteer fire fighters shall be under the supervision
and subject to the direction of the Senior Volunteer Battalion Chief. In
the absence of or incapacity of the Fire Chief, Captains and Volunteer
Battalion Chiefs, the senior fire fighter on duty shall be in charge of the
Volunteer Division. Supervision of the Volunteer Division is subject to the
departmental rules and regulations and standard operating procedures and
is under the general control of the Council of the Borough of Madison.
§ 18-31. Rights of membership not affected.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the rights of any member of any fire
company with respect to his membership in said company, as prescribed
and governed by the charter and bylaws of such company.
G. To perform such other duties as may be ordered by the Fire Chief or
other officer in command thereof and as set forth in the rules and
regulations of the Fire Department and/or departmental standard
operating procedures.
§ 18-29 MADISON CODE § 18-31
18:60
Chapter 22
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III of
this Code.
§ 22-1. Composition. [Amended 2-13-1922 by Ord. No. 240;
7-10-1967 by Ord. No. 862]
The Board of Health of the Borough of Madison shall be composed of seven
members.
§ 22-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 7-10-1967 by Ord. No. 862; 5-13-1974 by Ord. No. 12-74]
A. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 26:3-5, six members of the Board of
Health shall be appointed for a term of four years by the Mayor upon
the advice and consent of the Borough Council. In the event that the
Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after a position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by the vote
of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have
no vote thereon except in case of a tie. One member of the Board of
Health shall be a Council member, appointed by the Borough Council,
and the term of the appointment of such member shall be one year. In
the event of a vacancy, the term of appointment shall be only for the
unexpired term. The terms of office of the non-Council members shall
be so arranged that the terms of no more than three members shall
expire in any one year. [Amended 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 3-88]
B. The terms of all existing Board members shall continue in accordance
with their original appointment. The next vacancy occurring on the
Board of Health after the effective date of this chapter shall be filled by
the Council member to be appointed to the Board of Health, as
hereinabove provided.
C. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 26:3-5, and in conjunction with
Chapter 205 of the Borough Code, Part III, Board of Health Legislation,
the alternate members of the Board of Health shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. In the event that the
Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after an alternate
member position becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to
confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made by the
§ 18-31 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 22-2
22:61
§ 22-3. Meetings; record of proceedings; monthly reports.
[Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70]
The Board of Health shall meet at such times and places as shall be deemed
expedient in regard to public health within said borough. The Board shall
keep a record of its proceedings in a book suitable for that purpose, which
shall be the property of the Mayor and Council. The Board shall make
monthly reports of all proceedings to the Council.
§ 22-4. Authority to adopt ordinances and codes. [Amended
5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 70; 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
The Board of Health shall have the power to adopt ordinances and codes as
provided in N.J.S.A. 26:3-64 et seq.
Chapter 24
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
§ 24-1. Establishment; name.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 19 of the Laws of the State of New
Jersey of 1938,18 being more particularly known as the "Local Housing
Authorities Law," there is hereby created and established a body corporate
and politic to be known as the "Housing Authority of the Borough of
Madison," subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 24-2. Housing Cooperation Agreement. [Amended 11-9-1970 by
Ord. No. 20-70]
The Housing Authority created pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
and regulated by the provisions of a Housing Cooperation Agreement to be
entered into pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 55:14B-2 et seq. between
the Borough of Madison and said Housing Authority.
Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present
at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be
required, with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a
tie. In the event of a vacancy, the term of appointment shall be only for
the unexpired term. [Added 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 11-2000]
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. § 55:14A-1 et seq.
§ 22-2 MADISON CODE § 24-3
24:62
§ 24-3. Filing of copy.
The Clerk of this borough is hereby authorized and directed to file a
certified copy of this chapter with the executive officer of the Public
Housing and Development Authority in the State Department of Community
Affairs.
Chapter 25
OPEN SPACE, RECREATION AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District preservation — See Ch. 112. Land development — See Ch. 195.
§ 25-1. Establishment. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
An open space, recreation and historic preservation advisory committee
is hereby established to be known as "The Open Space, Recreation and
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee of the Borough of Madison"
(hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The Committee shall consist of
11 members.
§ 25-2. Purpose and responsibilities.
A. To make recommendations to Mayor and Council to implement the
Madison Borough Open Space and Recreation Plan subject to Mayor
and Council approval.
B. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council as to the
properties to be acquired or otherwise protected for open space
preservation; natural resources preservation, including water supplies;
active and passive recreation preservation; and historic preservation.
C. To prioritize acquisitions and recommend the method of acquisition or
preservation, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Acquisition of development rights only for the preservation of open
space;
(2) Outright purchases;
(3) Owner-donations;
(4) Conservation, scenic, and/or historic easements (purchased or
donated);
(5) The issuance of bonds;
(6) Long-term lease; or
§ 24-3 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 25-2
24:63
§ 25-3. Membership.
(7) Other methods for the same purposes, at the discretion of the
Mayor and Council.
D. To recommend that the Mayor and Council apply for county, state, and
nonprofit foundation grants to supplement the Borough's Open Space,
Recreation and Historic Preservation Trust Fund.
E. To advise the Mayor and Council on any issue relating to use,
preservation and acquisition of open space.
F. To interact with other boards, commissions, committees, and citizens
groups to obtain broad public input for the development of the open
space program.
G. To increase and maintain public interest and support for the Borough's
Open Space, Recreation and Historic Preservation Plan.
H. To submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the end of each calendar
year, including specific budget requests for ongoing activities.
I. To employ and/or contract for professional services, such as land use
planners, as it may deem necessary, subject to budget appropriation
and Council passage of professional services resolutions establishing
the rates of compensation to be paid.
J. To hold a minimum of six public meetings annually which shall be open
to the public and shall take place at the Madison Municipal Building
unless otherwise noted.
A. All members of the Committee shall be residents of the Borough of
Madison who shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall
be comprised of the following persons, all to be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council:
(1) One liaison member of the Council.
(2) One member of the Recreation Committee.
(3) One member of the Environmental Commission.
(4) One member of the Planning Board.
(5) One member of the Historic Preservation Commission.
(6) One member of the Parks Committee.
(7) Four members who are residents of the Borough.
(8) One member of the Shade Tree Management Board. [Added
4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 24-2018]
§ 25-2 MADISON CODE § 25-3
24:64
§ 25-4. Terms of office.
§ 25-5. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public
meeting of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at
the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie.
§ 25-6. Reporting responsibilities. [Added 5-13-2013 by Ord. No.
15-2013]
The Open Space, Recreation and Historic Preservation Advisory Committee
shall report the following information to the Borough Council during the
first meeting after the end of each calendar quarter (i.e., first meeting in
April, July, October and January).
B. The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
A. The Council representative shall serve annually.
B. The four resident members shall serve for a term of three years
(staggered terms). The terms of office shall commence upon the day of
each member's appointment, unless otherwise specified at the time of
appointment, and be for the initial respective periods of one, two, and
three years (two members shall initially be appointed for three years).
The term of each appointee shall be designated in his or her
appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies,
shall be for the full three-year term, to take effect on January 1 next
succeeding such appointment.
C. All other members shall serve annually.
D. The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall annually
select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall call the
initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the adoption of this
chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish its meeting schedule,
which shall be duly published.
A. The status of ongoing projects, including time to completion and
anticipated cost at completion versus budget.
B. Any projects soon to be proposed or being considered.
§ 25-3 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 25-6
24:65
Chapter 26
SUSTAINABLE MADISON ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Open Space Recreation and Historic
Preservation Committee — See Ch. 25.
Shade Tree Management Board — See Ch. 45.
Fertilizer application and use — See Ch. 97.
Garbage, municipal solid waste and
recyclables — See Ch. 107.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 111.
Historic District preservation — See Ch. 112.
Open Space Trust Fund — See Ch. 132.
Land development — See Ch. 195.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 26-1. Establishment.
The Sustainable Madison Advisory Committee is hereby established to be
known as "the Sustainable Madison Advisory Committee of the Borough of
Madison" (hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The Committee shall
consist of 11 members.
§ 26-2. Purpose and responsibilities.
Purpose and responsibilities are as follows:
C. Current balance in the Open Space Trust Fund.
D. Any and all other matters at the Committee’s discretion.
A. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council, and Madison
Environmental Commission ("MEC") to help the municipality achieve
sustainable smart growth land-use policies which balance economic,
environmental and societal needs.
B. The Committee will provide education and outreach on sustainability to
the community, all Borough committees, boards and commissions, and
the Mayor and Council.
C. The Committee will encourage the town to reduce its carbon footprint
through education and action.
D. The Committee will assist the efforts of Borough boards, committees
and commissions in their efforts to promote smart land-use planning,
energy and resource conservation, green design, sustainability, a green
element for the Master Plan, and a sustainability plan for the future of
the Borough of Madison.
E. The Committee will seek grants to achieve these goals.
§ 25-6 MADISON CODE § 26-2
24:66
§ 26-3. Membership.
§ 26-4. Voting powers, quorum and limitation of powers.
F. The Committee will submit a report to both the MEC as well as the
Mayor and Council at the end of each calendar year, concerning
ongoing activities and grants. In addition, the Committee shall
regularly circulate to the MEC and Mayor and Council copies of its
meeting minutes. All records, reports and data shall be available to the
Council for inspection at any time.
G. The Committee will hold a minimum of six public meetings annually
which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Act19 and shall take place at the Madison Municipal Building unless
otherwise noted.
A. Membership shall consist of nine regular members and two nonvoting
members. All voting members of the Committee shall be residents of
the Borough of Madison. All members shall serve without
compensation. The Committee shall be comprised of the following
persons, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council:
(1) The Council Liaison to the Madison Environmental Commission
(regular member);
(2) The Borough Administrator and/or Assistant Borough
Administrator (nonvoting);
(3) A representative from the office of the Superintendent of the
Madison Public School System (regular member);
(4) The Superintendent of Public Works (nonvoting);
(5) One member of the Madison Environmental Commission (regular
member);
(6) Six members who are residents of the Borough (regular members).
B. The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
A. Voting members. The voting members of the Committee shall be the
nine regular members.
B. Nonvoting members. The Assistant Borough Administrator and
Superintendent of Public Works shall not vote.
C. A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.
§ 26-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 26-4
24:67
§ 26-5. Borough departmental assistance.
§ 26-6. Terms of office.
§ 26-7. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public
meeting of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
D. The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power of
condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of the
municipality and from creating any debt against the municipality.
A. General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the
Mayor and Council, insofar as may be practicable, the employees and
professional staff of the Borough of Madison, including the Borough
Attorney, shall be available to assist the Committee in the performance
of its duties.
B. Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff assistance
shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any project that
requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff and
professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee, and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to commencement of
the project.
A. The Council Liaison shall serve annually.
B. The six resident members shall serve for a term of three years
(staggered terms). The terms of office shall commence upon the day of
each member's appointment, unless otherwise specified at the time of
appointment, and be for the initial respective periods of one, two, and
three years (two members shall initially be appointed for one year, two
members shall initially be appointed for two years and two members for
three years). The term of each appointee shall be designated in his or
her appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies,
shall be for the full three-year term, to take effect on January 1 next
succeeding such appointment.
C. All other members shall serve annually.
D. The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall annually
select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall call the
initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the adoption of this
chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish its meeting schedule,
which shall be duly published.
§ 26-4 MADISON CODE § 26-7
24:68
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at
the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
§ 26-8. Conflict of interest.
Chapter 27
MADISON COMMUNITY GARDEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sustainable Madison Advisory
Committee — See Ch. 26.
Shade Tree Management Board — See Ch. 45.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 73.
Fertilizer application and use — See Ch. 97.
§ 27-1. Establishment.
The Madison Community Garden Advisory Committee is hereby established
to be known as "the Community Garden Advisory Committee of the Borough
of Madison" (hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The Committee
shall consist of 15 members.
§ 27-2. Purpose and responsibilities.
Purpose and responsibilities:
A. Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease, mortgage,
sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any such project
or to the Committee without forthwith making written disclosure to the
Committee of the nature and extent of the interest. Such disclosure
shall be entered in writing upon the minutes of the Committee.
B. Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described in
§ 26-8A shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
A. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding the
operations of the Madison Community Garden and any future activities
of the Committee.
B. The Committee will provide education and outreach on community
gardening to the community, all Borough Committees, Boards and
Commissions, and the Mayor and Council.
C. The Committee will seek grants to achieve these goals.
§ 26-7 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 27-2
24:69
§ 27-3. Membership.
§ 27-4. Quorum; limitation of powers.
§ 27-5. Borough assistance.
D. The Committee will submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the end
of each calendar year, concerning ongoing activities and grants. In
addition, the Committee shall regularly circulate to the Mayor and
Council copies of its meeting minutes. All records, reports and data
shall be available to the Council for inspection at any time.
E. The Committee will hold a minimum of four public meetings annually
which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Act20 and shall take place at the Madison Municipal Building unless
otherwise noted.
A. Membership shall consist of 15 regular members. All members of the
Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Madison. All members
shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall be comprised of
the following persons, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council:
(1) One liaison member of the Council.
(2) Fourteen members who are residents of the Borough.
B. The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
A. A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum.
B. The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power of
condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of the
municipality and from creating any debt against the municipality.
A. General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the
Mayor and Council, insofar as may be practicable, the employees and
professional staff of the Borough of Madison, including the Borough
Attorney, shall be available to assist the Committee in the performance
of its duties.
B. Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff assistance
shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any project that
requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff and
professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to commencement of
the project.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 27-2 MADISON CODE § 27-6
24:70
§ 27-6. Terms of office.
§ 27-7. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public
meeting of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at
the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
§ 27-8. Conflict of interest.
Chapter 29
A. The Council liaison shall serve annually.
B. The 14 resident members shall serve for a term of three years
(staggered terms). The terms of office shall commence upon the day of
each member's appointment, unless otherwise specified at the time of
appointment, and be for the initial respective periods of one, two, and
three years (four members shall initially be appointed for one year, four
members shall initially be appointed for two years and six members for
three years). The term of each appointee shall be designated in his or
her appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies,
shall be for the full three-year term, to take effect on January 1 next
succeeding such appointment.
C. The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall annually
select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall call the
initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the adoption of this
chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish its meeting schedule,
which shall be duly published.
A. Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease, mortgage,
sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any such project
or to the Committee without forthwith making written disclosure to the
Committee of the nature and extent of the interest. Such disclosure
shall be entered in writing upon the minutes of the Committee.
B. Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described in
§ 27-8A shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
§ 27-6 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 27-8
24:71
PAYROLL PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Financial Officer — Ch. 17.
Personnel policies — Ch. 30.
Salaries and compensation — Ch. 42.
§ 27-8 MADISON CODE § 27-8
24:72
ARTICLE I
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 45-2018]
§ 29-1. Direct deposit required; exemptions.
§ 29-2. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder
of this article shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 29-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with
this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 29-4. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon adoption, passage and publication
according to law.
A. All full-time employees and part-time employees who receive
compensation from the Borough of Madison are mandated to have
direct deposit of their compensation as of January 1, 2019, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f.
B. Municipal employees may request an exemption from the direct deposit
requirements of this article by written request to the Borough of
Madison Chief Financial Officer (CFO). The CFO may grant an
exemption from the requirements of this article for good cause shown
on such terms and conditions as the CFO may deem necessary.
§ 29-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 29-4
24:73
Chapter 30
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Chapter 32
PATRIOTIC CELEBRATIONS COMMITTEE
§ 32-1. Establishment.
The Madison Patriotic Celebrations Committee is hereby established to be
known as "the Patriotic Celebrations Committee of the Borough of Madison"
(hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The Committee shall consist of
12 members.
§ 32-2. Purpose and responsibilities.
Purpose and responsibilities:
§ 32-3. Membership.
A. Organize and provide patriotic celebrations, including but not limited to
Memorial Day celebrations.
B. The Committee will provide education and outreach on celebrations to
the community, all Borough committees, boards and commissions, and
the Mayor and Council.
C. The Committee will submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the end
of each calendar year, concerning ongoing activities. In addition, the
Committee shall regularly circulate to the Mayor and Council copies of
its meeting minutes. All records, reports and data shall be available to
the Council for inspection at any time.
D. The Committee will hold a minimum of four public meetings annually
which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Act21 and shall take place at the Madison Municipal Building unless
otherwise noted.
A. Membership shall consist of 12 regular members. All members of the
Committee shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall be
comprised of the following persons, appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of Council:
(1) One liaison member of the Council (ex officio).
(2) Twelve members who are residents of the Borough or nonresidents
that have an identifiable interest in the activities and mission of the
Patriotic Celebrations Committee.
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 29-4 MADISON CODE § 32-4
24:74
§ 32-4. Voting powers, quorum and limitation of powers.
§ 32-5. Borough departmental assistance.
§ 32-6. Terms of office.
§ 32-7. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public
meeting of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at
the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
A. A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum.
B. The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power of
condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of the
municipality and from creating any debt against the municipality.
A. General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the
Mayor and Council, insofar as may be practicable, the employees and
professional staff of the Borough of Madison, including the Borough
Attorney, shall be available to assist the Committee in the performance
of its duties.
B. Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff assistance
shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any project that
requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff and
professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to commencement of
the project.
A. The Council liaison shall serve annually.
B. The 12 resident members shall serve for a term of one year. The term of
each appointee shall be designated in his or her appointment. All
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for one-year term, to
take effect on January 1 next succeeding such appointment.
C. The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall annually
select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall call the
initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the adoption of this
chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish its meeting schedule,
which shall be duly published.
§ 32-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 32-8
24:75
§ 32-8. Reporting responsibilities.
Following annual patriotic celebrations, a report shall be submitted to
the Mayor and Council including recommendation for the following year's
activities.
§ 32-9. Conflict of interest.
Chapter 34
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 30. Police escort services — See Ch. 141.
A. Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease, mortgage,
sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any such project
or to the Committee without forthwith making written disclosure to the
Committee of the nature and extent of the interest. Such disclosure
shall be entered in writing upon the minutes of the Committee.
B. Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described herein
shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
§ 32-8 MADISON CODE § 32-9
24:76
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 34-1. Department established; composition. [Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 60-2007; 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 27-2009; 8-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 32-2013; 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 44-2014]
The Police Department of the Borough of Madison is hereby established
and shall consist of the following ranks and shall not exceed the number of
officers specifically established herein at each rank enumerated below:
§ 34-2. Appointment.
A. Chief of Police.
B. One Captain.
C. Two Lieutenants
D. Five Sergeants.
E. Twenty-seven police officers.
F. Two Class II special police officers.
A. The officers and members of the Police Department shall be appointed
by the Borough Council to hold office as provided by law and shall
receive such salary as the Borough Council may determine.
B. In addition, the Borough Council may employ clerical personnel and
other employees to assist the Police Department and its officers in
preserving peace and good order in the Borough of Madison.
C. In addition to the police officers provided for in § 34-1, the Borough
Council by resolution may appoint, on a temporary basis, one or more
probationary patrolmen to fill any temporary vacancy in the Borough of
Madison Police Department, which vacancy is caused by the terminal
leave of any police officer or officers for unused vacation time and/or
any other reason authorized by Subsection C or D of § 30-18 of the Code
of the Borough of Madison.
(1) Promotion testing review procedure. Within 10 days of the posting
of the ranking of candidates, a candidate may file a written letter
requesting a review of the ranking. Said letter must contain the
reason(s) or justification(s) for the review and must be submitted to
the appropriate authority. The appropriate authority will assess the
request and determine the merit of the review. [Added 5-23-2016
by Ord. No. 42-2016]
(a) If merit exists, the candidate score shall be retabulated.
(b) If the retabulated score affects the candidate ranking, a
revised ranking shall be published.
§ 34-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:77
(c) If merit does not exist, the candidate shall be informed in
writing.
D. Promotion to rank of Police Chief. [Added 11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
37-2012]
(1) The Borough of Madison governing body desires to promote the
most qualified candidate to the position of Police Chief. This
Subsection D establishes the eligibility requirements and the
process for promotion to Police Chief. The promotion process shall
be on the basis of merit, experience, education, demonstrated
ability, psychological examination, competitive examinations and
an interview. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, the
promotion of any officer shall be made from the membership of the
Madison Police Department. No person shall be eligible for
promotion to Police Chief unless he or she shall have served as a
full-time police officer in the Borough of Madison Police
Department for a period of 10 years or more. Promotions to the
rank of Police Chief shall be open to members of the next lowest
rank who have served at least two years in said rank, unless the
Mayor and Council, in the best interest of the Department, choose
to test a wider pool of candidates, in which case they may open
testing to the next lower rank and/or reduce the length of time
requirement in rank.
(2) The Borough Administrator shall announce the promotional
process to members of the Department at least 30 days before any
written examination is to be given. The announcement shall be
posted in common areas of the Department accessible to all
members. The announcement shall contain, at a minimum, the rank
to be filled, the dates of the exams, source materials or reading lists
from which exam questions will be taken or topics from which
questions will be formulated. Candidates who qualify shall notify
the Borough Administrator of his or her interest in taking the
examination by submitting a letter of interest no later than 10
calendar days after the promotion announcement. Failure to do so
shall render the officer ineligible to participate in the process.
(3) Promotional testing procedure. The promotional testing procedure
for the Borough of Madison Police Department may consist of the
following: a written examination, an oral examination, a
psychological examination, a record review and an interview with
the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council reserve the right to
waive the written examination and/or oral examination by the
outside entity and shall so notify any applicant when the initial
announcement for the promotional process is posted.
(a) Written examinations.* The written examination shall be
supplied by a professional testing company, professional law
enforcement organization (e.g., State Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association, etc.). To
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:78
proceed to the oral examination of the examination procedure,
a candidate must achieve a minimum score of 70% on the
written examination.
(b) Oral examinations.* Candidates will be notified, in writing, of
their successful or unsuccessful completion of the written
portion of the exam by the Borough Administrator or his
designee. The oral examination shall take place after the
receipt of the written examination results. A standardized
interview will be conducted by an outside agency (e.g., Chiefs
of Police Association, International Chiefs of Police
Association, etc.) by a board of three examiners, at least one of
which shall be a personnel evaluator from the outside testing
agency. None of the evaluators shall be an officer, employee,
resident or relative thereof, of the Borough of Madison or of
any of the candidates. To proceed to the record review and
interview portion of the promotional process, a candidate must
achieve a minimum score of 70%.
* NOTE: The testing organization shall assign each candidate
an identification number, which shall be the only identification
used when the written and oral examinations are graded. The
identification numbers of all candidates for promotion shall be
posted on a pass/fail basis only. A complete master list of the
actual results of the written and oral examinations shall be
placed under seal and retained in the office of the Borough
Administrator and shall not be revealed to the Mayor and
Council until after the interview and record review of the
applicants are complete.
(c) Satisfactory psychological examination and certification by a
Borough-selected physician stating that the candidate is able
to perform the essential functions of the Police Chief title.
Candidates shall not move forward in the promotional process
without the completion of a satisfactory psychological
examination.
(d) Record review and interview by the Mayor and Council.
Candidates that successfully achieve a minimum score of 70%
on the written examination and a minimum score of 70% on the
oral examination and received a satisfactory psychological
examination shall proceed to the next step in the promotional
process, the review of service record and interview. The
interview shall be conducted by the Mayor and Council. The
record review shall be conducted by the Borough
Administrator and the Assistant Borough Administrator.
[1] The interview with the Mayor and Council shall focus on,
but not be limited to, leadership and management skills,
knowledge of the Borough of Madison's form of
government, knowledge of the Police Department
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:79
Ordinance, familiarity with the municipal budget process,
the Police Department budget in particular, staff/resource
allocations, Attorney General guidelines and knowledge of
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Mayor and Council shall grade
each candidate on a thirty-five-point scale and shall ask
each candidate the identical questions, and the Borough
Clerk will keep written records of each candidate's
responses to same.
[2] The Borough Administrator and Assistant Borough
Administrator shall examine the personnel jacket of each
candidate and give specific weight to each category and
grade each candidate on a twenty-point scale. The weight
of each category of the record review shall be the
maximum of the following points in each of the
enumerated categories as follows:
Specialized training (e.g., FBI Academy) 0 to 3
points
Each completed course +1 point to a total of 3 points
Performance evaluations 0 to 8 points
All previous performance evaluations shall be considered
and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of review for
the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
2 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations
4 points if all evaluations meet expectations
6 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations and some exceed expectations
8 points if a majority of evaluations exceed
expectations
Commendations 0 to 3 points
+1 point for each commendation up to maximum of 3
points
Education
Candidate only gets the point(s) associated with the
highest educational degree attained and not the point(s)
for each separate education degree.
Associate's degree 1 point
Bachelor's degree 2 points
Master's degree 3 points
Doctorate degree 4 points
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:80
Military experience
Active duty or reserve duty: candidate only gets the
highest of the following point(s).
Any enlisted rank 1 point
Any officer rank 2 points
Disciplinary actions
Each major sustained discipline (more than 5 days): 2
points.
Each minor sustained discipline (5-day suspension or less,
including written reprimands): 1 point.
All previous sustained disciplinary actions shall be
considered and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of
review for the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
Any points assessed under the Disciplinary Actions
section shall be deducted from the candidate's score.
[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 50-2017]
(e) The weight or percentage of each portion of the process shall
be as follows:
Written examination 25%
Oral examination 20%
Record review 20%
Mayor and Council interview 35%
(4) The candidate with the highest overall score shall be voted on by
the Mayor and Council as the Police Chief.
(5) Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to the
promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be given
to the candidate with the most seniority in service pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, or a resident over a nonresident pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6. Seniority shall prevail over residency in the
case of candidates that are ranked equally.
E. Promotion to rank of Captain. [Added 11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
37-2012]
(1) The Borough of Madison governing body desires to promote the
most qualified candidate to the position of Captain. This Subsection
E establishes the eligibility requirements and the process for
promotion to Captain. The promotion process shall be on the basis
of merit, experience, education, demonstrated ability,
psychological examination, competitive examinations and an
interview. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, the promotion of
any officer shall be made from the membership of the Madison
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:81
Police Department. No person shall be eligible for promotion to
Captain unless he or she shall have served as a full-time police
officer in the Borough of Madison Police Department for a period
of 10 years or more. Promotions to the rank of Captain shall be
open to members of the next lowest rank who have served at
least two years in said rank, unless the Mayor and Council, in the
best interest of the Department, choose to test a wider pool of
candidates, in which case they may open testing to the next lower
rank and/or reduce the length of time requirement in rank.
(2) The Police Chief shall announce the promotional process to
members of the Department at least 30 days before the written
examination is to be given. The announcement shall be posted in
common areas of the Department accessible to all members. The
announcement shall contain, at a minimum, the rank to be filled,
the dates of the exams, source materials or reading lists from which
exam questions will be taken or topics from which questions will be
formulated. Candidates who qualify shall notify the Police Chief of
his or her interest in taking the examination by submitting a letter
of interest no later than 10 calendar days after the promotion
announcement. Failure to do so shall render the officer ineligible to
participate in the process.
(3) Promotion testing procedure. The promotion testing procedure for
the Borough of Madison Police Department shall consist of the
following: a written examination, an oral examination, a
psychological examination, a record review and interview with the
Mayor and Council and the Police Chief.
(a) Written examinations.* The written examination shall be
supplied by a professional testing company, professional law
enforcement organization (e.g., State Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association, etc.). To
proceed to the oral examination of the examination procedure,
a candidate must achieve a minimum score of 70% on the
written examination.
(b) Oral examinations.* Candidates will be notified, in writing, of
their successful or unsuccessful completion of the written
portion of the exam by the Police Chief or his designee. The
oral examination shall take place after the receipt of the
written examination results. A standardized interview will be
conducted by an outside agency (e.g., Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association, etc.) by
a board of three examiners, at least one of which shall be a
personnel evaluator from the outside testing agency. None of
the evaluators shall be an officer, employee, resident or
relative thereof, of the Borough of Madison or any of the
candidates. To proceed to the record review and interview
portion of the promotional process, a candidate must achieve a
minimum score of 70%.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:82
*NOTE: The testing organization shall assign each candidate
an identification number, which shall be the only identification
used when the written and oral examinations are graded. The
identification numbers of all candidates for promotion shall
be posted on a pass/fail basis only. A complete master list of
the actual results of the written and oral examinations shall
be placed under seal and retained in the office of the Police
Chief and shall not be revealed to the Mayor and Council until
after the interview and record review of the applicants are
complete.
(c) Satisfactory psychological examination and certification by a
Borough-selected physician stating that the candidate is able
to perform the essential functions of the Captain title.
Candidates shall not move forward in the promotional process
without the completion of a satisfactory psychological
examination.
(d) Record review and interview by the Mayor and Council and
Police Chief. Candidates that successfully achieve a minimum
score of 70% on the written examination and a minimum score
of 70% on the oral examination and received a satisfactory
psychological examination shall proceed to the next step in the
promotional process, the review of service record and
interview. The interview shall be conducted by the Mayor and
Council and the Police Chief. The record review shall be
conducted by the Borough Administrator, Assistant Borough
Administrator and the Police Chief.
[1] The interview with the Mayor and Council and Police Chief
shall focus on, but not be limited to, leadership and
management skills, knowledge of the Borough of
Madison's form of government, knowledge of the Police
Department Ordinance, familiarity with the municipal
budget process, the Police Department budget in
particular, staff/resource allocations, Attorney General
guidelines and knowledge of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The
Mayor and Council and Police Chief shall grade each
candidate on a thirty-five-point scale and shall ask each
candidate the identical questions, and the Borough Clerk
will keep written records of each candidate's responses to
same.
[2] The Borough Administrator, Assistant Borough
Administrator and Police Chief shall examine the
personnel jacket of each candidate and give specific
weight to each category and grade each candidate on a
twenty-point scale. The weight of each category of the
record review shall be the maximum of the following
points in each of the enumerated categories as follows:
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:83
Specialized training (e.g., FBI Academy) 0 to 3
points
Each completed course +1 point to a total of 3 points
Performance
evaluations
0 to 8 points
All previous performance evaluations shall be considered
and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of review for
the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
2 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations
4 points if all evaluations meet expectations
6 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations and some exceed expectations
8 points if a majority of evaluations exceed
expectations
Commendations 0 to 3 points
+1 point for each commendation up to maximum of 3
points.
Education
Candidate only gets the point(s) associated with the
highest educational degree attained and not the point(s)
for each separate education degree.
Associate's degree 1 point
Bachelor's degree 2 points
Master's degree 3 points
Doctorate degree 4 points
Military experience
Active duty or reserve duty: Candidate only gets the
highest of the following point(s).
Any enlisted rank 1 point
Any officer rank 2 points
Disciplinary actions
Each major sustained discipline (more than 5 days): 2
points.
Each minor sustained discipline (5-day suspension or less,
including written reprimands): 1 point.
All previous sustained disciplinary actions shall be
considered and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of
review for the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:84
Disciplinary actions
Any points assessed under the Disciplinary Actions
section shall be deducted from the candidate's score.
[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 50-2017]
(e) The weight or percentage of each portion of the process shall
be as follows:
Written examination 25%
Oral examination 20%
Record review 20%
Mayor, Council and Chief interview 35%
(4) The candidate with the highest overall score shall be voted on by
the Mayor and Council as the Captain.
(5) Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to the
promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be given
to the candidate with the most seniority in service pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, or a resident over a non-resident pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6. Seniority shall prevail over residency in the
case of candidates that are ranked equally.
F. Promotion to rank of Lieutenant. [Added 11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
37-2012]
(1) The Borough of Madison governing body desires to promote the
most qualified candidate to the position of Lieutenant. This
Subsection F establishes the eligibility requirements and the
process for promotion to Lieutenant. The promotion process shall
be on the basis of merit, experience, education, demonstrated
ability, psychological examination, competitive examinations and
an interview. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, the
promotion of any officer shall be made from the membership of the
Madison Police Department. No person shall be eligible for
promotion to Lieutenant unless he or she shall have served as a fulltime
police officer in the Borough of Madison Police Department for
a period of 10 years or more. Promotions to the rank of Lieutenant
shall be open to members of the next lowest rank who have served
at least two years in said rank, unless the Mayor and Council, in the
best interest of the Department, choose to test a wider pool of
candidates, in which case they may open testing to the next lower
rank and/or reduce the length of time requirement in rank.
(2) The Police Chief shall announce the promotional process to
members of the Department at least 30 days before the written
examination is to be given. The announcement shall be posted in
common areas of the Department accessible to all members. The
announcement shall contain, at a minimum, the rank to be filled,
the dates of the exams, source materials or reading lists from which
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:85
exam questions will be taken or topics from which questions will
be formulated. Candidates who qualify shall notify the Police Chief
of his or her interest in taking the examination by submitting a
letter of interest no later than 10 calendar days after the promotion
announcement. Failure to do so shall render the officer ineligible to
participate in the process.
(3) Promotion testing procedure. The promotion testing procedure for
the Borough of Madison Police Department shall consist of the
following: a written examination, an oral examination, a
psychological examination, a record review and interview with the
Mayor and Council and the Police Chief.
(a) Written examinations.*
[1] The written examination shall be supplied by a
professional testing company, professional law
enforcement organization (e.g., State Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association,
etc.) To proceed to the oral examination of the examination
procedure, a candidate must achieve a minimum score of
70% on the written examination.
[2] The Borough Administrator, at the direction of the
governing body, is authorized to waive the written portion
of the Lieutenant promotional examination with the
expressed written consent of all candidates eligible for
promotion to the rank of Lieutenant. [Added 11-23-2015
by Ord. No. 52-2015]
(b) Oral examinations.* Candidates will be notified, in writing, of
their successful or unsuccessful completion of the written
portion of the exam by the Police Chief or his designee. The
oral examination shall take place after the receipt of the
written examination results. A standardized interview will be
conducted by an outside agency (e.g., Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association, etc.) by
a board of three examiners, at least one of which shall be a
personnel evaluator from the outside testing agency. None of
the evaluators shall be an officer, employee, resident or
relative thereof, of the Borough of Madison or of any of the
candidates. To proceed to the record review and interview
portion of the promotional process, a candidate must achieve a
minimum score of 70%.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:86
*NOTE: The testing organization shall assign each candidate
an identification number, which shall be the only identification
used when the written and oral examination is graded. The
identification numbers of all candidates for promotion shall
be posted on a pass/fail basis only. A complete master list of
the actual results of the written and oral examination shall
be placed under seal and retained in the office of the Police
Chief and shall not be revealed to the Mayor and Council until
after the interview and record review of the applicants are
complete.
(c) Satisfactory psychological examination and certification by a
Borough-selected physician stating that the candidate is able
to perform the essential functions of the Lieutenant title.
Candidates shall not move forward in the promotional process
without the completion of a satisfactory psychological
examination.
(d) Record review and interview by the Mayor and Council and
Police Chief. Candidates that successfully achieve a minimum
score of 70% on the written examination and a minimum score
of 70% on the oral examination and received a satisfactory
psychological examination shall proceed to the next step in the
promotional process, the review of service record and
interview. The interview shall be conducted by the Mayor and
Council and the Police Chief. The record review shall be
conducted by the Borough Administrator, Assistant Borough
Administrator and the Police Chief.
[1] The interview with the Mayor and Council and Police Chief
shall focus on, but not be limited to, leadership and
management skills, knowledge of the Borough of
Madison's form of government, knowledge of the Police
Department Ordinance, familiarity with the municipal
budget process, the Police Department budget in
particular, staff/resource allocations, Attorney General
guidelines and knowledge of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The
Mayor and Council and Police Chief shall grade each
candidate on a thirty-five-point scale and shall ask each
candidate the identical questions, and the Borough Clerk
will keep written records of each candidate's responses to
same.
[2] The Borough Administrator, Assistant Borough
Administrator and Police Chief shall examine the
personnel jacket of each candidate and give specific
weight to each category and grade each candidate on a
twenty-point scale. The weight of each category of the
record review shall be the maximum of the following
points in each of the enumerated categories as follows:
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:87
Specialized training (e.g., FBI Academy) 0 to 3
points
Each completed course +1 point to a total of 3 points
Performance evaluations 0 to 8 points
All previous performance evaluations shall be considered
and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of review for
the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
2 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations
4 points if all evaluations meet expectations
6 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations and some exceed expectations
8 points if a majority of evaluations exceed
expectations
Commendations 0 to 3 points
+1 point for each commendation up to maximum of 3
points
Education
Candidate only gets the point(s) associated with the
highest educational degree attained and not the point(s)
for each separate education degree.
Associate's degree 1 point
Bachelor's degree 2 points
Master's degree 3 points
Doctorate degree 4 points
Military experience
Active duty or reserve duty: Candidate only gets the
highest of the following point(s):
Any enlisted rank 1 point
Any officer rank 2 points
Disciplinary actions
Each major sustained discipline (more than 5 days): 2
points.
Each minor sustained discipline (5-day suspension or less,
including written reprimands): 1 point.
All previous sustained disciplinary actions shall be
considered and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of
review for the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:88
Disciplinary actions
Any points assessed under the Disciplinary Actions
section shall be deducted from the candidate's score.
[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 50-2017]
(e) The weight or percentage of each portion of the process shall
be as follows:
Written examination 25%
Oral examination 20%
Record review 20%
Mayor, Council and Chief interview 35%
(4) The candidate with the highest overall score shall be voted on by
the Mayor and Council as the Lieutenant.
(5) Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to the
promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be given
to the candidate with the most seniority in service pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, or a resident over a nonresident pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6. Seniority shall prevail over residency in the
case of candidates that are ranked equally.
G. Promotion to rank of Sergeant. [Added 11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
37-2012]
(1) The Borough of Madison governing body desires to promote the
most qualified candidate to the position of Sergeant. This
Subsection G establishes the eligibility requirements and the
process for promotion to Sergeant. The promotion process shall be
on the basis of merit, experience, education, demonstrated ability,
psychological examination, competitive examinations and an
interview. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, promotion of
any officer shall be made from the membership of the Madison
Police Department. No person shall be eligible for promotion to
Sergeant unless he or she shall have served as a full-time police
officer in the Borough of Madison Police Department for a period of
five years or more.
(2) The Police Chief shall announce the promotional process to
members of the Department at least 30 days before the written
examination is to be given. The announcement shall be posted in
common areas of the Department accessible to all members. The
announcement shall contain, at a minimum, the rank to be filled,
the dates of the exams, source materials or reading lists from which
exam questions will be taken or topics from which questions will be
formulated. Candidates who qualify shall notify the Police Chief of
his or her interest in taking the examination by submitting a letter
of interest no later than 10 calendar days after the promotion
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:89
announcement. Failure to do so shall render the officer ineligible to
participate in the process.
(3) Promotion testing procedure. The promotion testing procedure for
the Borough of Madison Police Department shall consist of the
following: a written examination, an oral examination, a
psychological examination, a record review and interview with the
Mayor and Council and Police Chief.
(a) Written examinations.* The written examination shall be
supplied by a professional testing company, professional law
enforcement organization (e.g., State Chiefs of Police
Association, International Chiefs of Police Association, etc.) To
proceed to the oral examination of the examination procedure,
a candidate must achieve a minimum score of 70% on the
written examination.
(b) Oral examinations.* Candidates will be notified, in writing, of
their successful or unsuccessful completion of the written
portion of the exam by the Borough Administrator or his
designee. The oral examination shall take place after the
receipt of the written examination results. A standardized
interview will be conducted by an outside agency (e.g. Chiefs
of Police Association, International Chiefs of Police
Association, etc.) by a board of three examiners, at least one of
which shall be a personnel evaluator from the outside testing
agency. None of the evaluators shall be an officer, employee,
resident or relative thereof, of the Borough of Madison or of
any of the candidates. To proceed to the record review and
interview portion of the promotional process, a candidate must
achieve a minimum score of 70%.
*NOTE: The testing organization shall assign each candidate
an identification number, which shall be the only identification
used when the written and oral examination is graded. The
identification numbers of all candidates for promotion shall
be posted on a pass/fail basis only. A complete master list of
the actual results of the written and oral examination shall be
placed under seal and retained in the office of the Borough
Administrator and shall not be revealed to the Mayor and
Council until after the interview and record review of the
applicants are complete.
(c) Satisfactory psychological examination and certification by a
Borough-selected physician stating that the candidate is able
to perform the essential functions of the Sergeant title.
Candidates shall not move forward in the promotional process
without the completion of a satisfactory psychological
examination.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:90
(d) Record review and interview by the Mayor and Council and the
Police Chief. Candidates that successfully achieve a minimum
score of 70% on the written examination and a minimum score
of 70% on the oral examination and received a satisfactory
psychological examination shall proceed to the next step in the
promotional process, the review of service record and
interview. The interview shall be conducted by the Mayor and
Council and Police Chief. The record review shall be conducted
by the Borough Administrator, the Assistant Borough
Administrator and the Police Chief.
[1] The interview with the Mayor and Council and the Police
Chief shall focus on, but not be limited to, leadership and
management skills, knowledge of the Borough of
Madison's form of government, knowledge of the Police
Department Ordinance, familiarity with the municipal
budget process, the Police Department budget in
particular, staff/resource allocations, Attorney General
guidelines and knowledge of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The
Mayor and Council and Police Chief shall grade each
candidate on a thirty-five-point scale and shall ask each
candidate the identical questions, and the Borough Clerk
will keep written records of each candidate's responses to
same.
[2] The Borough Administrator, Assistant Borough
Administrator and Police Chief shall examine the
personnel jacket of each candidate and give specific
weight to each category and grade each candidate on a
twenty-point scale. The weight of each category of the
record review shall be the maximum of the following
points in each of the enumerated categories as follows:
Specialized training (e.g., FBI Academy) 0 to 3
points
Each completed course +1 point to a total of 3 points
Performance evaluations 0 to 8 points
All previous performance evaluations shall be considered
and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of review for
the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
2 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations
4 points if all evaluations meet expectations
6 points if a majority of the evaluations meet
expectations and some exceed expectations
8 points if a majority of evaluations exceed
expectations
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:91
Commendations 0 to 3 points
+1 point for each commendation up to maximum of 3
points
Education
Candidate only gets the point(s) associated with the
highest educational degree attained and not the point(s)
for each separate education degree.
Associate's degree 1 point
Bachelor's degree 2 points
Master's degree 3 points
Doctorate degree 4 points
Military experience
Active duty or reserve duty: Candidate only gets the
highest of the following point(s):
Any enlisted rank 1 point
Any officer rank 2 points
Disciplinary actions
Each major sustained discipline (more than 5 days): 2
points.
Each minor sustained discipline (5-day suspension or less,
including written reprimands): 1 point.
All previous sustained disciplinary actions shall be
considered and reviewed to achieve the broadest scope of
review for the given candidate by his/her supervisors.
Any points assessed under the Disciplinary Actions
section shall be deducted from the candidate's score.
[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 50-2017]
(e) The weight or percentage of each portion of the process shall
be as follows:
Written examination 25%
Oral examination 20%
Record review 20%
Mayor, Council and Chief interview 35%
(4) The candidate with the highest overall score shall be voted on by
the Mayor and Council as the Sergeant.
(5) Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to the
promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be given
to the candidate with the most seniority in service pursuant to
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:92
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, or a resident over a nonresident pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6. Seniority shall prevail over residency in the
case of candidates that are
H. Acting designation; no office or position created. [Added 11-26-2012
by Ord. No. 37-2012]
(1) The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Madison have the
discretion and authority to assign the functions and duties of
superior officer ranks, once the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Madison have certified by resolution that the position of any
superior officer rank(s) is vacant and until a superior officer rank(s)
is promoted. The Mayor and Council may designate an officer who
is qualified to perform the functions and duties of any superior
officer rank in an acting capacity.
(2) It is explicitly understood that no office or position of any kind is
created by the assignment of functions and duties of a higher rank
to an officer of a lower rank on an acting basis. Such designation
shall also not be considered an appointment to a position, nor
constitute a promotion. Such designation shall not entitle the
officer to any additional compensation or other emoluments of
office unless specifically provided for in a collective bargaining
agreement or the Borough of Madison Personnel Policies and
Procedures Handbook. The officer fulfilling such assignment is not
and is not intended to constitute the holding of a de facto office or
position within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-6 or any other law.
The officer designated in an acting capacity shall continue to fulfill
the assignment at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
I. Procedure for hiring new police officers. [Added 11-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 37-2012]
(1) First phase.
(a) When a vacancy exists, the Chief of Police shall forward a
request to the Madison Borough Council to hire a police officer.
The Chief, after receiving approval to initiate the hiring
process of a new officer, shall proceed as follows:
[1] Accept applications from trained officers with New Jersey
Police Training Commission certificates. [Amended
6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 27-2013]
[a] Sworn officers from other agencies.
[b] Alternate route officer from police academies.
[2] Accept applications from existing Borough of Madison
Police Department personnel (e.g., dispatchers, special
law enforcement officers). [Added 11-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 52-201522]
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:93
[3] Work with the Borough Personnel Officer to advertise in
the official newspapers and other appropriate media
outlets.
[a] The advertisement shall be for a two-week period.
[b] The advertisement will indicate the filing deadline.
(b) All applications shall be given out and collected at police
headquarters and a copy shall also be provided to the Business
Administrator.
(c) When a candidate is given an application, the time, date and
location of the written test will be attached.
(d) When the desk officer provides a candidate with an application,
he/she shall complete the information on the applicant list
form.
(e) When the application is returned, the desk officer on duty
shall:
[1] Place a check in front of the applicant's name on the
applicant list.
[2] Collect the application and attach a ten-dollar money order
or a certified check that is made payable to the New Jersey
State Association of Chiefs of Police.
[3] Give the applicant a numbered test booklet after recording
the booklet number next to the applicant's name.
[4] The desk officer shall place the application, with the
money order or certified check attached, in the Chief's
office box.
(f) When the applications are received by the Chief's secretary,
he/she shall check to ensure that the appropriate fee has been
rendered and attached to the application form.
[1] He/she shall stamp the date that the application was
received.
[2] All original applications are to be forwarded to the Chief's
office.
[3] The Chief's secretary shall forward the checks or money
orders to the appropriate Chief's Association.
(g) The Chief, or his designee, shall arrange for the testing
locations for the written, physical and oral testing phases.
22.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection I(1)(a)[2] as
Subsection I(1)(a)[3].
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:94
[1] The Chief, or his designee, will be responsible for making
all the proper notifications to the applicants.
[2] Applications will not be rejected because of omissions or
deficiencies that can be corrected prior to the testing or
interview process.
(h) Eligibility.
[1] Must be a citizen of the United States.
[2] Must possess a high school diploma, or equivalency.
[3] Must be of good moral character.
[4] Must be at least 18 years old.
[5] Must not have been convicted of a crime.
[6] Must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(2) Second phase: written examination.
(a) Applicants shall submit to a written examination.
[1] In order for an applicant to move on to Phase III, the
applicant must attain a minimum score of 70% on the
written examination.
(b) The written examination shall be administered by the New
Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police.
(c) The applicant must be present at the testing location on the
date and time specified. If the applicant does not report to the
testing location as specified, he shall be ineligible for further
consideration for the current vacancy.
[1] The applicant may apply his/her written test score and be
eligible when another vacancy exists within the
appropriate time frame.
(d) Written test scores shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for
review.
(e) All applicants that do not qualify to participate in the next
phase shall be notified in writing along with their written test
score.
(f) If an applicant has taken the New Jersey Chief of Police
examination for another agency, he/she may apply his/her test
score and be exempt from taking the test again. His test score
must be current.
[1] For the purpose of this section, "current" shall mean that
the applicant would have had to have taken the written
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:95
examination within one year, prior to the posted test date
for the position of Patrolman with Madison Borough.
(g) Applicants possessing a valid New Jersey Police Training
Commission certificate will be subject to the Departmental
interview process and not required to take a written
examination.
(3) Department oral interview phase.
(a) The department interview shall be conducted by the Chief of
Police and/or an officer designated by the Chief of Police and
the Business Administrator and/or his designee.
(b) The Chief of Police shall appoint a department Oral Board
Committee. The Oral Board Committee shall evaluate and rank
the candidates. The Committee shall consist of no more than
seven individuals, including personnel representing different
ranks within the organization as well as the Administrator and
Assistant Administrator or their designees. [Amended
6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 27-2013]
(c) The candidates will then be ranked and selected for the
background investigation phase.
(4) Background investigation.
(a) When the candidate has successfully passed Phases I, II, and
III of this Subsection I, a background investigation is to be
initiated.
(b) The Background Policy and Procedure, contained in the
Department Rules and Regulations, is to be followed.
(c) The completed background investigation shall be evaluated by
the Chief of Police and the Detective Bureau.
(5) Psychological evaluation.
(a) The applicant shall be required to undergo a psychological
examination paid for by the Borough and shall be notified of
the evaluation at least three days in advance.
[1] The applicant will be notified of the following:
[a] Time.
[b] Location.
[c] Name of consultation team.
[d] Date.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-2
24:96
(b) The psychological evaluation is designed to provide the
Department with dimensional information about a candidate
that will assist in the selection process.
(c) The Chief of Police shall interpret the psychological evaluation
report.
(d) If a candidate does not successfully pass the psychological
examination, he/she is disqualified from the selection process.
(e) All medical records are to be treated as confidential with
access limited in accordance with the ADA requirements; the
medical records should be kept in a separate file.
(6) Medical examination.
(a) The Madison Borough Police Department shall pay for the
applicant to be examined.
[1] The Chief of Police shall designate the physician and
arrange for the appointment.
(b) The physician shall be provided with the Department medical
examination form and instructed to complete the appropriate
sections.
(c) Blood and urine analysis is to be conducted for every applicant
examined.
[1] A screen for drugs in the applicant's system is to be
conducted.
(d) The completed medical form is to be picked up from the
physician by the officer assigned and reviewed by the Chief of
Police.
(e) If a candidate's medical examination reflects that the applicant
has traces of a controlled dangerous substance in their system,
he/she is to be disqualified from the selection process.
(f) Any other medical problem, other than traces of controlled
dangerous substances in the applicant's system, are to be
thoroughly reviewed by the physician and a determination
made as to the applicant's fitness for police work.
(g) All medical records are to be treated as confidential with
access limited in accordance with the ADA requirements; the
medical records should be kept in a separate file.
(7) Successful candidate(s). The successful candidate or candidates, if
more than one position, will be presented to the Mayor and Council
for final approval and appointment. The initial year of employment
is a one-year probationary period during which time the candidate
may be removed for any cause and without notice. Termination
§ 34-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-2
24:97
§ 34-3. Designation of appropriate authority.
The Borough Administrator shall serve as the appropriate authority, as the
same is defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, to whom the Police Chief shall be
directly responsible for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of
the Police Department.
during the probationary period is not grievable and/or not
appealable.
(8) Exemptions.
(a) A candidate for employment may be exempted from the
selection process as set forth in Subsection I(1) through (2),
hereinabove, if such a candidate has previously been certified
by the New Jersey Police Training Commission as a law
enforcement officer; and if that candidate is currently
employed as a law enforcement officer with a bona fide law
enforcement agency. Any such candidate will still be subject to
the eligibility requirements set forth in Subsection I(3) through
(6) hereinabove.
(b) A candidate for employment may only be granted exemption
status by action of the governing body upon the advice and
recommendation of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
recruit and interview qualified candidates and may reject any
or all candidates prior to submission to the governing body.
(c) Such candidate shall still be subject to the requirements of
Article III, Department Oral Interview Phase, Article IV,
Background Investigation, Article V, Psychological Evaluation,
and Article VI, Medical Examination, as set forth herein above.
(d) Once the background investigation, the interview, the
psychological testing and medical examination have been
completed, the Chief shall present the candidate to the
governing body for its consideration. The governing body may,
in its discretion either accept or reject any candidate
recommended by the Chief of Police.
(9) Summary.
(a) All applicants shall be notified of the test date, time and place
at least five days prior to the test.
(b) All applicants that are rejected at any phase of this testing
process shall be notified in writing by the Chief of Police within
15 days after the testing date.
(c) All testing results will remain confidential and will not be
released to any person or agency unless specifically authorized
by the individual applicant.
§ 34-2 MADISON CODE § 34-4
24:98
§ 34-4. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council shall establish by resolution and may from time to time
amend and repeal by resolution such rules and regulations, with the advice
of the Chief of Police and as concurred in by the Borough Administrator,
as it may deem necessary for the government and efficient working of the
entire Department.
§ 34-5. Qualifications.
A. Each applicant for membership in the Police Department shall be a
United States citizen and shall comply with all of the laws of the State of
New Jersey pertaining thereto. On or after January 01, 2003, each
applicant must also have at least an associate's degree or 60 college
credits or military service or previous police service, or be presently
enrolled in a New Jersey Certified Police Academy.
B. Each applicant shall be sound in body and of good health sufficient to
satisfy the Board of Trustees of the police retirement system of New
Jersey that he/she is eligible for membership in the retirement system.
C. Each applicant shall be able to read, write and speak the English
language well and intelligently.
D. Each applicant shall be of good moral character. No person shall be
appointed who has been convicted of an indictable offense or who has
been convicted of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Each applicant shall be 21 years of age or over and under the age of 35
years, except as provided in § 34-14B herein.
F. No person shall be given nor shall he/she accept a permanent
appointment in the Borough as a police officer unless such person has
successfully completed a police training course at a school approved
and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of
Law and Public Safety, pursuant to the Police Training Act, N.J.S.A.
52:17B-66 et seq.
G. A qualified person for the Madison Borough Police Department shall be
given a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Borough for a total period not exceeding one year for the purpose of
enabling the person seeking permanent appointment to take a police
training course as prescribed in the Police Training Act, N.J.S.A.
52:17B-66 et seq. However, the time period set forth above may exceed
one year for those persons enrolled prior to the one-year limit in a
police training course scheduled to end subsequent to the one-year
limit, and for those persons who, prior to the one-year limit have been
scheduled to attend a police training course which commences
subsequent to the one-year limit. An extension may be granted, in the
discretion of the Chief of Police, up to six months.
§ 34-4 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-5
24:99
§ 34-6. Removal and suspension.
§ 34-7. Chief of Police.
H. Upon successful completion of the police training course as set forth in
Subsection F herein, the probationary or temporary appointment of the
person shall continue for twelve months. The purpose of the additional
twelve-month probationary or temporary appointment is to permit the
Borough to determine whether the person satisfactorily performs his/
her duties as a Borough police officer. The additional twelve-month
probationary or temporary appointment period shall commence on the
date of graduation from the police training course set forth above, or
date of hire.
A. Each regular police officer shall hold his/her office and continue in
employment during good behavior and efficiency, and no person shall
be removed from office or employment for any other causes than
incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, conduct unbecoming a police
officer, disobedience of the rules and regulations established or
hereafter established for the Department or absence from duty without
just cause for five days or more.
B. Any member of the Department may be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced from his/her office or employment for just cause upon due
notice and service of written charges and a hearing.
C. Any officer who is suspended with pay shall not be entitled to work
secondary employment during such suspension without written
approval of the Chief of Police.
D. Any member of the Police Department found guilty after such hearing
described in Subsection B hereof may appeal such decision as allowed
by law.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall, in his/her absence, assign the
next highest-ranking officer in charge of the Department. The officer in
charge, in the event of a planned absence of the Chief of Police, shall be
required to perform all of the duties and he/she shall maintain all of the
responsibilities of the Chief of Police as delineated by both local
ordinance and state statute. In the event of the unplanned
incapacitation of the Chief of Police, the officer in charge, as previously
designated by the Police Chief, shall perform the above functions until
such time as the Chief is capable to assume his/her duties.
B. The control and discipline of the Police Department and of its members
shall be vested in the Chief of Police or his/her designee and he/she
shall have the power to enforce all the rules and regulations herein
provided and any general and special orders or instructions which he/
she may from time to time promulgate, provided that such rules,
regulations, general or special orders or instructions do not conflict
§ 34-5 MADISON CODE § 34-7
24:100
§ 34-8. Special law enforcement officers (special police officers).
with the rules and regulations, orders or instructions issued by
resolution of the Borough Council. He/She shall enforce these rules and
regulations, orders or instructions, whether promulgated by him/her or
by the Borough Council, and may punish their violation as he/she deems
necessary pursuant to law.
C. The Chief of Police, with the assistance of the other members of the
Department who are detailed for the purpose, shall keep the Council
liaison advised of all matters of importance relating to the Department.
D. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Council from time to time
the purchase of new equipment or the repair or rearrangement of such
old equipment as will increase the efficiency of the Department. He/She
shall have full charge and control of all the apparatus and equipment of
the Department and its assignment and will make recommendations
that in his/her opinion will increase the efficiency of the Department.
E. The Chief of Police shall, at his/her discretion, assign members of the
Madison Borough Police Department to work assigned to these work
functions, and the officers assigned within these functions may be
changed from time to time as necessary to efficiently carry out the
duties of the Department as mandated by § 34-8.
A. Upon recommendation from the Chief of Police, the Borough Council
may appoint special law enforcement officers for terms not exceeding
one year and may revoke such appointments without cause or hearing.
Special law enforcement officers shall carry out their duties and
responsibilities under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police, and
their powers, rights and duties shall be specifically defined by the Chief
of Police. The powers, rights and duties shall immediately cease at the
expiration of the term for which they were appointed or upon
revocation of their appointment. Special officers shall not carry
revolvers or other weapons at any time except as otherwise directed by
the Chief of Police. The resolution approving appointment of special law
enforcement officers shall designate the rate of pay, if any.
B. No person may be appointed as a special law enforcement officer unless
the person:
(1) Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during the term of
appointment.
(2) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(3) Is sound in body and of good health.
(4) Is of good moral character.
§ 34-7 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-8
24:101
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him/her unfit to perform the duties of his/her
office.
(6) Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers of the Borough of Madison.
(7) Is not at the time of appointment serving as a full-time police officer
or as a special law enforcement officer in any other municipality.
C. Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to this section shall have fingerprints taken, which
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed, the Chief of
Police shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of the applicant
and report these determinations in writing to the Borough Council.
E. No person shall be permitted to commence his/her duties as a special
law enforcement officer unless he/she has successfully completed a
training course approved by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission and received an appropriate certificate thereof, unless he/
she is otherwise eligible and authorized to serve as a special law
enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.11.
F. At the time of appointment, each special law enforcement officer shall
be designated as either a Class 1A or Class 1B officer, each of which
shall possess the duties, powers and authority as follows:
(1) Class 1A officers shall be authorized to perform routine traffic
detail, spectator control and similar duties.
(2) Class 1B officers shall be authorized to perform all duties of a Class
1A officer and shall also have the power to issue summonses for
disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations
of Borough ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes.
(3) All Class 1 special law enforcement officers shall be strictly
prohibited from using firearms and shall not be assigned any duties
which may require the carrying or use of a firearm.
(4) All special law enforcement officers shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Chief of Police and shall perform their duties
only in the Borough of Madison.
(5) All special law enforcement officers shall comply with the rules and
regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of the
permanent, regularly appointed police officers, as well as any rules
and regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of special
law enforcement officers.
§ 34-8 MADISON CODE § 34-8
24:102
§ 34-9. School crossing guards.
The Council may, from time to time, appoint as school guards such persons
as it shall deem to be qualified for such position. The powers and duties
of school guards shall be limited to the protection of children while on
public thoroughfares in the Borough of Madison in connection with the
attendance of such children at the several schools in said Borough, and
to the direction and regulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic at the
various street intersections and crossings where they may be stationed.
While on active duty, school guards shall be under the jurisdiction of and
subject to the orders of the officers of the Madison Police Department.
§ 34-10. Community service officers.
(6) All special law enforcement officers may be assigned only to assist
the Police Department and may not be assigned to replace or
substitute for full-time regular police officers or in any way
diminish the number of full-time officers.
G. Every special enforcement officer prior to the commencement of his/her
duties shall be furnished with a uniform which shall identify the
officer's function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat
and appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or
name tag and the name of the Borough of Madison. The uniform shall
also include an insignia issued by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission which clearly indicates the officer's status as a special law
enforcement officer and the type of certification issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11. All special law enforcement officers prior to the
commencement of duties shall be in uniform properly displaying the
appropriate insignia.
H. The weekly hours assigned to special law enforcement officers shall not
exceed the limitations set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16.
A. The Borough Council, upon recommendation from the Chief of Police,
may appoint community service officers to serve under the supervision
of the Chief of Police. The duties of such persons shall include, at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, parking violations enforcement, police
dispatching and school crossing guard responsibilities.
B. Such persons shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer only to
the extent of being empowered to issue summonses and complaints for
nonmoving (parking) motor vehicle violations as provided by N.J.S.A.
39:5-3 and the rules governing the courts of the State of New Jersey.
C. Such persons shall not be regular members of the Police Department
nor have any of the powers or authority of regular or special police
officers, except as expressly granted herein regarding nonmoving
motor vehicle violations.
§ 34-8 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-11
24:103
§ 34-11. Personnel other than regular or probationary members not
to acquire tenure.
No person who shall serve as a special policeman or a school guard, or who
shall perform any duties of a police nature other than as a probationary
patrolman, prior to appointment as a regular member of the Madison Police
Department, shall be entitled to credit for any such prior periods of duty
or services rendered, either with or without pay on account of any required
tenure or promotion record in the Police Department; provided, however,
that persons permanently appointed to said Department who shall have
served as probationary patrolman shall be entitled to credit for service
during their probationary periods.
§ 34-11.1. Police Chaplain. [Added 10-13-2016 by Ord. No. 60-2016]
§ 34-12. Oath.
Every person appointed to the Police Department, in whatever capacity,
shall, prior to entering upon his/her duties, take and subscribe to an oath or
affirmation as may be required and prescribed by the laws of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 34-13. Police physician; physical examinations.
A. Position created. The position of Police Chaplain for the Borough of
Madison Police Department is hereby created in accordance with
statutory authority. The position(s) will be a volunteer position. The
position of Chaplain shall be under the control of the Chief of Police.
B. Qualifications. Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained
clergyman in good standing in the religious body from which he/she is
selected. The chaplain shall have basic training and shall be a certified
Police Chaplain credentialed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Borough of Madison Police Department and shall be
qualified in accordance with statutory requirements.
C. Duties of Police Chaplain. The Duties of Police Chaplain shall include,
but not be limited to, assisting the Borough of Madison Police
Department in death notifications, station house adjustments and any
other duties that may be assigned by the Chief of Police.
D. Rank and salary. Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in that
capacity without rank or salary.
E. Term of office. A person(s) appointed as Chaplain shall serve for a
period of one year from the date of appointment and shall continue to
serve in that capacity until he/she is either terminated or reappointed
with the recommendation of the Chief of Police regarding the
appointment of the Chaplain. The Mayor shall appoint the Chaplains in
accordance with this section with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council.
§ 34-11 MADISON CODE § 34-13
24:104
§ 34-14. Military service.
A. Every member of the Madison Police Department shall be required to
have at least one physical examination by a medical doctor annually.
Such examination shall be conducted at such time as the Chief of Police
may designate. Records of said physical examination shall be kept on
file by the Chief of Police.
B. Every member of the Madison Police Department must maintain
himself/herself in proper physical condition and good appearance at all
times. The Council of the Borough of Madison or the Chief of Police may
require any member of the Police Department to be examined by a
medical doctor when, in the opinion of said Borough Council or Chief of
Police, such member gives evidence that he/she is unable to perform
properly the duties of his/her position. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent such a member from submitting supplemental evidence of his/
her condition, to be supplied by a physician of his/her own selection, in
addition to that required by the Council or Chief as mentioned above.
C. Recommendations of a medical doctor for corrective measures of
physical deficiencies interfering with the duties of a member of the
Madison Police Department shall be followed by such member, subject
to the approval of the member's personal physician.
A. Leave of absence.
(1) When any member of the Madison Police Department who has
entered or hereafter shall enter the active military service of the
United States or of this state, in time of war or an emergency, or for
or during any period of training, or pursuant to or in connection
with the operation of any system of selective service, or who has
entered or hereafter in time of war shall enter the active service of
the United States Merchant Marine or any similar organization
authorized by the United States to serve with the military forces,
he/she shall be granted a leave of absence for the period of such
service and for a further period of three months after receiving his/
her discharge from such service. If any such person shall be
incapacitated by wound or sickness at the time of his/her discharge
from such service, his/her leave of absence shall be extended until
three months after his/her recovery from such wound or sickness or
until the expiration of two years from the date of his/her discharge
from such service, whichever shall first occur.
(2) In no case shall such person be discharged or separated from his/
her office, position or employment during such period of leave of
absence because of his/her entry into such service. During the
period of such leave of absence, such person shall be entitled to all
the rights, privileges and benefits that he/she would have had or
acquired if he/she had actually served in such office, position or
employment during such period of leave of absence, except, unless
otherwise provided by law, the right to compensation. Such leave of
§ 34-13 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-14
24:105
absence may be granted with or without pay as provided by law.
Such person shall be entitled to resume the office, position or
employment held by him/her at the time of his/her entrance into
such service, provided that he/she shall apply therefor before the
expiration of his/her said leave of absence. Upon resumption of
his/her office, position or employment, the service in such office,
position or employment of the person temporarily filling the same
shall immediately cease. If any person shall be appointed a member
of the Police Department of the Borough of Madison to fill any
vacancy, the Council thereof shall certify how such vacancy occurs
or exists, and the name of the person, if any, who held such office
or position immediately prior to the vacancy. No person who, after
entry into such service, shall have been separated from such
service by a discharge of lesser degree that an honorable discharge
shall be entitled to any of the rights, privileges or benefits herein
conferred.
B. Temporary replacement.
(1) When any member of the Police Department of the Borough of
Madison is granted a leave of absence, as hereinabove set forth or
pursuant to any law granting leave of absence to persons entering
the military forces of the United States or of this state, the Council
may appoint a person to serve in the place of the person who has
been granted such leave of absence and during the continuance
thereof. Such appointment shall constitute a temporary
appointment only, and such temporarily appointed person shall
have no obligation to contribute to any pension fund and shall
acquire no pension or tenure rights.
(2) The Council, in making the temporary appointment, may appoint
any person who is not less than 21 nor more than 35 years of age;
who is a citizen of the United States; is sound in body and in good
health; is able to read, write and speak the English language well
and intelligently; and is of good moral character; but no person
shall be so appointed who has been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude which, in the judgment of the Council,
would be prejudicial to the morale of the Department.
(3) Such temporary appointment shall terminate upon the expiration of
the leave of absence granted to the appointee's predecessor in
office, or upon official notification of the permanent incapacity or
death of such predecessor. It may be terminated sooner if such
appointment is found to be no longer necessary or in the interest of
economy.
C. Appointments and age requirements. Any person who has been or shall
be appointed a member of the Police Department in the Borough of
Madison while serving in the military service of the United States in
time of war, and who has been or shall be delayed in qualifying and
becoming a member of such Police Department as a result of such
§ 34-14 MADISON CODE § 34-14
24:106
§ 34-15. Uniforms.
§ 34-16. Firearms.
All firearms shall be provided by the Borough, shall remain the property of
the Borough and shall be subject to recall by the Chief of Police.
§ 34-17. Decrease in personnel for economy reasons.
When the Council of the Borough of Madison shall, for reasons of economy,
find it necessary to decrease the number of members of or employees in the
Police Department, or of any grade or rank thereof, in such Borough, it shall
proceed in the following manner:
service, and who has qualified and become a member of such Police
Department or who shall qualify and become a member of such Police
Department within six months after discharge or release from such
service under conditions other than dishonorable, shall be considered,
for the purpose of determining his/her years of service, rank and grade,
increase in pay or any other rights or benefits, as having qualified and
to have become a member of any such Department, as of the date of his/
her appointment, notwithstanding the requirements of any other law
concerning the appointment of members to such Police Department.
A. All members of the Police Department shall be provided with uniform
allowance as per the collective bargaining agreement and all members
shall maintain in clean and serviceable condition such wearing apparel
and equipment as is prescribed by the Police Chief.
B. If a police officer voluntarily leaves the employment in the Police
Department prior to two full years of service, then such officer shall
reimburse the Borough of Madison for all costs incurred by the Borough
of Madison for training and uniforms.
A. If the Council shall determine to decrease the number in any of the
higher ranks or grades of the Police Department, it shall demote such
member or employee, or members or employees, of such higher rank or
ranks to the next rank below. It shall not remove any such member or
employee from such Department for reasons of economy, except as
hereinafter provided, and in any such demotion from the higher rank or
grade, the member or employee to be demoted shall be the last one so
appointed to such higher rank or grade. All dismissals or removals from
the Department for reasons of economy shall be made from the last
person or persons appointed to the Department, regardless of the rank
of such person at the time of decreasing the number of employees.
B. If any officer, employee or member of said Police Department shall be
demoted to a lower rank or grade for reasons of economy, such member
or employee shall be carried on a special list, and when promotions are
made to such higher rank or grade, the person demoted on the ground
§ 34-14 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-17
24:107
§ 34-18. Criminal history background checks.
of economy shall be the first to be restored to the rank from which he/
she was demoted.
A. All criminal history background checks shall be conducted in
accordance with all applicable statutes and regulations and any
guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Attorney General, New
Jersey State Police or other applicable authority.
B. Criminal history background checks may be conducted by the Police
Department for the following purposes:
(1) Criminal justice, law enforcement and related purposes.
(2) In connection with any application to the Borough for a license,
permit or approval, where consideration of a prior criminal
conviction is authorized by statute, the Borough Code or other
laws, regulations or ordinances.
(3) In connection with an application for employment with the Borough
as authorized by § 30-5.1 of the Borough Code or as requested by
the Borough Administrator for other public employment related
purposes.
(4) For such other purposes as authorized by law.
C. In the case of criminal history checks conducted pursuant to Subsection
B(2) of this section, each person covered by the application shall submit
a completed State Police request form.
D. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for implementation and
administration of the provisions of this section; provided, however, that
responsibility may be delegated in whole or in part to one or more
subordinate officers.
§ 34-17 MADISON CODE § 34-18
24:108
ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid Agreement
§ 34-19. Agreement authorized.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq. and as
otherwise provided by law, the Mayor and Municipal Clerk may be
authorized by the Borough Council to execute a mutual aid agreement with
the County of Morris and the municipalities within the County of Morris for
the provision of supplemental law enforcement assistance in the event of
an emergency, disaster or widespread crisis, which agreement shall include
but not be limited to the following terms and conditions:
A. Each party agrees that in the event of an emergency, disaster or
widespread crisis within the municipal jurisdiction of any other party,
the appropriate services and assistance will be provided upon request
and to the extent reasonably possible without endangering persons or
property within the municipality rendering such assistance.
B. All mutual aid rendered pursuant to the mutual aid agreement and the
Morris County Regional Emergency Deployment (MCREDS) Plan shall
be provided without charge or expense to the municipality receiving
such assistance. By executing the mutual aid agreement, each party
acknowledges that it shall be solely responsible for the provision of any
and all salary and other benefits for its personnel, whether paid or
volunteer, rendering assistance within the other municipality to the
same extent as if such personnel were performing their duties within
the municipality providing the assistance.
C. The mutual aid agreement shall have an initial term of one year and
shall be automatically renewed for additional and successive one-year
terms unless and until one of the parties thereto elects to terminate the
agreement by providing prior written notice to the other parties to the
agreement.
§ 34-19 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-19
24:109

ARTICLE III
Off-Duty Outside Employment
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 49-2013; amended 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 54-2014]
§ 34-20. Contracted off-duty employment of police officers.
[Amended 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 37-2017]
A. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
employment as safety or security personnel for private businesses or
other public entities during off-duty hours, and at such times as will not
interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or
emergency duty for the Borough. The Borough's needs for said police
officers shall always take priority over scheduled off-duty work.
B. If a private business or other public entity desires to contract with the
Borough of Madison for the off-duty services of a police officer, said
private business or public entity shall request the services through the
office of the Chief of Police. To the extent that personnel are available,
the Chief of Police or his/her designee may, but shall not be required to,
assign a police officer to provide aforesaid off-duty services. The Chief
of Police or his/her designee shall withhold approval if the off-duty
services to be performed are inconsistent with the efficient operation
and professionalism of the Police Department and/or unreasonably
endangers or threatens the safety of the officer or officers who perform
the work.
C. Costs for services to Borough, Court and nonprofits.
(1) The cost of the services to the Borough of Madison or other public
entity shall be $60 per hour for the officer(s), plus a $20-per-hour
vehicle use fee, administrative and insurance fee. All payments for
the aforesaid services shall be made to the Borough of Madison.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish such rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement this section, including a
bifurcated billing process to users.
(2) Security in the Joint Municipal Court shall be paid at $55 per hour
to the officer(s), with no administrative, vehicle or insurance
charges. In addition, security for the Atlantic Health Systems (AHS)
shall be paid at the rate and upon the terms agreed between the
PBA/SOA and AHS. The cost of services to the Board of Education,
religious, charitable or Police Department-approved not-for-profit
entities or events shall be $60 per hour, with no administrative,
vehicle or insurance charges. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall set the administrative rate and whether same shall apply for
each request for officers.
D. All officers providing services under Subsection C above shall be paid a
minimum of two hours. When there is a cancellation without two hours'
advanced notice, the officer(s) shall be compensated two hours.
§ 34-20 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 34-20
24:111
E. The cost of services to all other third parties shall be $85 per hour for
the officer(s), plus a $25-per-hour vehicle use fee, administrative fee
and insurance fee. All officers shall be paid a minimum of four hours.
When there is a cancellation without two hours' advanced notice, the
officer(s) shall be compensated four hours.
F. Any private business or other public entity requesting the services of an
off-duty law enforcement officer shall estimate the number of hours
such services are required, which estimate shall be approved, in
writing, by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
G. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty officers, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee shall verify that there are no outstanding
charges for the private business or other public entity requesting
services. No services shall be performed unless all charges for prior
work have been paid.
H. All requests for the services of off-duty law enforcement officers in the
Borough of Madison Police Department for a period of one week or
longer shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, at
least 10 days before such services are required, whenever possible. Any
officers, when so employed by the Borough, shall be treated as an
employee of the Borough; provided, however, that wages earned for
outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of
law enforcement officers so employed, nor shall hours worked for
outside employment be considered in any way compensable as
overtime.
I. Any officer performing such details pursuant to this section shall be
deemed on-duty and in the employ of the Borough for purposes
including, but not limited to, workers' compensation.
J. This section shall take effect upon adoption.
§ 34-20 MADISON CODE § 34-20
24:112
Chapter 36
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EMERGENCY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 113. Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
§ 36-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 5-8-1978 by Ord.
No. 16-78]
There is hereby established the Madison Property Maintenance Emergency
Committee, hereinafter referred to as the "Committee." Its members shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and
shall serve for a term of one year terminating December 31 of each year,
or until their successors qualify. The membership of the Committee shall
consist of the Health Officer, the Building Inspector, two members of the
Board of Health of the Borough of Madison and one member of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Madison, who shall be the Chairman. The Council
representative to the Board of Health shall not be Chairman. Any conduct
or action of the Committee authorized by this chapter shall be deemed
valid and effective when taken by any three members of the Committee. At
any meeting of the Committee, a quorum shall consist of a majority of the
membership of the Committee.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY CONDITION — Any condition dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of a building or the occupants of
neighboring buildings, which arises out of any of the following
circumstances or conditions:
A. Lack of adequate ventilation or light.
B. Lack of adequate and properly functioning sanitary facilities.
C. Lack of adequate and healthful water supply.
Structural, mechanical or electrical defects which increase the hazards
of fire, accident or other calamity.
D.
From October 1 of each year until the next succeeding May 1, failure to
maintain every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein
at a temperature of at least 68° F. whenever the outside temperature
falls below 55° F. during the daytime hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
or failure to maintain every unit of dwelling space and every habitable
room therein at a temperature of at least 55° F. whenever the outside
E.
§ 34-20 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EMERGENCY § 36-2
36:113
§ 36-3. Duties.
The duties of the Committee shall consist of the following:
§ 36-4. Establishment of Property Maintenance Emergency Fund.
There is hereby established a fund to be known as the "Property
Maintenance Emergency Fund." The amount of dollars allocated to said
fund is limited to the following:
§ 36-5. Required conditions for authorization of expenditures.
temperature falls below 40° F. during the nighttime hours of 11:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not
be responsible for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior
temperature arising out of action by the occupants in leaving open
windows or doors to the exterior of the building.
A. Administering and expending funds allocated pursuant to the terms of
this chapter relative to any rented dwelling unit.
B. Examining those circumstances and conditions alleged to constitute
emergency conditions and declaring, where applicable, an emergency
condition to exist.
C. Arranging, in accordance with the terms of this chapter, for the prompt
repair, maintenance, supply or replacement of those items of structure,
equipment or supplies which are necessary to correct, eliminate or
alleviate the emergency condition.
A. Those sums of money specifically appropriated in the Borough's annual
budget or by emergency resolution or otherwise for this purpose.
B. All sums paid to the Borough by any property owner to reimburse the
Borough for expenditures made or authorized from said fund under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The Committee shall be authorized to expend the moneys from the fund
appropriated to correct, eliminate or alleviate an emergency condition
only when:
(1) It has examined those circumstances and conditions alleged to
constitute an emergency condition and has declared an emergency
condition to exist.
(2) The remedying of such emergency condition is the owner's
responsibility.
(3) The owner or the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint
venturer has received notice of the circumstances or conditions
constituting the emergency condition from either the Committee in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, telegram or
telephone conversation. Where such notice is by telephone
§ 36-2 MADISON CODE § 36-5
36:114
§ 36-6. Procedure for expenditures and recovery of costs.
conversation, said notice shall be confirmed by regular mail
addressed to the owner and mailed within 24 hours after said
telephone notice.
(4) No work has been commenced by the owner or the owner's agent,
servant, employee or joint venturer to correct, eliminate or
alleviate the emergency condition within 24 hours after the owner
or the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer has
received notice, as described in Subsection A(3) of this section, of
the circumstances and conditions constituting the emergency
condition.
(5) Where work was commenced within the twenty-four-hour period
referred to in Subsection A(4) of this section, but such work has not
been reasonably completed within 72 hours after the work was
commenced, and such work, under the applicable circumstances
and in the opinion of the Health Officer or the Building Inspector,
could have been completed within 72 hours.
B. Any such authorization for funds by the Committee shall require the
signatures of any two members of the Committee.
A. The Borough Council shall from time to time adopt a resolution
authorizing the Committee to act in its behalf in order to remedy any
emergency condition contemplated to be corrected under the
provisions of this chapter. The resolution shall specifically provide that
all costs of such municipal action shall be charged to the owner of the
property and that the expenditure of municipal funds for such purposes,
if not reimbursed within 10 days of the date of submitting said charge,
shall be charged as a lien against the premises and collectible in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f.
B. In the event that the Committee authorizes the expenditure of money or
spends money from the fund as authorized by this chapter and a
resolution or resolutions of the Council, thus reducing the amount of
money in the fund, the Committee shall immediately notify the owner in
the same manner as notification is given in § 36-5A(3) of this chapter of
the amount of money necessary to pay for said authorized expenditure
or fully reimburse the fund for moneys already spent, as the case may
be. Within 10 days thereafter, the owner shall deposit with the fund said
required sum necessary to fully reimburse it for the costs of such
emergency repairs.
C. In addition to all expenditures authorized from the fund under the
terms of this chapter, there shall also be charged against said fund the
reasonable cost of all municipal services performed directly by
municipal employees to correct any emergency condition contemplated
by this chapter, and said cost for the time of any municipal employee
shall be charged at a rate of 2 1/2 times his salary rate in order to cover
§ 36-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EMERGENCY § 36-6
36:115
§ 36-7. Interpretation and applicability of provisions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to waive any requirements of the New
Jersey Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and no contract
shall be made nor authorization for work given which exceeds the available
funds appropriated for this purpose or which violates any provision of the
New Jersey Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 36-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, association of persons or corporation found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge:
a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In
the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be
no less than $100. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
the cost of said employee's time plus the reasonable overhead
attributed to him.
D. In the event that the Committee authorizes the expenditure of money or
spends money from the fund, the owner of the premises may appeal to
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Madison for a hearing.
(1) Such hearing shall concern solely the issues of:
(a) Did an emergency condition exist.
(b) Was the amount expended to remedy the emergency condition
reasonable.
(2) If such appeal is desired, the owner shall, within 10 days of
receiving notice of the amount spent, file with the Borough Clerk of
the Borough of Madison a letter requesting such appeal.
(3) The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Madison shall hold a
hearing considering the aforementioned issues not less than 10 nor
more than 30 days after the Borough Clerk has received the
request from the owner, and it shall render its decision within 14
days after the hearing has been concluded. By mutual consent
between the Mayor and Council and an aggrieved party, the time
limitation herein stated may be extended.
§ 36-6 MADISON CODE § 36-8
36:116
Chapter 39
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 30. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 36-8 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EMERGENCY § 36-8
36:117

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 51-2008]
§ 39-1. DCRP positions.
On and after July 1, 2007, newly appointed officials in the Borough must
enroll in Defined Contribution Retirement Program (DCRP), not Public
Employees' Retirement System (PERS), if the position requires the specific
consent and/or approval of the elected governing body. Borough employees
appointed to a position by elected officials, such as Mayoral appointments,
or appointments made with the "advice and consent" of the Council shall
also be DCRP positions.
§ 39-2. Continuance of membership in PERS.
An appointed official in the Borough who is already enrolled in the PERS
prior to July 1, 2007, based on an elected and/or appointed office, will
remain a PERS member while in that office/position. If, however, on or after
July 1, 2007, there is a break of service in that office/position, or the official
is elected to a different elected office, the official will be enrolled in the
DCRP and cannot continue with PERS membership in the newly elected
office/position.
§ 39-3. Positions eligible for DCRP.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 39-4. Positions exempt from DCRP.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Municipal Manager;
B. Municipal Attorney;
C. Municipal Engineer;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
§ 39-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE EMERGENCY § 39-4
36:119
§ 39-5. Implementation.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 39-4 MADISON CODE § 39-5
36:120
Chapter 42
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 44
SEAL
§ 44-1. Description; establishment. [Amended 12-28-1978 by Ord.
No. 47-78]
The seal provided and used by and for the Borough of Madison is described
as follows: A device representing a rose surrounded by the words
"Incorporated December 27, 1889." Encircling the whole are the words
"The Borough of Madison, Madison, N.J." The seal represented as aforesaid
is hereunto annexed, shall be and is hereby established and declared now
to be the common Seal of the Borough of Madison.
§ 44-2. Custody; preservation.
The Borough Clerk shall have the custody of the Borough Seal, and the same
shall be carefully preserved and kept by him at all times in his office.
Chapter 45
SHADE TREE MANAGEMENT BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 136. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
§ 45-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 39-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 45-1
42:121
ADVISE THE SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — Wherever this
chapter refers to the Shade Tree Management Board acting with the advice
of the Superintendent of Public Works, it shall mean that the Shade Tree
Management Board shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works so that
the Superintendent may coordinate the work and inform the Shade Tree
Management Board as to:
BOROUGH — Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Madison.
BOROUGH SHRUB — A shrub located on land owned by the Borough or
which is otherwise located on a street, highway, public place, right-of-way,
Borough easement, park or parkway or within the sidewalk lines.
BOROUGH TREE — A tree located on land owned by the Borough or
which is located on a street, highway, public place, right-of-way, Borough
easement, park or parkway or within the sidewalk lines.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
DRIP LINE — A line connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a tree
projected vertically onto the ground.
EMERGENCY — An event or events, disease or condition which has
damaged or destroyed a tree or trees, such that the continued presence
of such damaged or destroyed tree or trees imminently threatens life or
property in proximity thereto.
LANDMARK TREE — Any tree designated and identified as such by the
Shade Tree Management Board pursuant to the standards set forth herein.
NONBOROUGH TREE — Any tree other than a Borough tree as heretofore
defined.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, agency or other entity.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A barrier constructed to protect the root system
or trunk of a tree from damage during construction or from equipment or
soil or material deposits.
ROOT SYSTEM — Tree roots within the drip line perimeter.
A. Date.
B. Time.
C. Workload of the Department of Public Works.
Such other factors as the Superintendent determines could affect the
planting, pruning or removal of trees and shrubs.
D.
Proper notification to affected property owners and/or utilities in the
case of planned removals or pruning of trees or shrubs that have an
impact on private property.
E.
§ 45-1 MADISON CODE § 45-1
44:122
SHRUB — A woody plant that does not have a center trunk and does not
grow over 10 feet high.
TREE — Any living, woody perennial plant having a diameter greater than
four inches measured at a point four feet above the ground.
§ 45-2. Establishment; membership.
A Shade Tree Management Board is hereby established, to be known as
the "Shade Tree Management Board of the Borough of Madison." The
Management Board shall consist of seven members, and may include not
more than two additional alternate members. The members and alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least
15 days prior to the date of the second regular public meeting of the Council
after a position becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a
nomination, then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by
the vote of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that
at least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have no
vote thereon except in case of a tie.
§ 45-3. Terms of office.
The first Shade Tree Management Board members shall be appointed within
60 days after the effective date of this chapter, and their terms of office
shall commence upon the day of their appointment and be for the respective
periods of one, two, three, four and five years. The initial terms of the
sixth and seventh members of the Management Board shall be such that
they expire simultaneously with the expiration of the initial terms of the
fourth and fifth members of the Management Board respectively. The term
of each appointee shall be designated in his appointment. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full five-year term, to
take effect on January 1 next succeeding such appointment. If the ordinance
provides for the appointment of two alternate members, the terms of each
alternate member shall be five years commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment; provided, however, that in the event that two alternate
members are appointed, the initial term of "Alternate No. 1" shall be five
years, and the initial term of "Alternate No. 2" shall be four years. An
alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member.
§ 45-4. Organization.
The Management Board shall organize within 30 days after the appointment
of its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year and
thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as Chairman and
the appointment of a secretary, who need not be a member. The salary of the
secretary, who may be compensated even if a member of the Management
Board, shall be fixed by the Madison Borough Council.
§ 45-1 SEAL § 45-5
44:123
§ 45-5. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice and
consent of the Council.
§ 45-6. Powers and duties.
§ 45-7. Maintenance and removal of Borough trees and shrubs.
A. The selection, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways and public places of
the Borough of Madison, except state highways and except county
highways, parks and parkways, shall be exercised by the Shade Tree
Management Board with advice to the Superintendent of Public Works.
The powers of the Shade Tree Management Board shall include:
(1) Exercise full and exclusive control over the selection, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery, including the
planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
(2) Control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far as may
be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
(3) Move or require the removal of any Borough trees or shrubs or part
thereof under the conditions set forth herein.
B. The duties of the Shade Tree Management Board shall include:
(1) Develop and maintain a community Forestry Management Plan in
compliance with the New Jersey Shade Tree and Community
Forestry Assistance Act.23
(2) Encourage arboriculture.
C. The Management Board shall develop any plans and specifications
needed to solicit bids for planting, care or removal of Borough shade
trees. Bids for such work, when required, shall be let by the Borough
according to the applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to delegate to the
Management Board the power to solicit bids directly for planting, care
or removal of Borough shade trees.
A. All Borough trees and Borough shrubs located on property owned by
the Borough or on a street, highway, right-of-way, park or parkway or
within the sidewalk lines of any street shall be maintained by the Shade
Tree Management Board.
B. No Borough trees, as heretofore defined, shall be removed except by
order of the Shade Tree Management Board, who shall advise the
Superintendent of Public Works unless otherwise provided in this
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 through 13:1L-17.9.
§ 45-5 MADISON CODE § 45-7
44:124
section. The Shade Tree Management Board may remove such Borough
tree if, but only if:
(1) Such tree is so diseased or so infested so as to be a danger to other
trees in the Borough or surrounding communities.
(2) Such tree is dead or dying and its presence would cause hardship
or endanger the public or an adjoining property owner.
(3) Such a tree or shrub is a hazard to the public safety because it
obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators or otherwise
interferes with traffic or pedestrian safety. In the event that the full
removal of the tree or shrub is not required, it may be pruned
pursuant to § 45-8.
(4) Such a tree, if the Shade Tree Management Board determines for
other reasons, is necessary to be removed.
(5) In the case of construction on Borough property as provided in
Subsection C below:
(a) The presence of such tree would cause hardship or endanger
the public or an adjoining property owner.
(b) Such tree is located in an area to be occupied by buildings,
driveways, recreation areas or other construction or within a
distance of 15 feet around the perimeter of such construction,
depending on tree species and conditions to be determined by
the Shade Tree Management Board.
(c) Such tree is located in an area to have a cut or fill of land
deemed injurious or dangerous to such tree. The determination
of the Shade Tree Management Board in this respect shall
depend on the species of trees and degree of injury.
C. If the Borough Council directs the construction of any building,
driveway, recreation area or anything else upon the property owned by
the Borough, such construction shall be located to the extent
practicable so as to conserve a maximum number of trees consistent
with the appropriate and practical use and enjoyment of the land in
question. The Shade Tree Management Board shall be advised prior to
the start of such work and shall advise the Borough or other party
performing the work how the work can be accomplished, minimizing
the number of trees to be removed and the damage done to remaining
trees. To prevent damage to remaining trees, no material, machinery or
temporary soil deposits shall be placed within the drip line of any
existing tree, and proximity of said construction shall be established to
prevent damage to such tree during construction.
D. The electric utility of the Borough of Madison shall have the right to
remove trees, without the prior approval of the Management Board,
when an emergency as defined herein exists and when obtaining the
§ 45-7 SEAL § 45-7
44:125
§ 45-8. Permission required for certain actions.
prior approval of the Management Board is not practical. At all times,
the electric utility shall have the right to trim trees which reasonably
are required to be trimmed for the purpose of ensuring continuous
electric utility service or to avoid danger to the public or electric utility
personnel or equipment.
E. In the event that the governing body has reason to believe that the
removal of a Borough tree at the direction of the Shade Tree
Management Board, or otherwise, does not meet the criteria set forth in
this section or will be detrimental to the welfare of the Borough, the
Council may stay the removal of said tree pending a report on the
reasons for removal, which report shall be submitted promptly by the
Shade Tree Management Board. After consideration of the Shade Tree
Management Board's report and such other information as is pertinent
to the decision to remove the tree, the Council shall either approve or
disapprove the removal of the tree.
F. In the event that the governing body has reason to believe that the
Shade Tree Management Board's refusal to agree to a requested
removal of a Borough tree is inconsistent with the criteria of this
chapter or will be detrimental to the welfare of the Borough, the
Council may order the Shade Tree Management Board to submit a
report explaining its reason for refusing to remove the tree, which
report shall be promptly submitted by the Management Board. After
consideration of the Shade Tree Management Board's report and such
other information as is pertinent to the decision of whether or not to
remove the tree, the Council shall either approve the Shade Tree
Management Board's refusal to remove the tree or order the removal of
the tree, which the Shade Tree Management Board shall promptly do.
A. It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts with respect to
Borough trees without the prior written consent of the Shade Tree
Management Board:
(1) Cut, prune, break, injure, alter or remove any tree; or cut, unduly
disturb or interfere in any way with any root of a tree or trees,
except as provided in § 45-7.
(2) Fasten any object, rope, wire, sign, insulator or other device to a
tree or trees or to any guard about such a tree or trees in any public
street or park.
(3) Install, remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect
trees.
(4) Close or obstruct any open spaces provided about the base of a tree
or trees to permit the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots
of such tree or trees.
§ 45-7 MADISON CODE § 45-8
44:126
(5) Cut any tree roots within 10 feet of any trunk or any roots four
inches in diameter.
(6) String or bury wires or lines through a public park.
B. The Shade Tree Management Board shall grant such written
permission if the activity for which such permission is requested is in
the public interest and is not likely to injure any Borough tree. The
Shade Tree Management Board will notify the Superintendent of Public
Works if written permission is granted for any of the above so that the
terms of the consent are followed.
C. Any person or persons who cause damage to any Borough tree or
Borough trees by machines, autos, etc., shall be held liable for damages
to said tree or trees. Damages shall be corrected or repaired and the
liable person or persons billed for the damages.
D. Any and every person having or maintaining any electric, telephone,
telegraph or other wires or lines running through a public street or
park shall securely fasten and maintain such wires and lines in such a
manner as will safeguard Borough trees against any damage therefrom
and shall make periodic adjustments whenever necessary to prevent
damage to Borough trees and Borough shrubs.
E. When necessary to prune or remove any Borough tree or Borough trees
along a public street, any person having any wires or lines running
through or along said public street shall temporarily remove such wires
or lines within 24 hours after the serving upon the owner of said wires
or lines, or his agent, of a written notice from the Superintendent of
Public Works.
F. Any person except the Madison electric utility having line clearance
operations (tree trimming) done for them by any other person or
persons shall first obtain the written approval of the Shade Tree
Management Board.
G. No person shall move or cause to be moved any building or large object
along any street without having first obtained a valid permit from the
Borough Engineer, which, if the Borough Engineer deems necessary,
may require the mover to furnish a bond or cash deposit in an amount
sufficient to cover any damage to or destruction of Borough trees on
such street or streets as a result of such moving operations.
H. No person shall operate, place or maintain, within the dripline of any
Borough tree, any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks,
cement, earth, soil or other substance which may harmfully affect such
Borough trees by unduly compressing the earth or otherwise impeding
or preventing the access of water or air to the roots of such tree or
excavate around to remove earth or soil from or cause any water to flow
upon the roots of any tree. The Borough Engineer may waive, in whole
or in part, such provisions, but only to the extent absolutely necessary
§ 45-8 SEAL § 45-8
44:127
§ 45-9. Non-Borough trees.
The Management Board shall not exercise any of the powers granted to
it herein over care and planting of trees or shrubbery located on private
property. In the following circumstances, the Management Board shall
notify the owner of the tree of the existence of the danger or disease and
report to the Council the need for action with respect to non-Borough trees,
and the Council may direct such action as is necessary to protect the public
safety and welfare:
§ 45-10. Advisory services.
to alleviate undue hardship in the appropriate use and enjoyment of
property. [Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
I. The Shade Tree Management Board shall have the primary jurisdiction
and responsibility to identify any violations hereunder and to refer
those locations, in writing, to the Borough Zoning Officer for
enforcement action pursuant to § 45-15, Violations and penalties.
[Added 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 42-2018]
A. Where any non-Borough trees, whose drip line is partly within the area
of any property owned by the Borough or within the area of any street,
highway, public place, right-of-way, park or parkway or within the
sidewalk lines of any street, endanger the public safety, interfere with
public travel or traffic on sidewalks, streets, highways or the right-ofway
or interfere with the lighting of sidewalks, streets, highways or the
right-of-way.
B. Where any tree is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the Borough.
A. The Management Board will provide assistance to any Borough resident
on the planting, treatment and care of non-Borough trees, including but
not limited to:
(1) Advice on the species of trees most appropriate for the owner's
location and purpose.
(2) Advice on minimizing or eliminating adverse impact on existing
trees due to proposed construction.
(3) Advice on whether tree removal is necessary and how best to effect
removal.
B. Advisory work with Planning Board.
(1) One copy of all plans for major and minor subdivisions and site
plans submitted to the Madison Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment shall be forwarded by the Planning Board/Board of
Adjustment Secretary at the same time such plans are distributed
to Planning Board/ Board of Adjustment members to the Chairman
§ 45-8 MADISON CODE § 45-10
44:128
§ 45-11. Landmark trees.
of the Management Board for his or her review. The Shade Tree
Management Board, in appropriate cases, shall submit to the
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment and the owner written
recommendations with respect to the following:
(a) Minimizing removal of trees located on the property.
(b) Appropriate species of trees that could be used to replace trees
that must be removed because of construction and appropriate
locations for the trees.
(c) Minimizing damage that may occur during construction to
trees that will not be removed.
(d) The number of shade trees, their species and variety, if any, to
be placed within the Borough right-of-way at the property
owner's expense.
(2) All such recommendations shall be submitted to the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment on or before the date the matter is
scheduled to be heard unless a shorter or longer period is directed
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. Failure of the Shade
Tree Management Board to approve its recommendations to the
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment within the required time shall
be deemed a waiver of its right to submit comment.
(3) Whenever the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment incorporates
in its approval of plans the recommendation of the Shade Tree
Management Board with respect to planting of trees on Borough
property, it shall require each tree so planted to be nursery-grown
stock, two inches to three inches in diameter, characteristic of its
species, balled and burlapped and planted in accordance with
American Nursery Association specifications. Each tree shall bear a
two-year guaranty by the permit holder and shall be guaranteed
further by a two-year maintenance bond or cash bond. If any tree so
guaranteed must be replaced, a new two-year guaranty and
maintenance or cash bond shall apply to the replacement. Upon
acceptance, such trees shall become Borough trees. The
Management Board's recommendations shall be advisory only.
A. The Shade Tree Management Board shall have, as one of its duties, the
location, selection and identification of any trees, which qualify as
"landmark trees." A tree may qualify as a landmark tree if it meets one
or more of the following criteria:
(1) The tree species is rare.
(2) The tree is more than 100 years of age.
(3) The tree has been connected with a significant historical event.
§ 45-10 SEAL § 45-11
44:129
§ 45-12. Annual appropriation.
§ 45-13. Public improvements affecting trees.
The laying of any sidewalk along any street within the Borough or the
opening, constructing, curbing or paving of any such street or any similar
act undertaken by the Borough or requiring the consent of the Borough,
(4) The tree is of an outstanding trunk diameter or drip line diameter
for a tree of its species.
(5) The quality of the tree foliage is outstanding for a tree of its
species.
(6) The location, shade value, fragrance, erosion control, aesthetic
features or scenic enhancement of such tree is of especial
importance to the Borough.
B. All trees designated as "landmark trees" by the Shade Tree
Management Board shall be shown on an official Borough Map with
appropriate code marks signifying each tree's designation, number,
species, age, size and other distinguishing characteristics for ready
reference and periodic monitoring.
C. If the owner or owners of the property on which a landmark tree is
located consent thereto; the Shade Tree Management Board shall
identify such tree as a landmark tree by the placement of a suitable
marker thereon.
D. If and when any landmark tree is removed, the Shade Tree
Management Board shall arrange for the necessary changes to be made
to the official landmark tree inventory records and the Borough Map.
A. During the month of October in each year, the Shade Tree Management
Board, with consultation of Superintendent of Public Works, shall
certify to the Mayor of the Borough the estimated sum necessary for the
proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal year, which shall
include the sums estimated to be expended for the following items,
namely:
(1) Expenses of the Management Board members in discharging
official duties, including expenses incident to attendance at
professional meetings.
(2) Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
(3) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
(4) Purchase of professional services.
B. The governing body of this Borough shall annually appropriate such
sums as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
§ 45-11 MADISON CODE § 45-13
44:130
if done by a party other than the Borough, shall be done to the extent
practicable so as to conserve a maximum number of trees consistent with
the appropriate and practical construction of the public improvement. The
Shade Tree Management Board shall advise the Superintendent of Public
Works prior to the start of such work and the Superintendent shall advise
the Borough or other party performing the work how the work can be
accomplished without injury to any trees, and he shall monitor such project
for the protection of any tree, consistent with the conditions set forth in
§ 45-7C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or impede the
construction of any public improvement.
§ 45-14. Notification of Management Board of trees and shrubs
needing attention.
It is hereby declared to be the duty of all persons having knowledge thereof
to immediately notify the Shade Tree Management Board or the
Superintendent of Public Works of the Borough of Madison of any tree or
shrub in or upon any street, highway, road, park or other property of or
under the jurisdiction of the Borough of Madison which has suffered any
accident or injury, is in need of attention or care or has become dangerous
to the public or to the adjacent property. This provision shall be considered
as directive only and for the public good, and no penalty shall be imposed
for the failure to comply with this provision.
§ 45-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable, upon conviction thereof, to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment in the county jail for
a period not to exceed 90 days, or community service not to exceed 90
days or a combination of fine, imprisonment and/or community service in
the discretion of the judge, for each violation hereof. Each 24 hours of
continuous violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be considered a
separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
§ 45-16. Application for and issuance of permits.
A. Applications for a permit, where required under this chapter, shall be
made directly to the Borough Engineer pursuant to § 45-8G and H, with
a copy to the Shade Tree Management Board, which application shall
be filed with the office of the Borough Engineer and shall contain the
name of the applicant, location of the property or street affected and, in
addition thereto, the purpose for which the application is being made.
B. Within seven business days after the submission of an application for a
permit, the Borough Engineer, shall review the site and the application
and either grant or deny said permit or extend for an additional seven
business days the period for review, by the end of which he shall grant
§ 45-13 SEAL § 45-16
44:131
§ 45-17. Minutes of Shade Tree Management Board.
The minutes of the Shade Tree Management Board's regular meetings shall
be presented to the Borough Clerk as soon as possible.
§ 45-18. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this code, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are here declared to be severable.
Chapter 47
UTILITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Utilities Authority — See Ch. 48.
§ 47-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
UTILITIES or UTILITY — The Borough of Madison's water and electric
utilities.
or deny said permit. Failure of the Borough Engineer to act within the
aforesaid time shall be deemed approval of the application.
C. Fees. There shall be no fee charged for the issuance of a permit by the
Borough Engineer.
D. Appeal. Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the
Engineer to the Borough Council by filing with the Borough Clerk of the
Borough of Madison a letter requesting such appeal within 14 days
from the decision of the Borough Engineer. The Council may solicit the
advice of the Shade Tree Management Board, Environmental
Commission or other experts and shall review the decision of the
Borough Engineer. The Council shall, by resolution duly adopted by it
within 45 days of the submission date of the appeal, either affirm the
denial of said permit or direct the Borough Engineer to issue such
permit with such conditions as may be appropriate.
§ 45-16 MADISON CODE § 47-2
44:132
§ 47-2. Powers limited.
The purpose of the Committee is to advise the Mayor and Council. As such,
the Committee does not have the power to enter into agreements, set utility
rates, or to transact any business on behalf of the Borough of Madison.
§ 47-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Committee shall be to:
§ 47-4. Membership and subcommittees.
A. Assist the Mayor, Council and Borough staff in studying the future of
the utilities and to provide Borough staff with technical assistance that
will enhance performance, system reliability, risk management and
utility best practices.
B. Assist the Mayor, Council and Borough staff in developing capital plans
for the utilities.
C. Advise the Mayor and Council on utility performance, system reliability,
risk management and utility efficiency.
D. Provide support to the Mayor and Council regarding metering systems,
self-generation, interconnection and other financial/technical issues.
E. Assist Borough staff on other utility-related issues as requested by the
Mayor and Council.
A. Number of members. Membership shall consist of nine regular
members, two public officials and four ex officio members.
B. Classification of members. The regular members, known collectively as
"members," and the ex officio members, shall consist of the following:
(1) Public officials: two regular members, specifically the Mayor and
the Council Liaison to Utilities.
(2) At-large members: nine regular members. These members shall be
any individual, resident or nonresident, with an identifiable interest
in the activities and mission of the Utilities Advisory Committee.
(3) Ex officio members: four members who shall be the Administrator
or Assistant Administrator, the Borough Engineer, the Electric
Utility Superintendent or designated representative, and either the
Department of Public Works Superintendent or designated
representative for the Madison Water Department.
C. The Mayor, Council Liaison and all regular members of the Commission,
excluding the ex officio members, shall exercise voting power.
D. Appointment. Appointments of all members shall be made by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. In the event that
the Mayor fails to make a nomination at least five days prior to the date
§ 47-2 SEAL § 47-4
44:133
§ 47-5. Committee Secretary.
The Mayor shall annually appoint the Committee Secretary, who shall be
an employee of the Borough in either the Land Use, Public Works or
Utility Department. The Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, reports
and findings. Copies of all minutes shall be delivered promptly to the
Borough Clerk.
§ 47-6. Facilitation of meetings.
The Mayor, Council Liaison or Administrator shall set the agenda and
facilitate the meetings.
§ 47-7. Meetings.
of the second regular public meeting of the Council after a position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by the vote
of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have
no vote thereon except in case of a tie.
E. Terms. Regular members shall serve for terms of three years. The term
of any public official shall not extend beyond the current term of public
office.
F. Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy, the Committee will recommend a
successor who may be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council to fill the unexpired term.
G. The Committee shall maintain two standing subcommittees: Water
Utility Operations Subcommittee and Electric Utility Operations
Subcommittee. The Committee may also create ad-hoc subcommittees
in order to study specific topics or initiatives.
A. Schedule. The Committee shall meet at least four times a year.
B. Notice. Notice of the annual schedule and of any special or additional
meetings shall be made to the public pursuant to the Open Public
Meetings Act. See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. Any cancellation or change of a
meeting shall be made by the Administrator. Committee members will
be notified at least 48 hours in advance.
C. Open meetings. The meetings of the Committee shall be open to the
public.
D. Quorum. A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
E. Absence from meetings. All regular members are expected to attend all
meetings. When a member has exceeded three unexcused absences in
§ 47-4 MADISON CODE § 47-7
44:134
§ 47-8. Remuneration.
The members of the Committee shall receive no salary or other
compensation for their services.
§ 47-9. Conflict of interest.
Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall acquire
any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any project which
the Committee is promoting or in any contract or proposed contract for
materials or services or in any lease, mortgage, sale or contract of any
nature whatsoever relating to any such project or to the Committee without
forthwith making written disclosure to the Committee of the nature and
extent of the interest. Such disclosure shall be entered, in writing, upon the
minutes of the Committee.
Chapter 48
UTILITIES AUTHORITY
§ 48-1. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council, as the governing body of the Borough of Madison, in
the County of Morris, does hereby find and determine that:
§ 48-2. Request for exclusion of borough from the Morris County
Municipal Utilities Authority.
The Borough of Madison, by its governing body and pursuant to and for all
of the purposes of Section 12 of said law,26 does hereby request the Morris
any twelve-month period, the Committee may request the resignation
and recommend a replacement to the Mayor for approval by the
Council.
A. The area within the territorial limits of the borough has not been
excluded from the district of the Morris County Municipal Utilities
Authority pursuant to proceedings had or taken in accordance with the
provisions of Section II of the Municipal Utilities Authority Law (L. 1957
c. 183).24
B. It is in the best interests of the borough and the inhabitants thereof that
the borough shall no longer be a part of the district of the Morris
County Municipal Utilities Authority, and the area within the territorial
limits of the borough shall be excluded from said district pursuant to
proceedings had or taken in accordance with provisions of Section 12 of
said law.25
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 40:14B-11.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 40:14B-12.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 40:14B-12.
§ 47-7 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 48-2
48:135
County Municipal Utilities Authority and the members or commissioners
thereof that the Borough of Madison, in the County of Morris, shall no
longer be a part of the district of the Morris County Municipal Utilities
Authority and that the area within territorial limits of the borough shall be
excluded from said district; and does hereby further request the Authority
to adopt a resolution, in substance approving and consenting to this
chapter, stating either that the Authority has no debts or obligations
outstanding or that all creditors or other obligees of the Authority have
consented to such chapter, and to cause a certified copy of such resolution
to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey.
§ 48-3. Filing of copies.
The Borough Clerk of the borough is hereby authorized and directed to
forward a certified copy of this chapter to the Morris County Municipal
Utilities Authority and to file a certified copy of this chapter in the office of
the said Secretary of State.
§ 48-4. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon the adoption of the resolution of the
Morris County Municipal Utilities Authority referred to above in § 48-2
of this chapter, but not sooner than its publication after final passage as
provided by law.
Chapter 49
VOLUNTEERS
§ 48-2 MADISON CODE § 48-4
48:136
ARTICLE I
Fingerprint Checks of Volunteers in Borough Sports and
Extracurricular Activities
[Adopted 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 14-2011]
§ 49-1. Annual fingerprint checks.
All adults who participate in Madison-sponsored sports and extracurricular
activities as a coach, manager or other volunteer, and who work with
or supervise children under their care in such sports and extracurricular
activities shall, on an annual basis, submit to state and federal fingerprint
checks for the purpose of obtaining a background check by the Madison
Police Department.
§ 49-2. Notification of results; determination of disqualification
from activities involving children.
Upon receipt of the results, the Madison Chief of Police shall notify the
organization of the results, and if the results show such person has a
record of conviction of any crime or disorderly conduct offense, then the
Chief of Police shall consult with the organization to determine whether the
individual will be disqualified from activities involving children, including
coaching, managing or volunteering for children's sports and
extracurricular activities, but such determination shall only be made after
the Chief of Police has obtained sufficient information from the individual in
question to make such recommendation.
§ 49-1 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 49-2
48:137
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 54
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18. Police Department — See Ch. 34.
§ 54-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards, procedures and
controls for all types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm
devices which are designed, directly or indirectly, to summon assistance
from the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal
department, agency or official.
§ 54-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is employed by any business, firm,
corporation or other commercial entity for the business of owning,
operating, maintaining, installing, leasing or selling alarm devices whose
duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing in or on any building,
place or premises any alarm device within the Borough of Madison.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business, firm, corporation or other commercial
entity which is in the business of owning or operating, maintaining,
installing, leasing or selling alarm device or devices or a system of alarm
devices, which business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity is
an owner, operator, provider of maintenance service, installer or lessor or
seller-of said devices or systems of devices.
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices producing a
visual or audio response, or both, and located within the Municipal Building
of the Borough.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device or mechanism used or designed for detection
and warning of unauthorized entry, fire, smoke, flood or other perils, but
specifically excluding local alarm mechanisms located entirely within
enclosed residential buildings.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or aggregate of alarm devices
installed on or within a single building or on or within more than one
building or other structure on a common site, at a specific location.
§ 49-2 MADISON CODE § 54-2
48:138
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility operated by a private firm that
owns or leases a system of emergency alarm devices, which facility is
manned at all times by trained operators employed to receive, record and
validate alarm signals and to relay information concerning such validated
signals to the police or fire dispatch room.
DIGITAL DIALED ALARM — Any alarm device which automatically or
electronically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police or Fire Department
of the Borough and then delivers a signal or reproduces a prerecorded
digital message to report a criminal act or other emergency. This
specifically excludes tape dialers.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm device connected directly by leased telephone
wires from a specific location to the radio dispatch room at the Municipal
Building.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal or message received by the Police or Fire
Department and to which either or both respond, which signal or message
was directly or indirectly brought about or produced by an alarm device
of any type, but which was not the result of criminal activity or other
emergency and which was not created by malfunction of the alarm console
within the Municipal Building.
HOLDUP ALARM — Any police alarm device actuated by a holdup, robbery
or theft at a specific location.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which, when actuated, produces an
audible signal beyond the boundaries of the premises or visible signal
designed to notify persons within audible or visible range of the signal that
a criminal act or other emergency is occurring or has occurred.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Madison or any department, agency or
officer duly authorized to act on behalf of the municipality.
PERMITTEE — Any private individual, partnership, corporation or firm
which holds a permit from the municipality to use an alarm device on
premises owned or leased by it.
§ 54-3. Permit requirements and conditions.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any individual,
partnership, corporation or firm to operate or maintain an alarm device,
as defined by this chapter, without a valid permit.
B. Any individual, partnership, corporation or firm which owns and
operates or maintains an alarm device or devices shall make application
to the Chief of Police for a permit therefor on forms supplied by the
Police Department. The application shall specify:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and user of
the alarm installation.
(2) The exact location of the alarm device or devices.
(3) The name and address of the installer of said device.
§ 54-2 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 54-3
48:139
(4) The specific type of alarm detecting device.
(5) The name and address of the individual or firm regularly servicing
said alarm device, if any.
(6) Provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures.
(7) A list of names and addresses of persons to be contacted in the
event of an alarm.
(8) other information relating to the alarm device reasonably required
by the Chief of Police.
(9) A certification of twenty-four-hour emergency service.
(10) Addresses of subscribers or persons authorized by subscribers to
respond.
C. Applications for all permits, existing and new alarm installations, must
be filed on or before June 1 succeeding the adoption of this chapter. All
alarm permits shall be accompanied by an annual fee payable to the
municipality in accordance with the schedule of fees hereinafter set
forth. [Amended 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013]
D. All permits shall expire May 31 of the following year. A renewal
application must be accompanied by an annual fee payable to the
municipality in accordance with the schedule of fees hereinafter set
forth. Any alarm renewal application/or renewal fee that is not filed or
paid prior to July 1 shall result in an additional late fee of $25 for each
month the renewal application and/or renewal fee is past due. The
renewal application, on forms supplied by the Police Department, shall
provide for any changes in information from that contained in the
original application or in the most recent renewal application.
[Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 39-2002; 6-24-2013 by Ord. No.
24-2013]
E. The Chief of Police is the designated official of the municipality to issue
and renew permits, to remove or suspend permits and to otherwise
enforce and apply the provisions of this chapter.
F. An application for a permit or permit renewal may be denied if the Chief
of Police disapproves of the equipment intended to be used or continued
by the applicant or the manner of use thereof or if the applicant has
violated any other provision of this chapter or is in default in the
payment of the annual fee.
G. All permits as may be granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the
express condition that:
(1) The permittee shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the
municipality and its authorized officials, agents and employees
from and against any and all damages, costs, expenses and
liabilities arising out of the acts or failure to act of the municipality,
§ 54-3 MADISON CODE § 54-3
48:140
§ 54-4. Fees.
the permittee, the alarm contractor or any one or more of them, or
arising out of any defects, deficiencies or inadequacies in any alarm
device or devices for which a permit has been granted or in any
installation, monitoring or maintenance thereof or by reason of any
malfunction or defect in the operation or maintenance of the alarm
console.
(2) The permittee shall comply with all other provisions of this
chapter.27
A. (Reserved)28
B. The permittee shall pay an annual alarm fee to the Borough of Madison
due on the first of June each year as follows: [Amended 6-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 24-2013]
(1) Application fee.
Type of Alarm System Annual Fee
Local alarm $40
Central alarm station $40
Other alarm system not specified $40
(2) This fee shall not be prorated and no portion of the fee paid is
refundable after the permit is issued regardless of termination,
revocation or suspension of permit.
C. (Reserved)29
D. (Reserved)30
E. There shall be no fees under this section due from municipal
governmental entities of the Borough of Madison, which entities
include the Madison Board of Education, the Madison Housing
Authority and the Madison Free Public Library. [Added 5-30-2001 by
Ord. No. 20-2001]
F. All applications for renewal of a permit must be filed with the Chief of
Police by June 1 of each year together with the renewal fees as specified
by resolution of the Borough Council. Any alarm renewal application
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, concerning permit applications by banking
institutions, added 12-9-202 by Ord. No. 29-2002 and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013.
28.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, concerning the annual fee for direct connection/
monitoring was repealed 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013.
29.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning a one-time fee for connection to the alarm
console, was repealed 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013.
30.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, concerning existing permittees, was repealed
6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013.
§ 54-3 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 54-4
48:141
§ 54-5. Limitation on responsibility of Borough.
The Borough of Madison and its various departments, agencies and officials
shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee or to any other person
or persons with respect to the adequacy, operation, installation, repair or
maintenance of the alarm console equipment and any allied or related
equipment or services and assumes no liability in connection therewith.
Upon issuance of a permit hereunder, the permit holder hereby agrees
to hold and save harmless the Borough of Madison and its departments,
agencies and officials from any liability or damages suffered as a result of
or arising out of improper or faulty installation, operation or maintenance
of any police or fire alarm system of the permittee or the improper or
faulty installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm console at the
Municipal Building. No action taken by the Borough or, the Borough Police
Department pursuant to the provisions of this section shall create any
liability upon the Borough or the Borough Police Department by reason of
any failure of any alarm system or local alarm any failure to respond to
any emergency or any act of omission or commission relating to any alarm
system or local alarm.
§ 54-6. Suspension and revocation of permit; fines; appeal.
and/or renewal fee that is not filed or paid prior to July 1 shall result
in an additional late fee of $25 for each month the renewal application
and/or renewal fee is past due. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
39-2002; amended 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 24-2013]
A. A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police,
either temporarily or permanently, upon 30 days' written notice to the
permittee, for any one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Failure or refusal of the permittee or his agent or employee to
immediately comply with a request by a member of the Police or
Fire Department to proceed to the location of the permittee's alarm
and render services as requested.
(2) Knowingly installing or maintaining an inferior or faulty alarm
system. Nine false alarms in any one twelve-month period shall be
prima facie evidence that such an alarm system is knowingly a
faulty device. A permittee shall repair or replace any alarm found to
be inferior or defective by the Fire or Police Chief within 14 days
after notice thereof.
(3) Failure or refusal of the permittee to pay the required initial
connection fee or annual fee where the alarm system of the
permittee is directly connected to the console.
(4) A breach of any of the terms or conditions of the permit or the
failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with all of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Police or Fire Chief as hereinafter
provided..
§ 54-4 MADISON CODE § 54-6
48:142
§ 54-7. General provisions and regulations.
(5) Abuse of the privilege of owning or operating an alarm system to
the detriment of the public.
B. Fines.
(1) The holder of any permit, except in the case of a permit issued for a
publicly owned building, shall be assessed a service fee for each
false alarm in excess of five in any twelve-month period. The Police
Chief may, in his discretion, waive any fines to a holder of a permit
that is a local municipal governmental entity, including the Madison
Board of Education, the Madison Housing Authority and the
Madison Free Public Library. However, no fine shall be waived for
an independent contractor to a municipal local governmental entity
for a violation of this chapter caused by such independent
contractor. The service fee shall be as follows: [Amended
5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 20-2001]
(a) Sixth false alarm: $50.
(b) Seventh false alarm: $75.
(c) Eighth and subsequent false alarms: $100 each.
(2) Said fees shall be paid to the Borough of Madison within 30 days of
service or written notice upon the permittee of assessment of the
fees. The written notice shall state the date and time of each false
alarm attributable to the permittee for the year in which the notice
is given.
(3) In addition to the service fees for false alarms, where investigation
by the Police Department shows that false alarms continue to result
due to the failure of the permittee to take corrective action to avoid
false alarms, or in the event that the permittee shall fail to remit
the required service fee, the permittee shall disconnect and
deactivate the alarm system within 10 days of receipt of written
notice from the Chief of Police to do so. The Chief of Police is
authorized to disconnect the system from the console. Each and
every day after the 10 days in which the permittee shall fail to
comply with the notice to disconnect shall constitute a separate
violation of this provision.
C. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Chief in denying a
permit or in the suspension or revocation of any permit provided for by
this chapter may appeal to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Madison by filing a written notice of appeal with the Borough Clerk
within 30 days of the alleged wrongful or improper act of the Police
Chief.
A. All alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
municipal and governmental laws, ordinances and requirements.
§ 54-6 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 54-7
48:143
B. Any permittee utilizing the services of any other alarm company
connected to the Borough console shall provide for a representative to
be on call at all times, and adequate service shall be provided within
eight hours of notification by the Police or Fire Department of any
malfunctioning or faulty equipment. All connections to the Borough
console shall be made by the contractor selected by the Borough to
maintain the Borough console at a fee to be paid by the permittee as set
forth in § 54-4.
C. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter; any person installing, maintaining or using unauthorized
equipment shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each
and every day said equipment is in use shall be considered a separate
violation.
D. A permittee shall respond to the source of a signal or transmission from
an alarm device as promptly as possible after the actuation of such
device and shall contact the Police or Fire Department dispatched to
the scene. The permittee shall relieve the police or firefighter in charge
whenever there is no apparent fire or criminal activity at the scene of
the alarm.
E. Any permittee shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of the
premises on which said alarm device is installed, at reasonable hours,
by the Police or Fire Chief or his designated representative. This
provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on the municipality to
make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from inspecting, testing
and maintaining his own alarm device(s).
F. If the location of the fire or police communications facilities should be
changed at any time, permittees or licensees under this chapter shall
not be permitted to charge the municipality with any resulting cost of
moving the alarm equipment.
G. All costs and recurring charges incurred in the installation and
maintenance of alarm systems shall be borne by the permittee except
where this chapter indicates that such costs shall be paid by the
licensee.
H. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any alarm device that
automatically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police Department or
Fire Department of the Borough of Madison and then reproduces any
prerecorded voice message to report a robbery, burglary, fire or other
emergency. This shall not affect any alarm device that has been
approved by the effective date of this provision, nor shall it have any
effect on equipment used by the Madison Police Department.
I. All local alarms, as defined in § 54-2, must be equipped with a device or
devices that limit the audible signal to a duration not to exceed 10
minutes. In any case where the alarm system and/or local alarm emits
sound for more than 10 minutes in violation of this section, or for
§ 54-7 MADISON CODE § 54-7
48:144
periodic intervals exceeding 10 minutes each repeatedly, or of any
provisions of this chapter, the operation or maintenance of the alarm
system shall be deemed to constitute the grant of permission by the
owners and occupants of the premises for law enforcement, first aid
or fire officials to enter the said premises and investigate and to
disconnect the alarm system. The owners and occupants, by operating
or maintaining the alarm system, agree to hold harmless and defend
the Borough or its law enforcement, first aid or fire officials, agents
and employees from any and all claims for such entry on the premises
and any liability and damages that may occur. The minimum fine for
violation of this section shall be $25 with a maximum of $500.
J. Any alarm produced by any alarm system shall clearly distinguish
between intrusion-related alarms and fire-related alarms. No alarm
system shall be permitted that produces the same or similar signal from
both calls, nor shall any alarm system be permitted that produces the
same or similar signal for more than one location.
K. All alarm agents and alarm businesses as defined in § 54-2 that are
presently conducting or intend to conduct business within the Borough
of Madison shall register with the Police Department prior to
conducting business. The Police Department shall provide a
registration form, which shall require the alarm agent or business
agent to provide the following information:
(1) Firm or company name, address and telephone number.
(2) Owner's name, address and telephone number.
(3) Description of the services to be provided.
L. Alarm agents; penalties.
(1) All alarm agents must notify the Madison Police Department by
telephone prior to performing any tests or repairs on any alarm
system within the Borough other than fire alarm systems. All alarm
agents must notify the Madison Fire Department by telephone prior
to performing any tests or repairs on any fire alarm system within
the Borough.
(2) Penalties.
(a) Any alarm agent who violates this subsection shall be subject
to the following penalties for each alarm system site or
location:
[1] A first offense per calendar year: $25.
[2] Second offense per calendar year: $50.
[3] All subsequent offenses per calendar year: $100.
§ 54-7 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 54-7
48:145
§ 54-8. Local alarm.
§ 54-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter, for which there is no specific penalty set
forth in this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or
(b) Violations of more than four per year from any one alarm
system site or location shall be grounds for the Borough, in its
discretion, to terminate the permit for connection to the
Borough console.
(c) Any assessment of penalty under this subsection shall preclude
a penalty to the permittee for a false alarm for such incident.
(3) Payment of penalties under this subsection. Said penalties shall be
paid to the Borough of Madison within 30 days of service or written
notice upon the alarm agent of assessment of the penalty. The
written notice shall state the date and time attributable to the
alarm agent's violation of this section for the year in which the
notice is given.
A. Notification of Use. Every individual, partnership, corporation or firm
who installs, maintains or uses a local alarm with an audible warning
signal within the Borough shall notify the Chief of Police of such local
alarm by completing and filing with the Chief of Police a form to be
furnished by the Chief of Police providing for the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and/or
occupant of the property served by the local alarm.
(2) The location of the property served.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of any company
maintaining the local alarm.
(4) The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a
faulty local alarm at any time when no one is present on the
property served by the local alarm.
(5) Such other reasonable information as requested by the Police
Department in regard to such device.
B. Proper maintenance. Every person who installs, maintains or uses a
local alarm to serve an improved property within the Borough shall
promptly correct or disconnect any faulty device upon notice from the
Police Department. Nine false alarms within any twelve-month period
shall constitute prima facie evidence that a local alarm is faulty. Fines
and penalties for violation of this section shall be as set forth in
§ 54-6B(1) of this chapter.
§ 54-7 MADISON CODE § 54-9
48:146
more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed
$2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is
imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than $100.
Chapter 56
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 209.
§ 54-9 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 54-9
48:147

ARTICLE I
Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses
[Adopted 10-11-1937 by Ord. No. 421 (Art. 3, Ch. A, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-1. Limit on number of licenses. [Amended 7-8-1938 by Ord. No.
426; 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 51-86]
The number of plenary retail distribution licenses to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail in the Borough of Madison is hereby limited to 11.
§ 56-1 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-1
48:149

ARTICLE II
Plenary Retail Consumption Licenses
[Adopted 12-27-1945 by Ord. No. 469 (Art. 3, Ch. B, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-2. Limit on number of licenses.
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Madison is hereby limited to seven.
§ 56-2 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-2
48:151

ARTICLE III
Limited Retail Distribution Licenses
[Adopted 6-12-1950 by Ord. No. 535 (Art. 3, Ch. C, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-3. Licenses prohibited.
No limited retail distribution license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be
issued in the Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
§ 56-3 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-3
48:153

ARTICLE IV
License Fees
[Adopted 12-13-1967 by Ord. No. 879 (Art. 3, Ch. D, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-4. Fees established. [Amended 5-9-1988 by Ord. No. 23-88;
8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 30-89; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 22-2010]
Annual fees for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages in the Borough of
Madison, beginning July 1, 2010, shall be as follows:
A. Plenary retail consumption license:
Period Fee
July 1, 2010, through June 30, 2011, and
thereafter
$2,386
B. Plenary retail distribution license:
Period Fee
July 1, 2010, through June 30, 2011, and
thereafter
$1,798
C. Club license: $180.
§ 56-4 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-4
48:155

ARTICLE V
Hours of Sale
[Adopted 3-18-1965 by Ord. No. 795 (Art. 3, Ch. F, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-5. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSEE — Includes any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation,
club or other organization licensed to sell, serve, distribute, deliver or
otherwise deal in alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Madison, in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey and the rules and
regulations of the State of New Jersey, Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
RESTAURANT — Includes an establishment regularly and principally used
for the purpose of providing meals to the public, having an adequate kitchen
and dining room designed, equipped and maintained for the preparing,
cooking and serving of meals for its customers and in which no other
business, except such as is incidental to such establishment, is conducted,
and in which dining room meals are served only to persons seated at tables
by waiters or waitresses, other than a person who tends the bar.
§ 56-6. Hours and days of sales. [Amended 6-10-1968 by Ord. No.
11-68; 6-14-1971 by Ord. No. 14-71; 12-11-1972 by Ord. No. 18-72;
7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 20-76; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 48-89;
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 4-91]
A. Sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and sale of
wine and malt beverages for off-premises consumption. No licensee or
any agent, servant or employee of any licensee shall sell, serve,
distribute or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service,
distribution or delivery of any alcoholic beverage for consumption on
any licensed premises or any wine or malt beverage for consumption off
the licensed premises:
(1) On Sunday between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., except as otherwise
provided herein. [Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 42-2019]
(2) On New Year's Day, when the same falls on a Sunday, between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and the following 12:00 noon.
(3) On New Year's Day, when the same falls on a day other than
Sunday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(4) On Monday, other than New Year's Day, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(5) On Tuesday through Friday, inclusive, other than New Year's Day,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 56-5 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-6
48:157
§ 56-7. Interpretation of hours.
The hours herein referred to shall be prevailing time.
§ 56-8. Interpretation and applicability of provisions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the sale, service, distribution,
delivery or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any time or times
prohibited by any law of the State of New Jersey or any rule or regulation
of the State of New Jersey, Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Any
proceedings instituted under the provisions of this chapter are exclusive
and not in lieu of any disciplinary proceedings for revocation or suspension
of license instituted under the provisions of the rules and regulations of the
State of New Jersey, Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, or for the
violation of any law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 56-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, partnership, association of persons, club, corporation or
other organization, including any agent, servant or employee thereof, found
guilty of violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge:
a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the
event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no
less than $100.
(6) On Saturday, other than New Year's Day, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. Sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. No licensee
or any agent, servant or employee of any licensee shall sell, serve,
distribute or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service,
distribution or delivery of any alcoholic beverage (with the exception of
wine and malt beverages), at retail, in its original container, for
consumption off the licensed premises or allow, permit or suffer the
removal of any alcoholic beverage (with the exception of wine and malt
beverages), in its original container, from retail licensed premises
before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
§ 56-6 MADISON CODE § 56-9
48:158
ARTICLE VI
Off-Premises Consumption
[Adopted 11-11-1974 by Ord. No. 25-74 (Art. 3, Ch. G, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 56-10. Consumption in certain locations prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Madison, consume
any alcoholic beverage or have in his or her possession any open alcoholic
beverage container with unconsumed alcoholic beverage therein:
§ 56-11. Consumption or possession by persons under legal age.
[Added 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 26-8331]
A. In a parking area adjacent to any licensed premises for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
B. Within or on a public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public
parking place, public playground, public recreation area or public
school building or public school grounds. The word "public," as used
herein, shall be limited in meaning to that property which is either
owned in fee or by easement or other right held by the Borough of
Madison or other governmental entity.
C. While in or about any public place or any parking area open to the
public, whether said parking area is owned or otherwise controlled by
any governmental or private entity. The word "public place" as used
herein shall not apply to the social room for municipal firemen within
the Municipal Building, to social events duly authorized by the Mayor
and Council, including Borough-sponsored functions or social functions
of newly elected or reelected officials within the Fire Department social
room, to the annual picnics held by the Police and Fire Departments or
to the functions approved by the Library Board of Trustees to be held at
the Madison Library. Exceptions to this prohibition may be granted by
the Borough Council upon application by any recognized organization
stating the date and location of the proposed use, the number of
persons expected to be present, the hours of said use, the type of
alcoholic beverages to be consumed and the parking accommodations
to be provided for the event. The Borough Council may reject any
application which it considers inimical to the public health, welfare or
interest. [Amended 4-14-1975 by Ord. No. 7-75; 8-11-1975 by Ord.
No. 23-75; 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 46-84; 4-28-1997 by Ord. No.
10-97]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any place of public
accommodation or recreation, including but not limited to restaurants,
bowling alleys, laundromats, arcades, etc., or his agents or servants or
employees, knowingly to permit, suffer or allow a person under the
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 56-11 and 56-12 as §§ 56-13 and
56-14, respectively.
§ 56-10 UTILITIES AUTHORITY § 56-11
48:159
§ 56-12. (Reserved)32
§ 56-13. Interpretation and applicability of provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in § 56-10, that section shall in
no way interfere with the authority of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control and the Borough Council to issue temporary licenses for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to the laws of the State of
New Jersey or ordinances of the Borough of Madison.
§ 56-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to
exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to consume any alcoholic
beverage or have in his or her possession any open alcoholic beverage
container with unconsumed alcoholic beverages therein on the
premises.
B. No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
knowingly consume any alcoholic beverages or knowingly have in his or
her possession any alcoholic beverage container with unconsumed
beverage therein on the premises of any place of public accommodation
or recreation.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, distribute, transfer,
give or by any other means supply any alcoholic beverage to any person
under the legal age to purchase such beverages in any place of public
accommodation or recreation.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 56-12, Intoxicated or drunk and disorderly persons, added
9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 26-83, which ordinance also renumbered former §§ 56-11 and 56-12
as §§ 56-13 and 56-14, respectively, was repealed 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 63-2008.
§ 56-11 MADISON CODE § 56-14
48:160
Chapter 58
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 70.
Model car raceways — See Ch. 125.
Pool and billiard halls — See Ch. 142.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
Vending machines — See Ch. 232.
§ 58-1. License required.
No person shall display, place, maintain or keep for operation any
amusement machine, as defined in § 195-73N, on or within any public place
where permitted under the provisions of Chapter 195, entitled "Zoning,"
without having first obtained a license for the premises and without having
first paid the required fee for such machines.
§ 58-2. Application for license.
An application, sworn to by the applicants, to license a premises for use
and operation of amusement machines, either as a primary or accessory
use, shall be filed annually with the Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the
Clerk. The forms shall require the following information and such additional
information as deemed necessary:
§ 58-3. Investigation of applicant.
A. Name of applicant and address.
B. Address of the premises where the machines are to be maintained,
operated or used and the operating area by square footage as set forth
in § 195-73N(1) and (2).
C. Number of machines to be installed on the premises.
D. Whether the applicant, or any partner, officer, director or stockholder
owning more than 10% of the outstanding shares thereof, has been
convicted of:
(1) A crime.
(2) A violation of any ordinance involving gambling.
(3) A violation of this chapter.
E. Consent of owner or lessee of said premises, if other than the applicant.
A. When the aforesaid original application or renewal is properly filled out
and signed by the applicant, the duplicate thereof will be referred to the
§ 56-14 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 58-3
58:161
§ 58-4. Issuance of license.
§ 58-5. Fees.
Chief of Police, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of
the applicant's business responsibility and moral character as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.
B. The Chief of Police shall issue a report of such investigation to the
Borough Council, which report shall address but shall not be limited to
the following areas:
(1) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Previously fraudulent acts or conduct.
(3) False statements contained in the application.
(4) Evidence of bad character.
(5) Prior performance under this ordinance.
A. The Borough Council shall review the annual application and
investigation report of each applicant. The Council shall approve or
deny the application, taking into consideration the factors set forth in
§ 58-3B.
B. Any applicant who is denied a license may, in writing, request a hearing
on the same before the Borough Council.
C. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises
prior to the opening of the premises for business.
A. The annual license fee for each and every premises on which
amusement machines are located shall be $500.
B. In addition to Subsection A above, there shall be an annual fee of $50
per machine.
C. The premises' license may not be transferred within the calendar year
for which it is issued. Individual machines may be exchanged during the
year without payment of additional machine fees, provided that the
total number of machines listed on the license is not exceeded.
D. The annual license fee and the per-machine fee required in this section
shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year. Said
license shall be issued for the calendar year commencing January 1 and
expiring December 31. Said license shall be renewed annually on or
before December 31 by the filing of a written application accompanied
by the annual license fee and per-machine fee for each renewal. The
license fee and per-machine fee for any license issued in any calendar
year after July 1 shall be 1/2 of the annual and per-machine fees.
§ 58-3 MADISON CODE § 58-6
58:162
§ 58-6. Hours of operation.
§ 58-7. Supervision required.
In all premises wherein the operation of amusement machines is the
primary use, the licensee shall employ one or more adult supervisors, one
of whom shall be present at all times when the premises are in operation,
and whose sole responsibility shall be the control and supervision of the
games and the patrons of the premises. A current list of said supervisors
shall be filed with the Borough Police Department. In all premises wherein
the operation of amusement games is an accessory use, the licensee or a
designated employee may serve as supervisor in addition to other duties.
§ 58-8. Play by persons under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent, servants or employees
knowingly to permit, suffer or allow a person under the legal age for
purchasing alcoholic beverages to play or operate any of the amusement
machines licensed under this chapter, when said machines are upon any
premises where the primary use is the sale of alcoholic beverages. No
person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall use
or operate any amusement machine described in this chapter, when said
machine is placed upon premises where the primary use is the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 58-9. Gambling and prizes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agents, servants or employees
to knowingly permit, suffer or allow an amusement machine licensed
hereunder to be used for gambling purposes, nor shall they offer, permit,
suffer or allow any prize, free play or return of money on any such machine.
No person shall use any such machine for the purpose of gambling of any
kind.
§ 58-10. Suspension and revocation of license.
A. All amusement machines licensed in primary establishments under this
chapter shall be operated only during the following hours:
(1) Monday through Thursday: 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 P.M.
(2) Friday: 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(3) Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(4) Sunday: 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m.
B. No premises wherein the operation of amusement machines is the
primary or accessory use shall permit children under 18 years of age to
operate any amusement machines prior to 3:00 p.m. on Monday
through Friday when the schools of Madison are in session.
§ 58-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 58-10
58:163
§ 58-11. Enforcement.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for the licensing of premises and
the collection of machine fees. This chapter shall otherwise be enforced by
the Madison Police Department.
§ 58-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
§ 58-13. Severability.
Each section of this chapter is an independent section and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
Chapter 58A
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General regulations pertaining to operation
of amusement devices — See Ch. 58.
A. Any license or permit may be suspended or revoked for good cause,
including but not limited to a misrepresentation of the information
supplied in the application for such license or the conviction of a crime
or a violation of any ordinance, statute or government regulation
involving gambling or a violation of this chapter.
B. In such cases, the licensee shall be entitled to a notification of the
charges against him, the right to a hearing before the governing body
and the right to be represented by counsel and to call witnesses at such
hearing. The evidence against the license holder shall be presented by
the police officer or officers making the charges and, in the discretion of
the Chief of Police or the governing body, the charges against the
license holder shall be presented by the Municipal Prosecutor.
Witnesses may be called by either the prosecution or the license holder
and the right of cross-examination shall be afforded to all parties. The
Council shall render its decision within 30 days after completion of the
hearing.
§ 58-10 MADISON CODE § 58-13
58A:164
§ 58A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH CLERK — Includes the Deputy Clerk or Business Administrator.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, association, trust or
community chest, fund or foundation which is exempt from sales and use
taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9(b)(1).
§ 58A-2. Permit required.
No nonprofit organization shall display, place, maintain or keep for
operation any amusement machine, as defined in § 195-73N, in any public
place in connection with fund-raising activities without first having obtained
a permit for the operation of the machines.
§ 58A-3. Application for permit.
An application, sworn to by the applicant, for a permit to operate
amusement machines as a part of a fund-raising event or activity shall be
filed at least 30 days prior to the event or activity with the Borough Clerk.
The applicant shall set forth the following information and such additional
information as is reasonably related to the issuance of a permit and is
requested by the Clerk:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Address of the premises where the machines are to be operated, the
gross floor area of the premises and the area to be devoted to the
operation of such machines by square footage as set forth in
§ 195-73N(2)(a).
C. Number of machines to be operated in the space described in B.
D. Proof that the applicant qualifies as an exempt organization pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9(b)(1).
E. Name, address and phone number of person in charge of the event or
activity.
F. Whether the applicant has previously applied for a permit and the dates
of such application.
G. Consent of the owner or lessee of the premises to be used if other than
applicant.
H. The name and date of the event and the number of days for which a
permit is sought.
§ 58-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 58A-3
58A:165
§ 58A-4. Standards for issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued only if the proposed operation of the machines will
be in accordance with the following limitations:
§ 58A-5. Issuance or denial of permit; display of permit.
§ 58A-6. Compliance with other provisions.
The operation of the machines shall be subject to the limitations of § 58-6,
Hours of operation, § 58-7, Supervision required, except that a list of
supervisors need not be filed with the Borough Police Department, and
§ 58-9, Gambling and prizes prohibited.
§ 58A-7. Duration of permit.
I. The items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with
the games to be used at the event or activity, the name(s) and addresses
of the person(s) to whom each item is to be paid and the purpose of
each payment.
A. There shall be 60 square feet of operating area for each machine in
accordance with the requirements of § 195-73N(2)(a).
B. No applicant shall have more than six machines at any single event or
activity and the total number of such machines at any single event or
activity shall not exceed 24.
C. The non-profit organization shall receive all profits derived from the
operation of said machines.
A. The Borough Clerk shall issue a permit to any applicant who provides
the information required in § 58A-3 of this chapter and whose proposed
use meets the standards set forth in § 58A-4 of this chapter. Said permit
or notification of denial of a permit shall be issued within two weeks of
the filing of an application.
B. Any applicant who is denied a permit may, in writing, request a hearing
on that denial before the Council; the Council shall afford the applicant
a hearing within a reasonable time and render its decision to affirm the
denial of the permit or direct issuance of a permit.
C. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the area
devoted to the operation of the machines.
A. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall authorize operation of the
machines for a specified period not to exceed five days.
B. No nonprofit organization shall be eligible for more than two permits
per year.
§ 58A-3 MADISON CODE § 58A-8
58A:166
§ 58A-8. Revocation of permit.
Any permit may be revoked for good cause, including but not limited
to a misrepresentation of the information supplied in the application for
the permit, failure to comply with the limitations listed in § 58A-6 of this
chapter, or other violation of this chapter or violation of any ordinance,
statute or government regulation involving gambling.
§ 58A-9. Enforcement.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for issuing permits. This chapter
shall be otherwise enforced by the Borough Police Department.
§ 58A-10. Violations and penalties.
Any nonprofit organization violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 58-12.
§ 58A-11. Severability.
Each section of this chapter is an independent section. A determination that
any section or part hereof is unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
Chapter 59
ANIMALS AND RABIES CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 22.
Animals — See Ch. 203.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
§ 59-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat, for the purpose of this chapter.
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Any facility operated by a nonprofit humane
agency, municipal agency, or any other authorized agent for the Borough for
the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of
this chapter or state law.[Added 5-29-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal animal control officer
or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement officer of the
Borough or his designee.
§ 58A-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 59-1
58A:167
ANIMAL OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — An individual or group of individuals
who, with or without salary or compensation, house and care for homeless
animals in the home of an individual or in other facilities, with the intent
of placing the animals in responsible, more permanent homes as soon as
possible.[Added 5-29-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION FACILITY — The home or other facility
in which an animal rescue organization houses and cares for an
animal.[Added 5-29-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
BITE — To seize with the teeth or jaws so as to enter, nip or grip the person
or thing seized; also to cut, wound, pierce or impress deeply the person or
thing seized.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison in the County of Morris.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female, or
neutered.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed, at once, without delay.
KENNEL or KENNEL OPERATOR — Any establishment or person who owns
or operates such an establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop or pet store.[Amended 5-29-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
NEUTERED — To render permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal shall include
every person having a right of property (or custody) in such animal and
every person who has such animal in his/her keeping, or who harbors or
maintains an animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by that person. A person shall be deemed to have
an animal in his keeping or under his control whenever the ownership or
custody of such animal is an unemancipated infant or other member of his/
her household.
OWNER'S PREMISES — Includes the building or plot of land on which said
building stands in which the owner of an animal has a place of abode or
place of business in the Borough.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association of
persons, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP or PET STORE — Any place of business which is not part of a
kennel, wherein animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the
purpose of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship
§ 59-1 MADISON CODE § 59-1
58A:168
rather than for business or research purposes.[Amended 5-29-2019 by
Ord. No. 20-2019]
PET SHOP OPERATOR or PET STORE OPERATOR — A person who owns or
operates a pet shop or pet store, or both.[Added 5-29-2019 by Ord. No.
20-2019]
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of animals seized either
under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
SHELTER — Any establishment where animals are received, housed, and
distributed.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal which at any time, without provocation,
has attacked or shall attack a human being or another domestic pet, either
while upon or off the premises occupied by the person owning, keeping,
harboring or having the custody or possession of the attacking animal.
"Vicious animal" shall also mean and include any animal which has caused
any human being engaged in a lawful activity or occupancy to be fearful for
his own safety by chasing or snapping at such person without provocation.
§ 59-2. Animal Control Officer; enforcement.
A. The position of Animal Control Officer is hereby established under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Health.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall be a certified municipal animal control
officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement
officer of the Borough or his designee.
C. The Council of the Borough of Madison is hereby empowered to appoint
an Animal Control Officer or may designate some other authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. The Council shall also have the power to enter into a contract with one
(1) or more persons, either individual or corporate, to exercise the
duties of the Animal Control Officer in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
E. All police officers of the Borough of Madison, regular and special, and
the Animal Control Officer are hereby given full power and authority
and are charged with the duty to enforce this chapter.
F. The duties of the Animal Control Officer shall be the enforcement of the
measures and provision for the control of the animal contained in Title
§ 59-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 59-2
58A:169
§ 59-3. License required.
No person shall keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or harboring within
the limits of the Borough of Madison any dog or cat of licensing age without
first obtaining a license therefor to be issued by the Health Department
of the Borough, upon application by the owner or some person on behalf
of the owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep
or harbor any dog or cat in the Borough except in compliance with the
provisions for the control of animals contained in Title 4, Chapter 19,
Sections 15.1 through 15.29 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and any
amendments thereof.
§ 59-4. Obtaining license and registration tag.
§ 59-5. Fees; renewal; expiration date of license; "Seeing Eye,"
"service" and "hearing ear" dogs; acceptance of license from
another municipality.
4, Chapter 19, Sections 15.1 through 15.29, of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey and any amendments thereof and the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any dog of licensing age within the Borough of Madison
shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Health Department a license and official registration
tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon
each dog a collar or other device with the license number securely
fastened thereto or displayed thereon.
B. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any cat of licensing age within the Borough of Madison
shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Health Department a license and official registration
tag for each such cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon
such cat a collar or other device with the license number securely
fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying license
number shall include, but not be limited to, breakaway or elastic
collars. [Amended 8-22-2004 by Ord. No. 44-2005]
A. The person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay a fee for
each dog or cat as provided for in § 59-15.
B. The person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay the fee
fixed or authorized. The fee for renewal of a license and registration tag
shall be the same as for the original, and said license, registration tag
and renewal thereof shall expire on January 31 of the following year.
C. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog or cat owned in Madison Borough, and such license
§ 59-2 MADISON CODE § 59-5
58A:170
§ 59-6. Rabies vaccination required.
and registration tag issued by any municipality in the State of New
Jersey shall be accepted as evidence of compliance with this section.
D. Any dog or cat owner or person harboring a dog or cat found to have an
unlicensed dog or cat by the Borough Animal Control Officer or any
other municipal official on or after February 1 shall be required to pay
an additional delinquent fee, as established by § 59-15, plus the
required license fee as provided in this chapter for the animal license,
together with any other fines due to summons issued that may be
imposed on him as provided in this chapter for failure to obtain an
animal license by January 31. The aforementioned fee shall not apply to
animals which have been acquired by the owner after February 1,
provided said license is obtained within 10 days after acquisition and
sufficient proof is presented to establish the date the dog or cat is
acquired. [Amended 8-22-2004 by Ord. No. 44-2005]
E. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing-
Eye dogs," dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear dogs" shall be licensed and registered
as other animals hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee thereof.
F. The owner or keeper of any newly acquired animal of licensing age shall
make application for such license and registration tag for such animal
within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
G. Any owner or keeper of a licensed dog or cat whose current licensed tag
has been lost may obtain a replacement tag by applying to the Health
Department immediately. A charge, as established in § 59-15, is made
for replacement of this tag.
H. No person shall make use of or have in his possession or under his
control a stolen, counterfeit or forged dog or cat license receipt, animal
license registration tag or rabies vaccination certification or other
forms issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
I. Any person applying for a dog or cat license for a neutered dog or cat
must present to the licensing agent a veterinarian's certification that
said animal of reproductive age has had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization.
A. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in § 59-6D.
B. Any person applying for a dog or cat license and registration tag must
provide evidence to the Health Department that said animal has been
§ 59-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 59-6
58A:171
§ 59-7. Impounding or taking animals into custody; grounds;
notice; destruction; disposal; report if rabid.
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department
of Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided for by
§ 59-6D. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do
the same. Such vaccine shall be repeated at intervals as provided by
regulations of the New Jersey State Department of Health.
C. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each dog or
cat vaccinated on a form recommended by the State of New Jersey.
D. Any dog or cat may be exempt from the requirement of such vaccination
for a specified period of time by the Health Department upon
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an
infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such animal shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person appointed for the purpose by the Borough of Madison shall
take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, and thereafter destroy or dispose of as provided in this
section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents has
reason to believe is a stray dog;
(2) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog or cat without a current registration
tag on its collar;
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog;
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected of being rabid;
(5) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured
or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animal is known, any person authorized by the Borough shall forthwith
serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
owner or person keeping or harboring said animal, if known, a notice in
writing stating that the animal has been seized and will be liable to be
§ 59-6 MADISON CODE § 59-7
58A:172
§ 59-8. Seizure of animals.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any animal or animals which he may lawfully seize and impound
when such officer is in the immediate pursuit of such animal or animals,
except upon the premises of the owner of the animal if said owner is present
and forbids the same.
§ 59-9. Rabies control.
§ 59-10. Defiling or damaging property; requirements for disposal;
exemptions.
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any animal so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure when no notice has been given as
above set forth, and if the person keeping or harboring said animal has
not claimed said animal and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance, and if the animal is unlicensed at the
time of seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said
animal has not produced a license and registration tag for said animal,
any person authorized by the Borough may cause the animal to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent
with the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 22, Section 19, of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, and any amendments thereof.
A. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is affected by rabies or suspected
of being affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or
suspected to be affected by rabies, the owner or person in charge of the
animal or any person having knowledge thereof shall forthwith notify
the Health Department of the place where the animal is located.
B. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal bites a person, the owner or
person in charge of the animal, the person bitten or parent or guardian
or the physician having professional attendance upon any person bitten
shall notify the Health Department of the name, age, sex, color, and
precise location of the person so bitten pursuant to the Revised Statutes
of the State of New Jersey, Title 26, Chapter 4, Sections 78 through 95.
A. Defiling or damaging property. No person shall suffer, permit or allow
any animal to injure or damage or soil or defile any lawn or shrubbery
§ 59-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 59-10
58A:173
§ 59-11. Vicious or potentially dangerous dog.
Chapter 307 of the Laws of the State of New Jersey 1989 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-35 et seq.) and the amendments and supplements thereto are
hereby adopted, enacted and incorporated herein.
§ 59-12. Howling or barking dogs.
No person shall keep within the Borough any dog causing a nuisance and
disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood in which it shall be kept
by chronically howling, barking and/or making and causing other sounds or
noises.
§ 59-13. Operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
or flowers or grounds, or any property, either public or private, of any
person other than that of its owner. No person shall suffer, permit, or
allow any dog to be upon any private or public property other than the
premises of the owner without the consent of the owner or tenant of the
private or public property or to permit the dog to run unleashed off the
premises of the owner.
B. Requirements for disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person. Pet waste shall not be deposited into any catch basin or street
drain, but must be properly disposed of in a sanitary manner.
C. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or pound shall apply to the Health Department for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment and shall
pay an annual fee as established in § 59-15. The application shall
describe the premises where the establishment is located or is
proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be maintained.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall expire
on the last day of January of each year and shall be subject to revocation
by the Borough for failure to comply with the rules and regulations
governing kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds pursuant to the New
Jersey Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 23, Subchapter 3, and this
chapter. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for animals owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment; such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises.
§ 59-10 MADISON CODE § 59-13
58A:174
§ 59-13.1. Prohibited acts; exceptions. [Added 5-29-2019 by Ord.
No. 20-2019]
§ 59-14. Canvass of dogs and cats.
The Health Officer or any person appointed for the purpose which person
may include the Chief of Police, who annually causes a canvass to be
made of all dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
Borough, and shall report biannually each year to the licensing official and
to the Department of Health, and to the New Jersey State Department of
Health the results thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs or cats,
the number of unlicensed dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored by each said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
animal.
§ 59-15. Fees.
The following fees shall be paid to the Borough of Madison for compliance
with this chapter:
Type of Fee Fee
Dog and cat licenses and registration tags, annual
[Amended 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 44-2005;
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 41-200733]
Neutered $15.00
C. No animal kept in kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off the premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other method of safe
control.
D. Any person who keeps or operates a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or
pound shall be subject to such inspection or inspections as may be
required to comply with rules and regulations governing the sanitary
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds pursuant to the
New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 23A, Subchapter 1
and this chapter.
A. No pet shop, pet shop operator, pet store, or pet store operator may
sell, offer for sale, barter, auction, breed or otherwise dispose of dogs
and cats in the Borough of Madison. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit pet shops, pet shop operators, pet stores, or pet store
operators from collaborating with animal care facilities, animal rescue
organizations, pounds, or shelters to offer space for such entities to
showcase adoptable dogs and cats.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an animal care facility, animal
rescue organization, pound, or shelter from keeping, displaying, selling
or otherwise transferring any dog, cat, or both, that has been seized,
rescued, or donated.
§ 59-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, NONPROFIT USE OF § 59-15
58A:175
Type of Fee Fee
All others $18.00
Late charge for dog or cat license and registration tag,
effective February 1 [Amended 8-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 44-2005; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 41-200734]
$10.00
Replacement dog or cat license and registration tag $1.00
Animal redemption fee $25.00
Pound maintenance, per day $4.00
Animal adoption, per animal $15.00
Disposal fee
Per dog $80.00
Per cat $20.00
Kennel license, annual
10 or fewer $10.00
Greater than 10 dogs $25.00
Pet shop, annual $10.00
Animal trap deposit $35.00
Potentially dangerous dog license and registration tag,
annually
$250.00
§ 59-16. Interfering with persons performing duties.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 59-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge. The continuation
of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense,
except:
A. Dogs running at large wherein the first offense shall be $50, the second
offense shall be $75, and the third and subsequent offense shall be
$100.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased fees begin with the January
2008 licensing term.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the increased fees begin with the January
2008 licensing term.
§ 59-15 MADISON CODE § 59-17
58A:176
Chapter 70
BOWLING ALLEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 58.
Model car raceways — See Ch. 125.
Pool and billiard halls — See Ch. 142.
§ 70-1. License required. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70]
No person or persons shall open or operate any bowling alley within the
limits of the Borough of Madison unless such person or persons shall have
first obtained a license for such purpose.
§ 70-2. License term and application information. [Amended
5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70; 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
The Borough Council may, in its discretion, grant a license to any person or
persons to operate a public bowling alley within the Borough for a term to
expire on December 31 of the year of issuance of the license. An application
to operate a bowling alley shall be signed by the applicant or applicants and
shall designate the premises where the alley is proposed to be operated.
§ 70-3. Granting of license; second application after rejection;
signing. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70]
No license shall be authorized without the concurrence of four members
of the Council, and whenever the Council shall reject or refuse to grant
the application of any person for a license, it shall not be lawful for any
such person whose application shall have been rejected to apply again for
said license at any time within one year thereafter. All licenses granted
hereunder shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk.
§ 70-4. License fee; payment; term. [Added 12-11-1961 by Ord. No.
736]
B. Fines for unlicensed dogs and/or cats shall be $15 per animal plus $15
court cost per animal, payable through the Violations Bureau.
C. The maximum fine for § 59-13.1 shall be not more than $2,000. [Added
5-29-2019 by Ord. No. 20-2019]
A. Every person who shall open, operate or maintain a bowling alley or
bowling saloon in the Borough of Madison, New Jersey, for which a
license is required shall annually pay to the Borough of Madison a
license fee, as follows:
(1) For a single alley: $10.
§ 59-17 BOWLING ALLEYS § 70-4
70:177
§ 70-5. Hours and days of operation. [Amended 5-8-1939 by Ord.
No. 433; 12-11-1939 by Ord. No. 437; 3-14-1966 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-14-1966 by Ord. No. 819;
amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
Chapter 73
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and trash on private property — See
Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Decayed or overhanging trees along streets
and sidewalks — See Ch. 166, Art. I.
Removal of weeds from sidewalks — See Ch.
166, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
(2) For each additional alley: $5.
B. Such license fee shall be paid to the Borough of Madison at the time
that application is made for the license.
C. Unless surrendered or revoked prior to expiration, every such license
shall remain in effect until midnight on the 31st of December in the year
for which such license is granted.
A. No person, persons, firm or corporation who may be granted a license
to operate a bowling alley or bowling saloon in the Borough of Madison
shall operate the same or permit the same to remain open to the public:
(1) Between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any Sunday and 9:00 a.m.
on the following Monday.
(2) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. next following on any
weekday other than Monday.
(3) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. next following on
any Sunday.
B. The hours designated in this section shall be prevailing time.
§ 70-4 MADISON CODE § 70-6
70:178
ARTICLE I
Brush and Hedges Near Roadways
[Adopted 10-8-1951 by Ord. No. 559 (Art. 9 of the 1970 Revised
Ordinances)]
§ 73-1. Owner or tenant to cut brush near roads.
Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.R.S. 40:48-2.26, every owner or
tenant of lands lying within the limits of the Borough of Madison shall keep
all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway
and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a height of
not more than 2 1/2 feet, where it shall be necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public safety, within 10 days after notice to cut the same
shall have been given to the owner or tenant of lands affected.35
§ 73-2. Service of notice to cut brush.
Such notice shall be in writing, addressed to such owner or tenant, and shall
be signed by the Borough Clerk or the Borough Engineer of the Borough
of Madison. The placing of such notice in the post office in an envelope
directed to such tenant or owner at the address indicated upon the records
of the Water and Light Department, with proper postage affixed thereto,
shall constitute sufficient notice for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 73-3. Cutting of brush by Borough upon default of owner or
tenant.
In the event that such owner or tenant shall refuse or neglect to cut such
brush, hedges and other plant life in the manner and within the time
provided above, the same may be cut by the Borough Engineer or by such
persons as he may direct to do it.
§ 73-4. Borough costs as lien.
In all cases where brush, hedges and other plant life are cut from any lands
within the limitations of the preceding sections of this article by or under
the direction of the Borough Engineer, he shall certify the cost thereof to
the Borough Council, who shall examine the certificate and if found correct
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands, or in
the event that such cost is excessive, cause the reasonable cost thereof to be
charged against said lands. The amounts so charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands; the same shall bear interest
at the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes, as authorized by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.27.
35.Editor's Note: For similar provisions pertaining to visibility requirements along streets
and intersections, see Ch. 195, Zoning, § 195-12.
§ 73-1 BOWLING ALLEYS § 73-5
70:179
§ 73-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
In addition to any other provision or penalties herein set forth, any person,
firm, corporation or other organization thereof, who shall refuse or neglect
to cut any brush, hedges or other plant life in the manner and within the
time provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more
of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed
$2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is
imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than $100.
§ 73-5 MADISON CODE § 73-5
70:180
ARTICLE II
Poisonous Weeds
[Adopted 5-11-1942 by Ord. No. 456 (Art. 95 of the 1970 Revised
Ordinances)]
§ 73-6. Unlawful growths.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners, tenant or tenants, of any lot
or tract of land or any part thereof in the Borough of Madison to permit or
maintain on any such lot or tract of land any growth of ragweed, poison ivy,
poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous weeds injurious to health.
§ 73-7. Duty of owner or tenant to remove. [Amended 5-11-1970 by
Ord. No. 9-70]
It shall be the duty of such owner or owners, tenant or tenants, of any such
lot or tract of land or any part thereof in the Borough of Madison to cut
and remove, or cause to be cut and removed, all such ragweed, poison ivy,
poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous weeds injurious to health within
10 days after receiving notice to do so from the Borough of Madison.
§ 73-8. Failure to comply; removal of growths by Borough;
collection of costs. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70]
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the
Borough of Madison shall serve written notice on the owner or owners,
tenant or tenants, of any such lot or tract of land, requiring them to comply
with the provisions of this article. Should the person or persons upon whom
such notice is served fail, neglect or refuse to cut and remove such ragweed,
poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous weeds within 10
days after the service of such notice, the Borough of Madison shall cause
such ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous
weeds to be cut and removed. The actual cost of such cutting and removal
shall be certified by the Borough Engineer to the Collector of Taxes, shall
thereupon become and be a lien on the property on which such ragweed,
poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous weeds were located,
shall be added to and form part of the taxes next to be assessed on said lot
or tract of land and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and
in the same manner as taxes.
§ 73-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any owner or owners, tenant or tenants, who shall neglect to cut and
remove such ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious or
poisonous weeds injurious to health as directed by this article, or who shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein
provided for, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or
who shall resist or obstruct the Borough of Madison or its employees in the
cutting and removal of ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious
§ 73-6 BOWLING ALLEYS § 73-9
70:181
or poisonous weeds, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or
more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed
$2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is
imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than $100. Each
day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 73-10. Imposition and collection of fine not to bar collection of
costs.
The imposition and collection of the fine or penalty imposed by the
provisions of this article shall not constitute any bar to the right of the
Borough of Madison to collect the costs as certified for the removal of said
weeds in the manner herein authorized.
§ 73-9 MADISON CODE § 73-10
70:182
Chapter 75
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
77.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 79.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 93.
Elevator safety — See Ch. 96.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
Issuance of building permits — See Ch. 131,
§ 131-6.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
Water — See Ch. 190.
Land development — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
§ 75-1. Applicable Building Code. [Amended 12-13-1976 by Ord. No.
38-76]
Pursuant to Chapter 217 of the Public Laws of 1975, the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs has been authorized to adopt a statewide
building code which will take precedence over any local building code
adopted by the municipalities within the State of New Jersey. Therefore,
upon the adoption of such a statewide building code, to be known as the
"State Uniform Construction Code," that code and all amendments thereto
shall be applicable to building construction in the Borough of Madison.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter and in the code adopted hereby, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — Equivalent to and synonymous with the terms
"Building Inspector," as such position has heretofore existed in the Borough
of Madison, and "Construction Official," as set forth in Chapter 217 of the
Public Laws of 1975. Whenever the term "Building Inspector" is mentioned
or referred to in any ordinance, official form or record of the Borough of
Madison, it shall be understood that the same is intended to mean the
"Building Official" as designated in this chapter.[Amended 12-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 38-76]
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Borough Attorney of the Borough of
Madison.
EARTHWORK — Any commercial or industrial operation or action
connected with excavations and embankments of each in preparing
foundations of buildings or the preparation of a site for construction or
physical alteration. Earthwork includes and is not limited to excavation and
piling of earth in an engineering operation and/or rock removal and physical
alteration of terrain.[Added 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 36-2012]
§ 73-10 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-2
70:183
GOVERNING BODY, MUNICIPAL BODY OR APPOINTIVE AUTHORITY —
The Council of the Borough of Madison, unless otherwise indicated.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Madison.
PERSON — Includes any individual or individuals, partnership, group or
association of individuals, or any corporation of any state.
§ 75-3. Office of Building Official established; appointment; Deputy
Building Official.
§ 75-4. Qualifications of Building Official. [Amended 12-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 38-76]
§ 75-5. Duties of Building Official; inspections, records, reports and
rules.
A. The Office of Building Official is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the "Building Official."
B. The Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
concurrence of the Council of the Borough of Madison.
C. The Mayor, with the concurrence of the Council, shall appoint a Deputy
Building Official who will act during the absence or disability of the
Building Official and who shall have all the powers of the Building
Official when so acting.
A. Pursuant to the standards established by Chapter 217 of the Public
Laws of 1975 of the State of New Jersey, persons with the following
qualifications shall be eligible for appointment to the position of
Building Official:
(1) A licensed engineer or registered architect with at least three
years' experience in construction, design or supervision.
(2) An architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree from an
accredited institution of higher education with five years'
experience in construction, design or supervision.
(3) A journeyman in a trade or a contractor with 10 years' experience
in construction, design or supervision.
(4) The Building Official of the Borough appointed prior to the effective
date of Chapter 217 of the Laws of 1975 (February 4, 1976), or
within one year thereafter, and further provided that said person
attains certification from the Department of Community Affairs to
serve in said position within four years of the date of the
appointment.
B. Persons meeting the qualifications set forth in Subsection A(1), (2) or
(3) must also be certified by the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 75-2 MADISON CODE § 75-5
70:184
A. Duties. The Building Official shall devote such of his time as is required
by the Council to the duties of his office.
(1) He shall receive applications required by this code, issue permits
and furnish the prescribed certificates.
(2) He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and
shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law
are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely.
(3) He shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code.
(4) He shall, when requested by the proper authority or when the
public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with
matters referred to in the Building Code and render written reports
on the same.
(5) To enforce compliance with this code, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction
or to require adequate exit facilities to buildings and structures, he
shall and is empowered to issue such notices, orders or summonses
as may be necessary.
B. Inspections.
(1) Inspections required under the provisions of the Building Code
shall be made by the Building Official or his duly appointed Deputy.
The Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of
recognized inspection services after investigation of their
qualifications and reliability, but in so doing he shall not be relieved
of his responsibility as Building Official. No certificate called for by
any provision of the Building Code shall be issued on such reports
unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible
officer of such service.
(2) The following inspections shall be requested by the builder and
work shall not proceed beyond each stage until said stage has been
inspected, approved and further procedure authorized by the
Building Official.
(a) Excavation and preparation for all footings.
(b) Foundation wall, prior to backfilling.
(c) After installation of rough plumbing, piping and air ducts, but
prior to installation of insulation; after Fire Underwriters'
electrical inspection approval sticker has been attached. Work
must not proceed beyond this stage until a lath inspection
sticker has been attached to the building.
(d) After final electrical, plumbing and Fire Department
inspections, but prior to occupancy.
§ 75-5 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-5
70:185
§ 75-6. Liability of Building Official.
The Building Official or any employee charged with the enforcement of
this code, acting in good faith and without malice for the Borough in the
discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties.
Any suit brought against the Building Official or employee because of such
act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of
this code shall be defended by the legal department of the Borough until
final termination of the proceedings.
§ 75-7. Cooperation of other officials.
The Building Official may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
(e) After completion of construction in accordance with projects
requiring site plan approval by the Planning Board, but prior to
occupancy.36 [Added 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 20-74]
C. Records.
(1) The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, permits issued, certificates issued, inspections made,
reports rendered, notices or orders issued and each violation found
by him or called to his attention. He shall retain on file copies of
required plans and all documents relating to building work so long
as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be
in existence.
(2) All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reason at the stated office hours, but shall not be
removed from the office of the Building Official without his written
consent.
D. Reports. The Building Official shall make written reports of his
activities to the Mayor and Council once each month, or oftener if
requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued,
orders promulgated and violations detected, including status of each
such case.
E. Rules and regulations. The Building Official may from time to time
promulgate such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for
the proper administration of this chapter, subject to the approval,
amendment, modification or repeal thereof by the Council. A copy of
such rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk, available for inspection during business hours.
36.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to site plan approvals, see Ch. 195, Zoning, Art.
XXII.
§ 75-5 MADISON CODE § 75-7
70:186
other officials of the municipality. He shall also fully cooperate with all other
municipal officials if and when requested by them.
§ 75-8. Right of entry by Building Official. [Amended 12-13-1976 by
Ord. No. 38-76]
§ 75-9. Fire limits established. [Amended 2-8-1971 by Ord. No.
4-71; 6-11-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
A. The owner of any premises upon which a building or structure is being
constructed shall be deemed to have consented to the inspection by the
Building Official or his agents of the entire premises and of any and all
construction being performed on it until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued. An inspector, or team of inspectors, on presentation of
proper credentials, shall have the right to enter and inspect such
premises and any and all construction thereon for purposes of ensuring
compliance with the provisions of the applicable construction permit,
the Building Code and other applicable laws and regulations. All
inspections pursuant to this chapter shall be between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on business days or when construction is actually
being undertaken; provided, however, that inspections may be
conducted at other times if the Building Official has reasonable cause to
believe that an immediate danger to life, limb or property exists, or if
permission is given by an owner or his agent, architect, engineer or
builder. No person, except the owner or his agent, shall accompany an
inspector or team of inspectors on any inspection pursuant to this
chapter unless his presence is necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter or the code, or unless consent is given by an owner or his
agent, architect, engineer or builder.
B. If the construction of a structure or building is being undertaken
contrary to the provisions of a construction permit, the Building Code
or other applicable laws or ordinances, the Building Official may issue a
stop-construction order, in writing, which shall state the conditions
upon which construction may be resumed and which shall be given to
the owner or the holder of the construction permit or to the person
performing the construction. If the person doing the construction is not
known or cannot be located with reasonable effort, the notice may be
delivered to the person in charge of, or apparently in charge of, the
construction. No person shall continue, or cause or allow to be
continued, the construction of a building or structure in violation of a
stop-construction order, except with the permission of the Building
Official to abate a dangerous condition or remove a violation, or except
by court order. If an order to stop construction is not obeyed, the
Building Official may apply to the appropriate court, as otherwise
established by law, for an order enjoining the violation of the stopconstruction
order. The remedy for violation of such an order provided
in this subsection shall be in addition to and not in limitation of any
other remedies provided by law or ordinance.
§ 75-7 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-9
70:187
§ 75-10. Permits and fees; waiver of payment. [Amended 2-14-1977
by Ord. No. 2-77]
§ 75-11. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, liability incurred or any cause of action accrued or existing under
any act or ordinance repealed hereby; nor shall any right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
A. The fire limits of the Borough of Madison, in the County of Morris, are
hereby established as being comprised within those portions of the
Borough laid out and designated as R-5 Residential Multiple-Family,
GBA General Business Area, P Professional Offices, CBD-1 Central
Business District No. 1, CBD-2 Central Business District No. 2, C Multi-
Use Commercial, IP Industrial Single-Family Attached Residential, U
Resident College and University, and PCD-O Planned Commercial
Development - Office Zone pursuant to an ordinance of the Borough
entitled the "Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Madison," as
heretofore or hereafter amended and supplemented,37 except that the
construction requirements of the fire limits shall not apply to singlefamily
attached residential units in the IP Industrial Park Zone.
[Amended 10-9-1979 by Ord. No. 24-79]
B. All buildings and structures and all additions to existing buildings and
structures erected within the boundaries of the fire limits shall be
fireproof (Type 1), protected noncombustible (Types 2A and 2B), heavy
timber (Type 3A) or ordinary protected (Type 3B) construction.
A. No permit as required by said code shall be issued until the fee
prescribed in this chapter shall have been paid; nor shall an
amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due
to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure shall
have been paid.
B. A permit is required to construct a permanent swimming pool.38 The fee
shall be on the same basis as fixed herein for other structures. A
bonding and grounding certificate shall be required for public pools
which either are newly constructed or have undergone modifications
that impact the bonding or grounding system. [Amended 4-24-2006
by Ord. No. 7-2006]
C. No county, municipality or any agency or instrumentality thereof shall
be required to pay the fees provided for hereinabove in order to secure
a permit for the erection or alteration of any public building or part
thereof. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 39-86]
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Swimming Pools.
§ 75-9 MADISON CODE § 75-12
70:188
§ 75-12. Construction Board of Appeals. [Added 12-13-1976 by Ord.
No. 38-7639; 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1-85]
Whenever the Building Official or other official refuses to grant an
application or refuses to act upon an application for a construction permit
or makes any other decision pursuant or related to this chapter or the
applicable building code, an owner, as defined in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-121, or his
authorized agent, may appeal in writing to the Morris County Construction
Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
§ 75-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-13-1976 by Ord. No.
38-7640]
A. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who: [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000]
(1) Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition or a
construction permit;
(2) Fails to comply with any order issued by the Building Official or his
agents; or
(3) Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the Building Official shall be subject to a penalty of not
more than $2,000. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
B. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
this chapter or who unreasonably interferes with such an inspection
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000. [Amended
8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
C. With respect to Subsection A(2) of this section, a person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stopconstruction
order validly issued by the Building Official and for each
week that he fails to comply with any other order validly issued by the
Building Official. With respect to Subsection A(3) of this section, a
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each false or misleading
written statement or omission of required information or statement
made in any application or request for approval to an enforcing agency
or the Department. With respect to Subsection A(1) of this section, a
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of the
conditions of a construction permit.
D. The penalties pursuant to this section may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties has been conferred upon
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 75-12, Amendments to code, as
amended.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 75-13, Extent of adoption.
§ 75-12 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-13
70:189
§ 75-14. Fees. [Added 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2-77; amended
7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 377; 8-8-1977 by Ord. No. 31-77; 5-8-1978 by
Ord. No. 17-78; 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80; 5-10-1982 by Ord. No.
8-82; 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 45-86; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 2-90;
5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 12-97]
judges of the municipality's court, in addition to the courts specified by
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-2.41
A. No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the fee
prescribed in this section shall have been paid. All applicable fees for a
construction permit shall be the sum of fees listed in Subsection A(1)
through (18) hereof and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
(1) The building subcode fee shall be:
(a) For all new construction one and two family, $0.03 per cubic
foot of building or structure volume, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $150; and all others, $0.03 per cubic foot
of building or structure volume, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $150. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs: $20 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of the work, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $46. [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 8-2009]
(c) For additions: one- and two-family, $0.03 per cubic foot of
building or structure volume for the added portion, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $150, and all other, $0.03 per
cubic foot of building or structure volume for the added
portion, provided that the minimum fee shall be $150.
[Amended 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 25-2013]
(d) For combinations of renovations and additions: the sum of the
fees are computed separately as renovations and additions.
(e) For roofing and siding (one- or two-family), a flat fee of $46.
Commercial and all others, $20 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
[Amended 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 25-2013]
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be 100% of state fees, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $46. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 37-2003; 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 65-2007]
(3) The electrical subcode fee shall be 100% of state fees, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $46. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 37-2003; 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 49-2006; 3-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 8-2009]
41.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 through 2A:58-9 was repealed by L. 1999, c. 274, § 4. See
now N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 75-13 MADISON CODE § 75-14
70:190
(4) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount charged for the
construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are
reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the
amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit.
(5) The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall
be $50 for accessory structures, $100 for one- and two-family
dwellings, and $200 for all other structures. [Amended
7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(6) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $20
per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated cost for moving, for new
foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, plus a demolition permit with a flat fee of $50. [Amended
7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(7) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be a flat fee of $46 per
sign. [Amended 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99]
(8) Certificates of occupancy: [Amended 7-12-1999 by Ord. No.
21-99; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $50 for one- and
two-family residence use only.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $100 for
commercial and all uses not mentioned in Subsection A(8)(a)
above.
(c) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $100.
(d) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be $150.
(e) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $100 for
first certificate of occupancy and $50 for all others.
(9) 42The fee for a mechanical permit shall be $50. [Added 8-11-2003
by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(10) The fee for a variation shall be $100 each.
(11) The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be state
regulated.
(12) The fee for inspection of an elevator shall be state regulated.
(13) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be state regulated.
(14) The fee for lead abatement shall be state regulated.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), regarding the fee for a zoning permit for building
construction, was repealed 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99.
§ 75-14 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-14
70:191
(15)Waiver of fees for construction to promote renovation of existing
vacant commercial structures. [Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
1-201643]
(a) No person or entity shall be charged a Borough construction
fee or enforcing agency fee for any construction, alteration and
improvement designed and undertaken solely to renovate a
previously occupied and currently vacant commercial
structure or currently vacant unit within an existing
commercial structure for the purpose of obtaining a certificate
of occupancy. The waiver of fees shall not include Uniform
Construction Code surcharge fees as applicable.
(b) For purposes of this Subsection A(15), the structure or the unit
within a structure which is being renovated shall be required
to be vacant for six months, but not more than 12 months, prior
to the permit application in order to be eligible for the waiver
of fees. The applicant shall be required to establish that the
structure or the unit within the structure has been vacant. A
waiver shall be limited to a renovation or alteration of unit of
less than 5,000 square feet. For purposes of calculating square
footage, a vacant unit of 5,000 square feet or less shall qualify
for the waiver of fees if the unit existing prior to and after
renovations is equal to or less than 5,000 square feet,
regardless of the total size of the structure. Units which exceed
5,000 square feet prior to or after renovation shall not qualify
for the waiver of fees.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection A(15), no waiver of fees shall
be provided to any commercial structure or unit within a
structure if the commercial property has outstanding property
taxes or outstanding property maintenance violations.
(16) The fire protection subcode permit fees are as follows: [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
(a) Sprinkler heads shall be $91 for one to 20 heads; $168 for 21 to
100 heads; $321 for 101 to 200 heads; $831 for 201 to 400
heads; $1,150 for 401 to 1,000 heads; and $1,469 for more
than 1,000 heads.
(b) Alarm devices shall be $50 for one to 12. For each additional 25
devices, the fee shall be $17.
(c) Each standpipe shall be $321.
(d) An independent preengineered system shall be $129.
(e) A smoke control system shall be $92.
43.Editor's Note: With the adoption of this subsection, former Subsection A(15) through
A(18) were renumbered as Subsection A(16) through A(19), respectively.
§ 75-14 MADISON CODE § 75-14
70:192
§ 75-15. Construction and demolition hours. [Added 11-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 36-2012]
(f) An underground storage tank shall be $46.
(g) Gas- or oil-fired appliances not connected to the plumbing
system shall be $65.
(h) A kitchen exhaust system shall be $46.
(i) A fire pump shall be $150.
(17) The plan review and inspection fee for mechanical systems shall be
10% of the amount of the building subcode fee.
(18) The fee for reinstatement of a lapsed permit shall be one-half the
fee charged originally, but not less than $25 per each subcode.
(19) All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Borough Council once every two years, a
report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses
of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act.
C. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,44 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee (subject to change) of $0.00265 per
cubic foot of volume of new construction and $1.35 per $1,000 cost of
renovation/alteration work. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Construction Code Element, New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending September
30, December 31, March 31 and June 30 and not later than one month
next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal
year in which the regulations first become effective, said fee shall be
collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
[Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003; 10-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 49-2006]
A. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work, shall
be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays and federal holidays. No commercial work is allowed on
Sundays. All motorized equipment used in construction and demolition
activity shall be operated with a muffler. No earthwork associated with
commercial or industrial construction will be permitted on weekends.
44.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs. (See N.J.A.C. 5:23)
§ 75-14 BOWLING ALLEYS § 75-15
70:193
Chapter 77
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
§ 77-1. Dangerous structures to be removed or destroyed by owner.
No building, wall or structure which is or may become dangerous to life or
health, or which might tend to extend a conflagration, shall be allowed to
remain on any land in the Borough of Madison, and every such building,
wall or structure shall be removed or destroyed by the owner or owners of
the land and premises affected thereby and upon which such building or
structure may be located.
§ 77-2. Failure of property owner to remove or destroy dangerous
structures. [Added 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 31-7845]
The failure of any property owner to destroy or remove a dangerous
structure shall be remedied in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§§ 113-4 through 113-10 of the Code of the Borough of Madison and N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.4 et seq. by the Housing Officer of the Borough of Madison whether
or not said building or structure was utilized for residential purposes or was
devoted to commercial, industrial and other uses.
§ 77-3. (Reserved)46
§ 77-4. (Reserved)47
§ 77-5. (Reserved)48
Chapter 79
B. The Uniform Construction Code Official of the Borough of Madison has
the authority to extend the aforementioned hours after a determination
that the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired by
construction activity and that there is sufficient justification for a
waiver.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 77-2, Authority of Council to cause
removal of destruction.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 77-3, Service of notice, was repealed 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 31-78.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 77-4, Statement of costs, was repealed 9-11-1978 by Ord. No.
31-78.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 77-5, Costs of lien, was repealed 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 31-78.
§ 75-15 MADISON CODE § 77-5
77:194
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
§ 79-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 79-2. Permit required. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street
or alley in the Borough without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Inspector, as provided in the Building Code of the Borough of Madison49 and
this chapter.
§ 79-3. Application for permit.
A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application for
such permit with the Building Inspector.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison, County of Morris, State of New
Jersey.
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter
or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for
residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial,
institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. A
structure of the following dimensions shall not fall within this definition:
a structure which is less than eight feet wide in any side horizontal
dimension, the height of which does not interfere with existing
overhead power lines but in no case exceeds eight feet and the weight
of which is not greater than 2,500 pounds.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of
Madison.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Building Construction.
§ 77-5 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 79-3
79:195
§ 79-4. Deposit for expense to Borough.
Upon receipt of an application, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector
to procure from the Borough Engineer and Borough Water and Light
Department an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing
and replacing any electric wires, street lamps or pole lines belonging to
the Borough or any other property of the Borough, the removal and
replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the
A. Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by
the Building Inspector, and shall be filed in the office of the Building
Inspector.
B. Contents. The application shall set forth:
(1) A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving the
street number, the construction materials, the dimensions, the
number of rooms and the condition of the exterior and interior.
(2) A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be
moved, giving the lot and block number, if located in the Borough.
(3) A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building
be removed, giving the lot and block number, if located in the
Borough.
(4) The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved.
(5) The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved.
(6) Proposed moving date and hours.
(7) Any additional information which the Building Inspector shall find
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue.
C. Accompanying papers.
(1) Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with
the application sufficient evidence that all taxes and any Borough
charges against the same are paid in full.
(2) Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than
the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill
of sale signed by the owner or other sufficient evidence that he is
entitled to move the building.
D. Disconnecting utilities. The applicant shall submit evidence that all
utility services, including water, gas, electricity and sewer, have been
disconnected.50
50.Editor's Note: Original § 41.3(4), which immediately followed this subsection and set forth
the permit fee, was deleted 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76. See now Ch. 75, Building
Construction.
§ 79-3 MADISON CODE § 79-4
79:196
building through the Borough, together with the cost of materials necessary
to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to issuance of
the permit, the Building Inspector shall require of the applicant a deposit of
a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated expenses.
§ 79-5. Deposit and insurance to protect Borough.
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by the following:
§ 79-6. Duties of Building Inspector.
The duties of the Borough Inspector shall be as follows:
A. Cash deposit. A cash deposit in the sum of $2,500 as an indemnity for
any damage which the Borough may sustain by reason of damage or
injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other
property of the Borough, which may be caused by or be incidental to the
removal of any building over, along or across any street in the Borough
and to cover any cost and expense incurred by the Borough in
connection with the moving of the building in question.
B. Insurance policy. An insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, in a form approved
by the Borough Attorney, providing personal and property liability
coverage in the respective amounts of $500,000 per accident and
$300,000 per person and $50,000 per accident on property. Said policy
shall name the Borough of Madison as a coinsured along with the
applicant and provide indemnification of the Borough against any claim,
alleged or otherwise, of damages to persons or private property arising
out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, across
or along any street of the Borough.
A. Fees and deposits.
(1) Deposit. The Building Inspector shall deposit all fees and deposits
with the Borough Treasurer.
(2) Return upon allowance or expense. After the building has been
removed the Building Inspector shall furnish the Mayor with a
written statement of all expenses incurred in removing and
replacing all property belonging to the Borough and of all materials
used in the making of the removal and replacement, together with
a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property
belonging to the Borough. The Mayor shall authorize the Building
Inspector to return to the applicant all deposits after the Borough
Treasurer deducts the sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and
expenses and for all damage done to property of the Borough by
reason of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with
the application shall not be returned.
B. Designation of streets for removal. The Building Inspector shall procure
from the Department of Public Works a list of designated streets over
§ 79-4 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 79-6
79:197
§ 79-7. Duties of permittee.
Every permittee under this chapter shall:
which the building may be moved. The Building Inspector shall have the
list approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the list upon
the permit in writing. In making their determinations, the Borough
Engineer, the Borough Water and Light Department and the Chief of
Police shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in
the Borough and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public
streets.
A. Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated
for such use in the written permit.
B. Notify as to revised moving time. Notify the Building Inspector in
writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the
application.
C. Notify of damage. Notify the Building Inspector in writing of any and all
damage done to property belonging to the Borough within 24 hours
after the damage or injury has occurred.
D. Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on
every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as
to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and
maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the
public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building.
Before a building shall be permitted to stand overnight on any street,
approval of location shall be secured from the Chiefs of the Police and
Fire Departments of the Borough.
E. Remove building from street. Remove the building from the Borough
streets after four days of such occupancy, unless an extension is
granted by the Borough Council.
F. Comply with governing law. Comply with the Building Code, the Fire
Zone Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the Borough.51
G. Pay expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer ordered by the
Building Inspector to accompany the movement of the building to
protect the public from injury.
H. Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all
excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the
premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition; provided, however,
that before the excavation is filled, the cellar bottom shall be removed.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Building Construction, Ch. 103, Fire Zones, and Ch. 195,
Zoning.
§ 79-6 MADISON CODE § 79-8
79:198
§ 79-8. Enforcement.
§ 79-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
Chapter 80
BUSINESS HOURS
§ 80-1. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to regulate the
closing hours of retail businesses within the CBD-2 Zone in order to avoid
the noise, lights, inconvenience and disturbance to residential properties
which are caused when retail establishments remain open during the late
evening hours. It is also hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to
regulate the hours of such retail establishments in order to avoid loitering
and crime during the late evening hours. It is hereby declared and
determined to be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Borough of Madison that retail businesses cease the
conduct of their business at a reasonable hour.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Enforcing officers. The Building Inspector and the Police Department
shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this chapter.
B. Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be
liable for any expenses, damages or costs in excess of deposited
amounts or securities, and the Borough Attorney shall prosecute an
action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the
recovery of such excessive amounts.
C. Original premises left unsafe. The Borough shall proceed to do the work
necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary
condition where the permittee does not comply with the requirements
of this chapter, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the cash
deposit.
§ 79-8 BUSINESS HOURS § 80-2
80:199
RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes any for-profit business which holds itself
out to the general public for the sale at retail of goods and services, but
excluding bank automatic teller machine operations.
§ 80-3. Closing hours.
Every retail business within the CBD-2 Zone of the Borough of Madison
shall be closed to the public and business with the public therein shall be
and is hereby prohibited after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of
7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Wednesday, and after the hour of 12:00 a.m.
and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. on Thursday, and after the hour of 1:00
a.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.
Chapter 82
CLOTHING BINS
§ 82-1. Permit required.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61, notwithstanding any other provision
of law to the contrary, no person or entity shall place, use, or employ
a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes, within the Borough of
Madison unless the person or entity shall obtain a permit, valid for a period
of one year, issued by the Borough Clerk, upon approval of the Borough
Council, in accordance with this Chapter 82.
§ 82-2. Issuance of permit.
A. An application shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on forms
designated by the Borough Clerk which shall include the following:
(1) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(2) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed,
and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would
be allocated or spent;
(3) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office required
pursuant to § 82-4B of any entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
(4) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property; and
(5) A zoning permit issued by the Madison Zoning Officer pursuant to
§ 195-30.5 of the Madison Land Development Ordinance.
B. The Borough Council shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards
§ 80-2 MADISON CODE § 82-2
80:200
§ 82-3. Renewal of permit.
An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed upon
application for renewal and payment of a fee of $25 for such renewal to
offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et
seq. Such application shall include:
§ 82-4. Display of information on bin.
All bins shall comply with the following display requirements:
shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or
sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
C. The applicant shall pay to the Borough of Madison a permit fee of $25 to
offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter and N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq.
A. The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, and, if
the person intends to move it, the new location where the bin would be
situated after the renewal is granted and written consent from the
property owner to place the bin on his property;
B. The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and
any changes the person anticipates it may make in these processes
during the period covered by the renewal; and
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office required
pursuant to § 82-4B of any entity which shared or profited from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and of any entities
which may do so during the period covered by the renewal.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin, in
addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection C of this
section;
B. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
C. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
§ 82-2 BUSINESS HOURS § 82-4
80:201
§ 82-5. Complaints.
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Borough of Madison in the most recent permit or renewal
application pursuant to § 82-2A(2) and § 82-3B, indicating the
manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed,
and the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would
be allocated or spent.
A. The Borough of Madison shall receive and investigate, within 30 days,
any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to
the Borough of Madison that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in,
any act or practice in violation of § 2 of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 or any
provisions of this chapter, the person who placed the bin shall be issued
a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with
the Borough Council is not requested within 45 days, the bin will be
seized or removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at
public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means
used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be
affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Borough of Madison may seize the bin, remove it, or have
it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Borough of Madison.
§ 82-4 MADISON CODE § 82-6
80:202
§ 82-6. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of this
state, any person who violates any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.
which results in seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
Chapter 89
(RESERVED)
Chapter 91
DRUG-FREE ZONES
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Borough of
Madison may bring this action in the municipal court or Superior Court
as a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999,
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq., and any penalty monies collected shall be paid
to the Borough of Madison; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to § 2 of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61. A person
disqualified from placing, using, or employing a donation clothing bin
by violating the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. may apply to
the Borough Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The
Borough Council may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and this chapter and all
other applicable laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent
intentions.
§ 82-6 (RESERVED) § 82-6
89:203

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 2-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1-89]
§ 91-1. Maps. [Amended 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 55-2004]
In accordance with and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L.
1988, c. 44, the Drug-Free School Zone Map, consisting of a single sheet
prepared by the Madison Borough Engineer, dated November 8, 2004,
(most recent revision), is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and boundaries of the areas within the Borough
of Madison on or within 1,000 feet of any property which is used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board.
§ 91-2. Maps to continue in effect.
The Drug-Free School Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which is used
for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended
to approve amended Drug-Free School Zone Maps to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of school property
and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 91-3. Notification of changes in school property.
The School Board or the Chief Administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial elementary or secondary school is hereby directed
and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Borough
Engineer and the Borough Attorney of any changes or contemplated
changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used
for school purposes.
§ 91-4. Copies of maps on file.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file as an
official record the originals of the Drug-Free School Zone Maps approved
and adopted pursuant to § 91-1 of this article and to provide at a reasonable
cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from
time to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy
is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file.
It is hereby further directed that a true copy of each such map and of the
ordinance enacting this article shall be provided without cost to the Morris
County Clerk and to the Office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 91-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 91-5
91:205
§ 91-5. Additional provisions.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. The maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1 of this article were
prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions
arising under the criminal laws of this state, and, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7, these maps shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Borough of Madison.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That each such school property is and continues to be used for
school purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of each such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the maps approved and adopted herein
as school property was owned by or leased to an elementary or
secondary school or school board and was being used for school
purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L. 1988,
c. 44, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon
any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense
defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the
ones approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-1 of this article. The
failure of any map approved herein to depict the location and
boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to an
elementary or secondary school or school board or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended by P.L.
1988, c. 44, concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of Drug-
Free School Zone Maps have been complied with.
§ 91-5 MADISON CODE § 91-5
91:206
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Area Zones
[Adopted 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 37-98]
§ 91-6. Map. [Amended 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 55-2004]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997 c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Public Area Map, consisting of a single
sheet prepared by the Madison Borough Engineer, dated November 8,
2004, (most recent revision), approved by the Borough Police Department,
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the Borough of Madison of property which is
utilized as public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings,
owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Madison or the Madison
Housing Authority, and of the areas on or within 500 feet of said properties.
§ 91-7. Map to continue in effect.
The Drug-Free Public Area Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-6
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of the real estate
comprising public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Madison or the Madison
Housing Authority until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended
to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location and
boundaries of the public housing facilities, public parks and/or public
buildings and drug-free public areas within the Borough of Madison.
§ 91-8. Copies of map on file.
The Borough Clerk is directed to receive and to keep on file the original of
the Drug Free Public Areas Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-6
of this article and to provide at reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
Morris County Clerk and the office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 91-9. Additional provisions.
The following matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-6
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecution arising under the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey,
and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
§ 91-6 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 91-9
91:207
§ 91-10. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, phrase or sentence of this
article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, said article, section, subsection, paragraph, phrase
or sentence shall be deemed separable and shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
(1) The location of public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Madison or
the Madison Housing Authority.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is utilized in connection
with public housing facilities, public parks and public buildings
owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Madison or the
Madison Housing Authority.
(3) That such property continues to be used as public housing
facilities, public parks and/or public buildings.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public housing facilities, public parks and public
buildings.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved map,
all of the property depicted on the map as drug-free public area was
owned, leased or controlled by the Borough of Madison or the Madison
Housing Authority and was being used for public housing facilities,
public parks and/or public buildings as of January 9, 1998, that being
the effective date of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A 2C:35-7.1).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 91-6 of this article. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for public housing facilities, public parks
and/or public buildings and which is owned, leased or controlled by the
Borough of Madison or the Madison Housing Authority, whether the
absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the
result of any change in the location and boundaries of such property
which has not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall
not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is
not owned or leased by the Borough of Madison or the Madison
Housing Authority or that such property is not used for public housing
facilities, public parks or public buildings.
D. All of the requirements of P.L. 1997, c. 327 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1)
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free public
area map have been complied with.
§ 91-9 MADISON CODE § 91-10
91:208
Chapter 93
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75. Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
§ 93-1. Electrical construction and equipment to be safe;
conformance to standards.
§ 93-2. Applicable standards.
§ 93-3. Application for inspections.
A. All electrical construction and electrical equipment shall be safe to
persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and the applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey, and all
orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof.
B. As used in this chapter, "safe to persons and property," as applied to
electrical construction and electrical equipment, means safe to use in
the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without
unnecessary hazard to persons or property.
A. Conformity of electrical installations with applicable regulations set
forth in the National Electrical Code, 1965 Edition, of the National Fire
Protection Association, which has been approved by the American
Standards Association, shall be prima facie evidence that such
installations are safe to persons and property. The said National
Electrical Code, of which code not less than three copies have been and
now are filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Madison, is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Borough of Madison.
B. Conformity of electrical equipment with applicable standards of
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that
such equipment is safe to persons and property.
A. Before any person, firm or corporation shall install, extend or renew
any electrical wiring or fixed electrical equipment, he shall first file an
application for inspection with the company or companies authorized by
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to
make electrical inspections as prescribed by statute. [Amended
2-14-1972 by Ord. No. 2-72]
B. When emergency repairs are necessary in order to maintain services
for an electrical system, the necessary repairs may be made without
§ 91-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 93-3
93:209
§ 93-4. Inspections; right of entry; reports. [Amended 2-14-1972 by
Ord. No. 2-72]
The company or companies authorized by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to make electrical inspections
as prescribed by statute, upon the receipt of an application for inspection,
shall, within a reasonable time after notice of completion of electrical work,
make or cause to be made an inspection of such work and such tests as may
be necessary to determine that the installation conforms with the provisions
of this chapter. The company or companies authorized by the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to make electrical
inspections as prescribed by statute shall, upon written request from the
Building Inspector, make or cause to be made an inspection of an existing
electrical installation when, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the
condition of the installation warrants such an inspection. The company or
companies authorized by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the
State of New Jersey to make electrical inspections as prescribed by statute
shall file with the Building Inspector a report of all inspections made and
shall have the authority, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or
premises for the purpose of making an inspection or test of the electrical
installation contained therein.
§ 93-5. Connection of wiring prior to approval prohibited.
[Amended 2-14-1972 by Ord. No. 2-72]
No electrical wiring shall be connected by the permanent placement of
parts of a building until such wiring has been inspected and approved
by the company or companies authorized by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to make electrical inspections as
prescribed by statute.
§ 93-6. Record of violations; notice; disconnection of installations;
emergencies. [Amended 2-14-1972 by Ord. No. 2-72]
The Building Inspector shall keep on file a record of all violation reports
received from the company or companies authorized by the Board of Public
Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to make electrical
inspections as prescribed by statute until such violations are corrected and
approval issued by the company or companies authorized by the Board of
first filing an application for inspection. In such cases the application
shall be filed not later than the next three working days after the date
on which the repairs were made.
C. This section shall not apply to commercial and industrial concerns who
maintain a special agreement with the aforesaid company or companies
authorized by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of
New Jersey to make electrical inspections as prescribed by statute for
periodical inspections of electrical installations. [Amended 2-14-1972
by Ord. No. 2-72]
§ 93-3 MADISON CODE § 93-6
93:210
Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey to make electrical
inspections as prescribed by statute. When an electrical installation which
is connected to the supply of electricity has been reported in violation of the
requirements of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall notify the person,
firm or corporation owning or using the installation. If, after a period of
10 days has elapsed, or such further reasonable time as may be granted
upon request, the installation has not been approved by the company or
companies authorized by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the
State of New Jersey to make electrical inspections as prescribed by statute,
the Building Inspector shall have the authority to order the disconnection
of electrical services to said electrical installation. In cases of emergency,
when necessary for safety to persons or property or when electrical
equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire Department, the Building
Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the disconnection
immediately of service to electrical installations.
§ 93-7. Provisions not applicable to public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to work done in connection
with lines or equipment owned by a public utility, as defined in N.J.S.A.
48:2-13, and directly used in the supplying of its service.
§ 93-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any order
made thereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or
more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed
$2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is
imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than $100.
Chapter 94
ELECTRIC UTILITY
§ 93-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 93-8
93:211

ARTICLE I
Rates
[Adopted 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 37-9352]
§ 94-1. Schedule of rates.53
A. The rates for the electric utility service provided by the Borough of
Madison shall be as set forth in Appendix A annexed hereto and entitled
"Borough of Madison — Schedule of Rates for Electric Utility —
December 1993" and as revised from time to time by ordinance of the
Borough Council.
B. The schedule of rates (Appendix A) consists of the electric utility rates
for the following service classifications: [Amended 7-10-2000 by Ord.
No. 30-2000; 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 45-2004]
RS — Residential Service
GSS — General Service (nondemand)
GS — General Service (demand)
GS-ML — Mid Level General Service - Demand
GSL-D — Large General Service - Demand
OL — Outdoor Area Light Service
OPW — Off-Peak Water Heating Service Rider
—- — Standby Facilities Service Rider
C. The schedule of rates for customers who generate and feed electricity
into Madison’s electrical system, which is applicable to all service
classifications, is set forth in Appendix A.54 [Added 10-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 48-2006]
D. A one-hundred-fifty-dollar per applicant targeted annual electric utility
rebate credit program is hereby established for income-eligible
Madison residents, subject to annual appropriations therefor in the
municipal budget. The program guidelines, eligibility criteria and
application process, attached hereto, shall be set forth in Appendix A.55
[Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 6-2015; amended 4-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-2016]
E. An annual electric customer cost adjustment program is hereby
established as follows: The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will provide a
written report to the governing body in January of the financial results
of the electric utility for the preceding calendar year. The report will
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 94, Electric Utility, Art. I, Rates,
adopted 11-7-1979 by Ord. No. 28-79, as amended.
53.Editor's Note: The schedule of rates is included at the end of this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
55.Editor’s Note: Said program guidelines, eligibility criteria and application process are on
file in the Borough offices.
§ 94-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 94-1
93:213
§ 94-2. Applicability of utility rules and regulations. [Amended
10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 48-2006]
§ 94-3. Requirements and fees for customers who install a system
to generate and feed electricity into Madison’s electrical system.
[Added 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 48-2006]
An electric utility customer who plans to install a generator to produce
electricity on the customer side of the meter must comply with Section 6 of
the Rules and Regulations of the Electric Utility Department of the Borough
of Madison (see Appendix C) and:
include a detailed accounting of all monetary inflows and outflows.
Costs will include utility operational costs, employee compensation
and benefits, transmission costs, capacity/demand charges, commodity
costs, physical plant and equipment charges, appropriations for the
Electric Utility Capital Improvement Fund, operating reserves,
contingency, transfers of electric surplus to the municipal budget for
tax relief, debt service, municipal operating support and general capital
improvements, a minimum free balance of at least $1,000,000, line loss
and such other financial factors as deemed appropriate and prudent by
the CFO and governing body. To the extent there are funds remaining
after all items cited above have been subtracted from the total electric
utility revenue, the CFO, with the Council's approval, may annually
recommend a prospective cost adjustment credit be applied to each
kilowatt-hour (KWH) supplied under all rate schedules and tariffs. This
adjustment, if any, will be set to the nearest $0.0001 via resolution and
applied to all kilowatt-hours supplied during subsequent billing periods
until the next annual financial analysis in January of the following
year by the CFO and governing body of the operating results and
performance of the Electric Utility. The cost adjustment credit factor
may be revised during the course of any calendar year period by the
governing body via resolution upon a showing of good cause. [Added
11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 65-201656]
A. The procedures and practices of the Madison Electric Utility and
customer requirements shall be carried out in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the rules and regulations of the electric utility
of the Borough of Madison currently in effect and as amended from time
to time by ordinance or resolution of the Madison Council.
B. The rules and regulations of the electric utility shall be as set forth in
Appendix C annexed hereto and entitled “Borough of Madison - Rules
and Regulations of the Electric Utility.”57
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also indicated that it would take effect 1-1-2017.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 94-1 MADISON CODE § 94-3
93:214
§ 94-4. Repealer. [Amended 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 48-2006]
All ordinances and amendments to ordinances establishing rates for the
electric utility contrary to the provisions of this article are hereby repealed
and/or amended as required.
§ 94-5. Severability. [Amended 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 48-2006]
Each section of this article and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 94-6. Aggregation of retail customer demand response. [Added
3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
§ 94-7. Ancillary services provided by demand response resources.
[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
A. Apply for service under the self-generation rules, pay the plan review
fee of $500 at the time of application and obtain the proper
construction permits.
B. Acknowledge and accept the terms of this schedule and the rules and
regulations regarding the interconnection and operation of a selfgeneration
system.
C. Pay for the purchase and installation of a special meter that measures
both the amount of energy provided by the Borough and the amount of
energy provided by the customer.
D. Enter into an agreement with the Borough of Madison as provided in
Section 6 of the Rules and Regulations of the Electric Utility
Department of the Borough of Madison (see Appendix C).
A. The Borough of Madison Electric Utility System or its authorized
designee is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf
of retail customers served by the Borough of Madison Electric Utility
System directly into any Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionapproved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission
organization’s organized electric markets.
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of Madison Electric Utility
wishing to bid their demand response into a Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s organized electric markets may do so by
participating in the program established by the Borough of Madison
Electric Utility or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not
permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other
entity without the express prior authorization of the Borough of
Madison Electric Utility.
§ 94-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 94-7
93:215
A. The Borough of Madison Electric Utility or its authorized designee is
the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail
customers served by the Borough of Madison Electric Utility directly
into any Commission-approved independent system operator’s or
regional transmission organization’s organized markets for energy
imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power
and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary
services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s
tariff).
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of Madison Electric Utility
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s
or regional transmission organization’s tariff) may do so only by
participating in the program established by the Borough of Madison
Electric Utility or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not
permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other
entity without the express prior authorization of the Borough of
Madison Electric Utility.
§ 94-7 MADISON CODE § 94-7
93:216
Chapter 96
ELEVATOR SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property Maintenance Emergency
Committee — See Ch. 36.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 93.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
§ 96-1. Appointment of enforcing agency.
The Borough of Madison appoints the Department of Community Affairs to
act as the enforcing agency for the Elevator Safety Subcode.
Chapter 97
FERTILIZER APPLICATION AND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 111.
Land development — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
§ 97-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor application of
fertilizer so as to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering
waterways, thereby helping to protect and improve surface water quality
and also to prevent degradation of the environment. This chapter does not
apply to fertilizer application on commercial farms.
§ 97-2. Basis and background.
A. Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in
diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in
turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die
off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen
levels. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of
the affected water for recreation and water supply.
§ 94-7 ELEVATOR SAFETY § 97-2
96:217
§ 97-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
However, in situations that warrant additional flexibility, such as where lot
sizes are exceptionally small or where the twenty-five-foot buffer constitutes
the majority of the available property, the required buffer may be reduced
to 10 feet in width, with the additional requirement that a drop spreader be
used for fertilizer application.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero, except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
B. Fertilizer applied immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall
outside the growing season or to impervious surfaces is most likely to
be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the
management of the type, amount and techniques for fertilizer
application is necessary as one tool to protect water resources.
C. This chapter does not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial
farms, but commercial farmers are expected to implement best
management practices in accordance with conservation management
plans or resource conservation plans developed for the farm by the
Natural Resource Conservation Service and approved by the Soil
Conservation District Board.
§ 97-2 MADISON CODE § 97-3
96:218
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A collection of or body of surface waters, such as a lake,
river, stream, creek, pond, or any accumulation of or standing water.
§ 97-4. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do or cause to occur any of the following:
§ 97-5. Phosphorus fertilizer application.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season from and during March
1 to November 15.
A. No person may do the following:
(1) Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as
demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target
vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual
fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research
and Extension.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules;
(b) Establishing or repairing a turf area in accordance with good
soil practices.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
§ 97-3 ELEVATOR SAFETY § 97-5
96:219
§ 97-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough Engineer, Police Department
and/or other representatives or employees duly designated by the Borough
of Madison.
§ 97-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation, with each day or
documented act or occurrence to be considered a separate violation.
§ 97-8. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Chapter 97
is declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 98
FILMING
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape,
digital or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on video receivers, television, in theaters, the
Internet or for institutional use. Filming performed by one individual using
a hand-held camera without assistance from others shall be excluded from
this chapter.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public right-of-way, public park or playground, public building and property
or other public place within the Borough which is within the jurisdiction and
control of the Borough of Madison.
§ 98-2. Permit required; application; point of contact.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Madison without first obtaining an application for permit
therefor, obtaining the required approvals, and filing the completed/
approved permit together with applicable permit fee with the Borough
§ 97-5 MADISON CODE § 98-2
98:220
§ 98-3. Issuance of permits filming restrictions; appeals; exceptions
to limitations.
at least 10 calendar days prior to the first date that filming is to take
place.
B. Madison Borough filming permit applications may be obtained from the
office of the Borough Clerk during normal business hours. Application
for such permits shall be in a form approved by the Borough
Administrator and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount
established by ordinance of the Borough of Madison.
C. The following information shall be included in the permit application:
(1) Location of filming;
(2) Proposed duration of filming, including date(s) and hours;
(3) Amount of space required on public streets/highways/sidewalks,
etc.; and
(4) Contact information of applicant, including the on-site person.
D. One permit shall be required for each location.
E. Duration of time authorized.
(1) One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on two
calendar days and indoor filming on two calendar days within a
period of not more than five calendar days beginning on the date of
issuance of the permit, provided that each such date on which
filming is to take place shall be specified in the permit.
(2) Permission for filming in excess of four days as described in
§ 98-2E(1) may be granted by the Borough Council upon filing of a
request with the Borough Clerk seven calendar days in advance of
the Borough Council meeting at which the matter is to be
considered. A copy of the permit application shall be attached to
the request. See also § 98-3J.
F. If a permit is issued and due to inclement weather or other good cause
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Administrator may, at the request of the applicant and with proper
notice given to approving authorities and any affected property owners/
tenants, issue a new permit for filming on other dates subject to full
compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. No additional fee
shall be paid for this permit.
A. A permit shall be limited to no more than five calendar days.
B. No more than two permits shall be issued by the Borough of Madison
for filming that will take place in any residential zones, without a waiver
pursuant to § 98-3J.
§ 98-2 FILMING § 98-3
98:221
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Borough Administrator unless a
completed application is filed with the Borough Clerk's office at
least 10 calendar days prior to the first date filming is to take place,
and where the filming is to take place in any commercial or
business district, a copy of the application is filed with the
Downtown Manager at least 10 calendar days prior to the first date
filming is to take place. However, the Borough Administrator may
waive the 10 calendar-day period if, in the judgment of the Borough
Administrator, the applicant has obtained all required approvals
and adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
(2) Where the filming is to take place in any commercial or business
district of the Borough of Madison, the Downtown Manager shall
act as liaison to the tenants and owners in the commercial or
business district. In that regard, the Downtown Manager shall:
(a) Distribute relevant information regarding the proposed filming
to the property owners and merchants in the commercial or
business district that may be affected;
(b) Provide to the Police Department, and such other municipal
departments as may be necessary, written comments from the
property owners and tenants in the commercial or business
district;
(c) Contact the Madison Police Department and any other relevant
departments to coordinate the information with the property
owners and tenants in the commercial district; and
(d) Upon issuance of a permit by the Borough Administrator, the
Downtown Manager shall be the coordinator and liaison
between Borough departments and the tenants and property
owners in the commercial district affected.
(3) No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(a) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
[1] For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of
$1,000,000 and any occurrence in the aggregate amount
of $3,000,000;
[2] For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $500,000; and
[3] A certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough
Clerk which shall name the Borough of Madison as an
additional insured on the policy.
§ 98-3 MADISON CODE § 98-3
98:222
(b) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Madison, its officers, employees and
agents, from any and all liability, expense, claim or damages
resulting from the use of public lands;
(c) The posting of a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000, running in favor of the Borough and protecting and
insuring that the location utilized will be left after filming in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment,
and that due observance of all Borough ordinances, rules and
regulations will be followed. Within two business days of the
completion of the filming, the Borough will return the bond if
there has been no damage to public property or public expense
caused by the filming;
(d) A contractual agreement with the Madison Police Department
for paid police coverage during the time indicated in the
permit;
(e) Proof of service of written notification of proposed dates and
lands to be used for production activities to any and all tenants
and property owners who will be directly affected by the
filming and its site location, and simultaneously said tenants
and property owners shall be informed that objections may be
filed with the Borough Clerk. Such notification is to take place
at least three business days prior to the requested shooting
date, with proofs submitted to the Borough Clerk prior to
issuance of the permit;
(f) A written approval from the Madison Police Department
authorizing issuance of the permit and providing any traffic
control requirements and public safety conditions; and
(g) Where the filming is to take place in a business or commercial
district, a written memorandum from the Downtown Manager
certifying he/she has contacted the affected property owners
or tenants and providing any concerns of the tenants and
property owners in the commercial or business district.
D. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Madison
Police Department with respect thereto.
E. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
§ 98-3 FILMING § 98-3
98:223
F. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
G. Filming, including setup and final cleanup, shall be permitted Monday
through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or
sunset, whichever is earlier.
H. The Borough Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever he/
she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a written report thereon by the Madison Police
Department and by other Borough departments involved with the
proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or the time set
forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance or would
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, or in the opinion of the Madison Police Department would
unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or
otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the
Borough reserves the right to require one or more on-site police officers
in situations where the proposed production may impede the proper
flow of traffic, the cost of said officers to be borne by the applicant as a
cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines are to be
utilized by the production, on-site Borough Electric Department
licensed employee(s) may be required, and the cost of such employees
is to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production. If any services
are required by employees from other Borough departments, the cost of
such employees is to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production.
I. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Borough Administrator or
the Borough of Madison denying or revoking a permit or a person
requesting relief pursuant to § 98-3J herein may appeal to the Borough
Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the
appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk no later than 10 calendar
days from the date of the denial or revocation of the permit. The
Borough Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30
calendar days of the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The
decision of the Borough Council shall be in the form of a resolution. A
resolution supporting the decision of the Borough Administrator or
granting relief pursuant to § 98-3J shall be adopted by the Borough
Council at the first regularly scheduled public meeting of the Borough
Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless the appellant agrees in
writing to a later date for the decision.
J. The Borough Council may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements
or limitations of this chapter, and may authorize filming on other public
property not defined as public lands and may authorize filming other
than during the hours herein described or may extend the duration of a
permit beyond five calendar days or may permit filming at a particular
location in a residential zone on more than two occasions during any
§ 98-3 MADISON CODE § 98-3
98:224
§ 98-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
are as follows:
one calendar year or may waive any other limitation or requirement of
this chapter whenever it determines that strict compliance with such
limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and
that such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's
health, safety and welfare.
K. Copies of the approved permit will be sent by the Borough Clerk to the
Police Department, Fire Department, Downtown Manager, the
Department of Public Works, and the Board of Health. Copies shall be
sent to any appropriate New Jersey state agencies, including the New
Jersey Film Commission.
L. The applicant shall notify the Police Department, the Fire Department,
Downtown Manager and the Board of Health 24 hours before filming
takes place and shall permit the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the Board of Health or other Borough inspectors to inspect
the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with
all safety instructions issued by Borough inspectors, including the
Police Department, the Fire Department and the Board of Health.
M. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue or repairs to
public property.
A. Permit:
(1) Basic filming for other than nonprofit applicants: $100.
(2) Basic filming for nonprofit applicants filming for educational,
noncommercial use: $25.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit fee:
(1) Five hundred dollars per day, except as set forth in § 98-4B(2)
hereof.
(2) One hundred dollars per day for nonprofit applicants filming for
educational, noncommercial purposes.
C. Waiver of fees for student. The fees set forth in § 98-4 shall be waived
when filming is done by a student in a grade school, middle school, high
school, college, university or other bona fide educational institution
upon receipt by the Borough Clerk of a written certification from a
teacher or administrator at the school attended by the student stating
that the filming is for educational purposes only and is not intended for
commercial use.
§ 98-3 FILMING § 98-5
98:225
§ 98-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 per day
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 98-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 98-7. Severability.
If any sentence, section, clause, or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair, or repeal the remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 99
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
§ 99-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.58
The discharge or firing of a gun, pistol or firearm of any description at any
place within the Borough of Madison less than 450 feet from any dwelling
or other building used for human habitation, except for the protection
of person or property, is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to any person, association or corporation who shall
obtain permission of the Council of the borough, or such committee or
officer of the borough as may be designated by the Borough Council, to
discharge or fire a gun, pistol or firearm of any description for sport or
recreation.
§ 99-2. Hunting on private property; public notice of prohibition.
Hunting with a gun, pistol or firearm of any description by any person upon
or over the lands of any other person after being forbidden so to do by the
A. The filming of news stories within the Borough of Madison;
B. Filming by one individual using a hand-held camera without the
assistance of other persons; and
C. Filming for authorized Madison Borough municipal government
purposes as may be authorized by the Madison Borough Council or the
Borough Administrator.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-5 MADISON CODE § 99-2
99:226
owner, occupant, lessee or licensee of such lands, or without the consent
of the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof after public notice on
the part of the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof forbidding such
trespass, is hereby prohibited. Such public notice shall bear the name of
said owner, occupant, lessee or licensee and shall be posted conspicuously
on the corners of said property and along the roads or highways abutting
said property on all boundary lines bordering on adjoining lands and at each
point where a stream enters upon or leaves said property.
§ 99-3. Written proof of permission to hunt required.
In any prosecution for the violation of the provisions of § 99-2 hereof, the
failure of the defendant to produce a written permit to hunt with a firearm,
as aforesaid, upon or over the lands where the violation is charged to have
occurred, signed by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof, shall be
prima facie proof that he was forbidden so to do by such owner, occupant,
lessee or licensee.
§ 99-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
Chapter 101
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 54.
Fire zones — See Ch. 103.
§ 101-1. Local enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Code. [Amended
11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202,
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.) shall be locally
enforced within the Borough of Madison. Said local enforcement shall be
pursuant to and in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the
fire code enforcement regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:71-1.1 et seq.).
§ 101-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention established; responsibility for
enforcement.
The local enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code provided for in § 101-1
of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
§ 99-2 FIREARMS AND HUNTING § 101-2
99:227
(the "Bureau"), which is hereby established within the Madison Fire
Department. The Bureau shall also be responsible for enforcement of all
provisions of this chapter. The Bureau Attorney is hereby designated as
legal counsel for the Bureau.
§ 101-3. Enforcement duties.
The enforcement duties of the Bureau under this chapter shall include the
following:
§ 101-4. Fire Official.
A. The Uniform Fire Safety Act and the code and regulations adopted
thereunder shall be enforced in all buildings, structures and premises
within the Borough of Madison, except for owner-occupied buildings
used exclusively for dwelling purposes and containing fewer than three
dwelling units.
B. The Bureau shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses,
as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.4, as required by the Uniform Fire Code on
behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs. [Amended
11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
C. The Bureau shall perform such other inspections and duties as required
by the Uniform Fire Code and this chapter.
D. The Bureau shall prepare an annual report to the Borough Council
setting forth all actions taken in enforcement of the code and this
chapter during the preceding year.
A. The position of Fire Official is hereby created within the Madison Fire
Department. The Fire Official shall be in charge of the Bureau and shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code and this
chapter, subject to the supervision of the Fire Chief.
B. At the recommendation of the Fire Chief, the Borough Council shall
biannually appoint a person to the position of Fire Official. Said person
shall be a paid employee of the Madison Fire Department who has
obtained certification as a fire official from the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:71-4.1 et seq. [Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
C. The duties of the Fire Official shall be in addition to the normal duties of
said person's position in the Madison Fire Department.
D. The Fire Official shall be assisted in the performance of his duties by
such other employees of the Madison Fire Department who shall be
certified as fire inspectors by the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:71-4.1 et seq.
[Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
§ 101-2 MADISON CODE § 101-5
99:228
§ 101-5. Appeals. [Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
Any person aggrieved by any ruling, action, order or notice of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention made in enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code shall be
entitled to an administrative hearing before the Morris County Construction
Board of Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 101-6. Life hazard uses. [Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No.
44-2000]
All life hazard uses, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.4, shall be registered and
inspected in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code. The
required fees shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9.
§ 101-7. Permits required. [Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No.
44-2000]
Permits shall be required for all uses enumerated in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7. The
permit application fees shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.8(c).
§ 101-8. Registration and inspection of non-life-hazard uses.
A. All commercial, industrial, educational, recreational and other
nonresidential uses which are not within the definition of life hazard
uses shall be annually inspected for compliance with the Uniform Fire
Code.
B. An annual application for registration and inspection shall be submitted
to the Fire Official by the owner of each non-life-hazard building or use.
The necessary forms shall be provided by the Fire Official and shall
require information substantially similar to that required for the
registration of life hazard uses as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.6.
[Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
C. The annual registration fee for non-life-hazard uses is as follows:
[Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92; 2-8-2010 by Ord. No.
3-2010]
Square Footage Fee
0 to 500 $50
500 to 1,000 $60
1,001 to 2,000 $70
2,001 to 3,000 $80
3,001 to 4,000 $90
4,001 to 5,000 $100
5,001 to 6,000 $110
6,001 to 7,000 $120
§ 101-5 FIREARMS AND HUNTING § 101-8
99:229
§ 101-9. Storage of certain materials prohibited. [Amended
11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000]
The storage within the corporate limits of the Borough of Madison of
the following hazardous materials, as defined by the BOCA Basic/National
Square Footage Fee
7,001 to 8,000 $130
8,001 to 9,000 $140
9,001 to 10,000 $150
10,001 to 11,000 $170
11,001 to 12,000 $190
12,001 to 13,000 $210
13,001 to 14,000 $230
14,001 to 15,000 $250
15,001 to 20,000 $280
20,001 to 25,000 $310
25,001 to 30,000 $340
30,001 to 35,000 $370
35,001 to 40,000 $400
40,001 to 45,000 $430
45,001 to 50,000 $460
50,001 to 55,000 $500
55,001 to 60,000 $540
60,001 to 65,000 $580
65,001 to 70,000 $620
70,001 to 75,000 $660
75,001 to 80,000 $700
80,001 to 85,000 $740
85,001 to 90,000 $780
90,001 to 95,000 $820
95,001 to 100,000 $860
Each 5,000 or part over 100,000 $50
D. If an owner of a non-life-hazard use has not complied with the
requirements of this section, the Fire Official shall notify the owner in
writing of said noncompliance, including an explanation of the manner
in which there is noncompliance. The failure to comply within 30 days
after receipt of said notice shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 101-8 MADISON CODE § 101-9
99:230
Fire Prevention Code/1984, adopted with modifications as the State Fire
Prevention Code by N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.1, shall be prohibited:
§ 101-10. Outside burning prohibited.
The outside burning of wrecked or discarded automobiles, or parts thereof,
or junk or any waste material is prohibited.
§ 101-11. Fireman on duty at public assemblies; fees.
§ 101-11.1. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors.
[Added 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 13-87; amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No.
12-92; 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 44-2000; 7-14-2003 by Ord. No.
26-2003]
A. Explosives and blasting agents as set forth in Section F-3001.0 of the
BOCA Code.
B. Flammable liquids and outside aboveground tanks as defined in Section
F-3801.0, Oxidizing Materials, of the BOCA Code.
C. New bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids as defined in
Section F-3201.0 of the BOCA Code.
D. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas as defined in Section F-3601.0,
Permit required, of the BOCA Code.
A. Whenever any building or structure, other than a residence, shall be
used as a place of assembly for any purpose by 50 persons or more, the
owner or lessee of said building or structure or the person in charge of
said assembly or function is hereby required to have a fireman or
firemen assigned to duty in said building or structure while such
assembly or function is being conducted. This provision shall not apply
to the normal day-to-day activities conducted at churches, theaters and
other buildings, such as but not limited to the YMCA and Community
House, but shall apply to all special functions conducted at such
churches, theaters and other buildings.
B. There shall be a fee of $65 per hour per fireman to the owner or lessee
of said building or structure, or other persons in charge of said
assembly or function, for the services of the firemen as required in this
section. Sixty dollars of this charge is imposed for the purpose of
reimbursing said fireman or firemen assigned to the duties required
herein. Five dollars of this charge is imposed for the purpose of
reimbursing the Borough for administrative charges connected with the
services provided by the firemen. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No.
15-92; 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 101-9 FIREARMS AND HUNTING § 101-11.1
99:231
DWELLING UNIT — Every structure or portion thereof used as a
separate unit for residential purposes, including single-family, twofamily
and multifamily residences; apartments; each residential unit
in rooming and boarding houses; and each suite or sleeping area in
dormitories.
B. Compliance.
(1) No dwelling unit shall be sold, leased or otherwise made subject to
a change of occupancy for residential purposes after the effective
date of this section without having first met its requirements.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner to sell or lease a dwelling unit or
a building containing a dwelling unit in the Borough of Madison,
regardless of the date of construction, without having first
procured a certificate from the office of the Fire Official or other
responsible state agency indicating that the premises to be sold or
leased comply with the provisions of this section.
C. Smoke detectors.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one approved smoke
detector installed and properly functioning on each story or level.
An approved smoke detector shall be a photoelectric and/or
ionization type, which has been approved by the Underwriter's
Laboratory. The installation of smoke detectors, either batteryoperated
or hard-wired, shall be made in accordance with the
regulations of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Madison Fire
Department and the requirements of the manufacturer, both as to
the number of detectors needed for the area to be protected and as
to the method employed. All such equipment and installations shall
comply with the regulations established under NFPA Standard No.
74 and the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain every smoke
detector in working order after a certificate has been issued by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Madison Fire Department.
D. Carbon monoxide detectors. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed
in all dwelling units in buildings in Use Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, except
for units in buildings that do not contain a fuel-burning device and have
an attached garage, as follows:
(1) Single station carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed and
maintained in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping area(s).
(2) Carbon monoxide alarms may be battery-operated, hard-wired or of
the plug-in type and shall be listed and labeled in accordance with
UL-2034 and shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of this section and NFPA-720.
§ 101-11.1 MADISON CODE § 101-11.1
99:232
§ 101-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 26-2003; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in the
Uniform Fire Code for all violations of the provisions of said code as
enforced by this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter not covered by the Uniform Fire Code
shall be subject to a fine punishable by one or more of the following in the
discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this
section, such fine shall be no less than $100.
Chapter 103
FIRE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101. Parking restrictions generally — See Ch. 185.
§ 103-1. Legislative finding and determination.
It is hereby determined that the operation and parking of motor vehicles
within 30 feet of buildings devoted for public uses, including shopping
(3) As an alternative to the requirements of Subsection B(1) above, and
with the approval of the Bureau of Housing Inspection, carbon
monoxide detectors may be installed in any building required to be
registered as a hotel or multiple dwelling in the locations specified
in the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.20).
(4) As an alternative to the requirements of Subsection B(1) above, and
with the approval of the Bureau of Rooming and Boarding House
Standards, carbon monoxide alarms may be installed in any
rooming or boarding house in the locations specified in the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.20).
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain every carbon
monoxide detector in working order after a certificate has been
issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Madison Fire
Department.
E. Inspection fees. The fee for any inspection for a certificate of
compliance with this section shall be $75. The fee for any reinspection
for a certificate of compliance with this section shall be $40 until the
property is in compliance with this section. [Amended 2-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 4-2010]
§ 101-11.1 FIRE ZONES § 103-1
103:233
centers, nursing homes, hospitals, schools, public buildings, churches and
similar uses, constitutes a danger to public health, safety and welfare in
that the approach, operation and departure of fire equipment and other
emergency vehicles is impeded by such operation and parking of motor
vehicles.
§ 103-2. Authorization to establish fire zones.
The Fire Chief of the Borough of Madison is hereby authorized, subject to
approval by resolution adopted by the Borough Council, to establish fire
zones on properties in the Borough of Madison devoted for public uses,
including but not limited to shopping centers, nursing homes, hospitals,
schools, public buildings, churches and similar uses, where the operation
and parking of motor vehicles within 30 feet of buildings located on such
properties would prevent adequate ingress, egress and operation of fire
equipment and other emergency vehicles.
§ 103-3. Establishment of zones to ensure access by emergency
vehicles.
The fire zones to be established pursuant to § 103-2 of this chapter shall
be designated in such areas of such public properties as will ensure fire
equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress
and egress to and operation on such properties in the event of fire or other
emergency.
§ 103-4. Determination of number, location, dimensions and
marking of fire zones.
The number, location, width, length and marking of such fire zones shall
be determined by the Fire Chief of the Borough of Madison, subject to
approval by resolution adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Madison. Such determination and approval shall be based upon the size,
type of construction and location of the building or buildings involved; the
use to which the property, building or buildings is put; the number of motor
vehicles operated or parked upon the property; the number of persons using
and occupying the property, building or buildings; the existing means of
ingress to and egress from the property, building or buildings; the total area
of the property, including the size of the parking lot; and all other factors
which are relevant to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of the Borough of Madison.
§ 103-5. Promulgation of regulations restricting operation or
parking of vehicles.
The Fire Chief of the Borough of Madison, subject to approval by resolution
adopted by the Borough Council, is further authorized to promulgate
regulations limiting, restricting or prohibiting the operation or parking of
motor vehicles within the fire zones authorized to be established pursuant
to § 103-2 of this chapter.
§ 103-1 MADISON CODE § 103-6
103:234
§ 103-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforceable by any member of the Borough Police
Department or the Fire Chief, or his duly authorized agent.
§ 103-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 6-10-1991 by Ord. No. 18-91; 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94;
10-15-1997 by Ord. No. 22-97; 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 42-99;
8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004;
6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2004; 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004;
5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization violating § 103-5 of the
Borough Code shall be subject to a penalty of $38 for the first offense and a
penalty of $58 for the second offense. Any person, firm, corporation or other
organization who violates § 103-5 more than twice or who violates any other
provision of this chapter shall make a court appearance, and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the following in the
discretion of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this
section, such fine shall be no less than $100.
Chapter 105
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 105-1. Conduct of games on Sunday.
The Council may, by resolution, permit organizations qualified pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 e seq. to conduct games of
chance on Sunday.
§ 105-2. Fee for one-year instant raffle license. [Added 4-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 11-98]
A. The municipal fee for a one-year license to sell, or to offer for sale,
instant raffle tickets during that year shall be $50.
B. All other municipal license fees for games of chance shall be an amount
equal to the amount charged by the Legalized Games of Chance Control
Commission of the State of New Jersey.
§ 103-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 105-2
105:235
Chapter 107
GARBAGE, MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 73.
Littering; handbills; brush and trash — See
Ch. 120.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 226.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 105-2 MADISON CODE § 105-2
105:236
ARTICLE I
General Conditions and Definitions
§ 107-1. Authorization to adopt collection and disposal rules and
regulations.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
A. The Borough Council may make provision, either by contract or through
its own employees or otherwise, as circumstances may require, for the
collection and disposal of commercial and residential solid waste and
recyclables; and it may also determine from time to time the extent and
frequency of collections and make suitable rules and regulations with
respect to the same.
B. The Borough Council may from time to time determine what material
may be placed for collection as commercial and/or residential solid
waste and as recyclables and may change the designations of each as
conditions require in accordance with the Morris County Solid Waste
Management Plan.
A. As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — Glass bottles and jars, aluminum
cans, bimetal cans, tin cans and plastic bottles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
designated within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management
Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These
materials include:
ALUMINUM CANS — Cans made from aluminum that was
manufactured to hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted
from this definition are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
(1)
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS — Bottles and jars made from glass
including clear, brown and green glass. A bottle is defined as a
receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked
or capped. A jar is defined as a wide-mouthed container that can be
capped. Caps and lids not included. Specifically omitted from this
definition are drinking glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and
anything made of Pyrex® or ceramic.
(2)
PLASTIC BOTTLES (CODED 1 AND 2) — Plastic bottles coded to
indicate that they are comprised of the specific types of plastic
compounds (polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate
(PETE) or high-density polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols below. A
bottle is defined as a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth
that can be corked or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item
made of plastic that is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without
one of the symbols shown to the left is specifically omitted from
(3)
§ 107-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-2
105:237
this definition. Empty bottles which contained hazardous materials,
such as motor oil, antifreeze, etc. should not be recycled.
STEEL (TIN) CANS — An airtight container for the distribution
or storage of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal.
Examples are soup cans and tuna fish cans.
(4)
NEWSPAPER — A publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint.
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time.
(5)
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shipping containers made with
kraft paper linerboard and corrugated medium.
(6)
MIXED PAPER — Various categories of recyclable paper including,
but not limited to white and colored paper used in printers,
photocopiers and fax machines, white and colored ledger paper,
carbonless copy paper, construction paper, undeliverable mail,
mailed promotional letters/advertisements/circulars, magazines,
catalogues, envelopes and soft-cover books.
(7)
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn
when they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/
or commercial lawns.
(8)
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Vegetative material generated when grass
(lawns) are cut.
(9)
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
(10)
NATURAL WOOD WASTE — Logs, stumps, branches and other
wood tree parts. Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in
this definition.
(11)
OIL-CONTAMINATED SOIL — Nonhazardous soil that contains
petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, #4 &
#6 heating oils and certain other refinery products including coal
tar). This type of soil shall be determined to be nonhazardous in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26.
(12)
USED MOTOR OIL — Motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers,
boats, etc., which has served its intended useful purpose.
(13)
§ 107-2 MADISON CODE § 107-2
105:238
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and
associated hardware including keyboards, modems, printers scanners
and fax machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a
flat panel display or similar video display device with a screen that is
greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one or
more circuit boards, including a television, and cell phones.
MEDICAL FACILITY — Offices of physicians and dentists, veterinary
clinics, medical testing laboratories, hospitals, health-care facilities and
other establishments which generate medical waste.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Storage batteries in which the
electrodes are grids of lead containing lead oxides that change in
composition during charging and discharging, and the electrolyte
is dilute sulfuric acid. These include starting batteries such as
car batteries that deliver a short burst of high power to start the
engine. In addition, they may include deep cell batteries found on
boats or campers used to power accessories like trolling motors,
winches or lights.
(14)
HAZARDOUS DRY CELL BATTERIES — Rechargeable batteries,
such as nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium
ion, small sealed lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes
for nonrechargeable batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C,
D and 9V. Rechargeable batteries are commonly found in cordless
tools, cellular and cordless phones, laptop computers, cameras,
remote controls, toys, etc. Also included in this definition are
nonrechargeable batteries that are hazardous as defined by the
Resource Conservation Recovery Act ("RCRA"), regardless of the
RCRA exclusion of household waste from the definition of
hazardous waste pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 261.4(b). Nonrechargeable,
hazardous batteries include older alkaline and carbon zinc
batteries as well as silver oxide, mercury and magnesium buttontype
batteries, etc. It should be noted that domestically
manufactured alkaline and carbon zinc nonrechargeable batteries
made after circa 1994 eliminated mercury content to the point that
they should not be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are
not included in this material category.
(15)
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of
metal, and may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for
example, if the appliance is predominantly metal. Also included
are air conditioners, refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are
predominantly metal. If these appliances on the latter list contain
refrigerants that are prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being
knowingly vented, the refrigerant must be recovered accordingly.
(16)
WHOLE TIRES — Tires that are whole, not chipped into small
pieces. [NOTE: Tires are allowed to be recycled and/or incinerated
for energy recovery.]
(17)
§ 107-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-2
105:239
MEDICAL WASTE — All solid waste generated by a medical facility,
including but not limited to tongue depressors, cotton swabs, medical
gloves, surgical gowns, table paper, bandages and gauze, needles and
syringes, pathological wastes, liquids, throat cultures and similar waste
material. This term shall not include office waste, food waste and other
solid waste which is unrelated to any medical use.
MEDICAL WASTE, INFECTIOUS — All medical waste which consists of
needles and syringes, pathological wastes, all liquids in excess of 20
cubic centimeters, throat cultures and similar waste.
MEDICAL WASTE, NONINFECTIOUS — All medical waste which does
not constitute "infectious medical waste."
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other
guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are
defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body to fulfill the requirements
of the Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan and the New Jersey
Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act and those
rules and regulations promulgated therefor.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR — The
person or persons named by the municipality who shall fulfill the
responsibilities with respect to recycling enforcement coordination
detailed in the March 2007 Morris County Solid Waste Management
Plan Amendment Section 8.6. This person may be the same person
designated as the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments
within the boundaries of the municipality of the Borough of Madison
which is not bulky waste or construction and demolition debris.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the
generator thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials
are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from
solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
B. All other definitions and regulations for the collection, transportation
and disposal of residential and commercial solid waste and recyclables
§ 107-2 MADISON CODE § 107-2
105:240
§ 107-3. Source separation; exemption from source-separation
requirements.
§ 107-4. Preparation for collection; prohibited locations.
are set forth in the current contracts for curbside collection and
disposal of solid waste and curbside collection and disposal of
recyclables executed by the Borough with private corporations. These
contracts are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and may be
examined upon request.
A. Mandatory source separation: It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the municipality of the Borough of
Madison, to separate designated recyclable materials from all solid
waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and
apart from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or
occupants of such premises. Designated recyclable materials shall be
placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and times
as may be hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the
Borough of Madison.
B. Exemptions: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf of
the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the
service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
A. All residential and commercial solid waste and recyclables shall be
placed at the curbside or other collection area designated by the
§ 107-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-4
105:241
§ 107-5. Containers.
§ 107-6. Hours for collection.
Borough for collection, and the same shall be placed in appropriate
containers for collection as described herein and pursuant to contract
regulations. Containers shall be placed as near as possible to or along
the curbside.
B. No refuse, grass clippings, yard waste, hedge clippings, shrubbery
clippings, tree branches, tree cuttings or other similar material shall be
placed, pushed, blown, raked or swept in or onto any public walk or
sidewalk so as to interfere with public travel.
C. Curbside collection of solid waste and recyclables is prohibited on Main
Street from Park Avenue to Prospect Street, on Park Avenue from Main
Street to Ridgedale Avenue, on Waverly Place and on Lincoln Place. For
these locations, a collection point must be established, maintained and
kept clear at the rear of the building. Where multiple commercial and/
or residential establishments use the same collection point, each
container must be clearly marked to identify the owner.
D. No leaves, grass clippings, hedge clippings, tree branches, tree
cuttings, yard waste or other similar material shall be placed in any
manner in any street at any time. Leaves placed for collection during
fall pickup shall not be placed in any manner in a street.
A. Each resident or commercial establishment shall be responsible for
providing sufficient containers so as to keep all solid waste and
recyclables contained therein, except for those items defined in the
contract as "large items" which are too large to fit into a container. Such
containers shall be watertight and strong enough so that their contents
do not fall out when the containers are picked up and emptied.
B. Solid waste shall be placed in garbage cans such that the container and
its contents shall not weigh more than 80 pounds. Such garbage cans
shall not exceed 39 gallons in capacity and shall have tight-fitting lids
and handles.
C. Commingled recyclables shall be placed in reusable containers or
garbage cans such that the container and its contents shall not weigh
more than 80 pounds.
D. Newsprint may be combined and placed in strong brown kraft paper
bags or tied in bundles. Bundles shall not weigh more than 25 pounds
each.
E. Yard waste, other than leaves, shall be placed in containers not greater
than thirty-gallon capacity. The container and its contents shall not
weigh more than 80 pounds. Twigs and branches shall be cut to no
more than four-foot lengths and may be tied with twine or heavy cotton
cord.
§ 107-4 MADISON CODE § 107-6
105:242
§ 107-7. Metal appliances; charge for removal.
§ 107-8. Fees for collection.
The following fees will be charged for the pickup of refrigerators, freezers,
air conditioners and other white goods and heavy appliances. Fees are to be
paid to the Borough Clerk prior to making arrangements for pickup.
§ 107-9. Cleanup.
The owner of any receptacle, container, packaged or bundled solid waste
and/or recyclable placed for collection shall be responsible for cleaning and
policing the curbside or collection area in the event that said receptacle,
container, package or bundle is broken and the solid waste and/or
recyclable is scattered.
§ 107-10. Dogs.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit, suffer or allow
said dog to damage any receptacle or container or to scatter or otherwise
disturb any garbage and/or recyclables placed for collection.
§ 107-11. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
A. No solid waste or recyclables shall be place at the curbside or collection
area before 7:00 p.m. on the evening before the day of collection,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. No container, receptacle or uncollected material shall be left at the
curbside or collection area later than 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
A. Metal appliances, as defined in § 107-2, including stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, washing machines, dryers, dish washers and air conditioners
may be placed at the curbside no more than two days prior to the day of
collection. Refrigerator and freezer doors and any other dangerous
attachments must be removed prior to placement for collection.
B. Metal appliances will be picked up by Borough employees. Prior
arrangements must be made with the Public Works Department. A
charge will be imposed for their removal as set forth in § 107-8.
A. Refrigerators and freezers containing Freon: $25.
B. Air conditioners: $25.
C. All other metal appliances: $25.
§ 107-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-11
105:243
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 107-12. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
A. All nonresidential generators, including commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments, of solid waste shall be required to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or his or her designee, unless the municipality provides
for the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoors litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. All nonresidential facilities shall report on an annual basis to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be prescribed,
on recycling activities at their premises, including the amount of
recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any Code enforcement officer.
§ 107-11 MADISON CODE § 107-12
105:244
ARTICLE II
New Developments of Certain Properties
§ 107-13. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c).
§ 107-14. Collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable materials
prohibited.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the Borough of Madison for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily
dwellings of three or more units, single-family developments of 50 or
more units or any commercial, institutional, or industrial development
for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land must include a
recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the municipal recycling coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough of
Madison, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this chapter and the local sanitary
code.
§ 107-13 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-14
105:245
C. Once placed in the location identified by this chapter, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 107-14 MADISON CODE § 107-14
105:246
ARTICLE III
Enforcement, Penalties and Regulations
§ 107-15. Enforcement; random inspections.
§ 107-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $25, nor more than $1,000. Each day such violation shall
be continued shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 107-17. Regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works and the Recycling Coordinator are
hereby authorized and directed to promulgate such reasonable regulations
as necessary for the efficient operation of the solid waste and recycling
collection programs, respectively, including but not limited to the manner,
days and times of collection. Said regulations may also establish reasonable
exceptions from the recycling requirements, such as for physically disabled
or handicapped persons. Such regulations shall take effect only after
adoption by resolution of the Borough Council. Such regulations may be
amended from time to time by the same procedure as deemed necessary
and appropriate.
A. Except as otherwise provided, provisions of this chapter shall be
enforced by the Madison Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent may delegate said enforcement responsibilities to one
or more employees of the Borough of Madison as deemed necessary
and appropriate for effective enforcement.
B. Random inspections of garbage set out for collection can be conducted
in order to determine if recyclable materials are included.
C. The provisions of Article VI, Medical Waste, shall be enforced by the
Madison Health Officer. The Health Officer may delegate said
enforcement responsibilities to one or more employees of the Borough
of Madison as deemed necessary and appropriate for effective
enforcement.
§ 107-15 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-17
105:247

ARTICLE IV
Recyclable Materials
§ 107-18. Recycling mandated.
§ 107-19. Disposal of recyclable materials.
A. There is hereby established a mandatory recycling program for all
residential, commercial and institutional establishments of the Borough
for the purpose of separating recyclable materials, as defined in
§ 107-2, from other waste.
B. As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13b.(4)(c), and section 9.2(b) of the
Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan, the Borough of Madison
accepts the goal of 50% recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015 and
shall monitor its level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall
strive to achieve the recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste
generated within its borders.
C. To achieve the fifty-percent objective, all residential dwellings,
institutional, commercial and industrial businesses shall sourceseparate
designated materials from all other solid waste for recycling.
D. All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of any residential or
commercial property in the Borough of Madison shall separate and
exclude all recyclable materials, as defined herein and as may be
changed or augmented from time to time by the Borough Council or
other governmental agency of competent jurisdiction, from all other
solid waste which is put at the curbside or other collection point for
collection.
E. In multi-generator buildings, such as apartment buildings, hotels,
condominiums or office buildings, the building management as well as
the generator shall be responsible for compliance with material source
separation recycling requirements mandated by the County of Morris
and the Borough of Madison.
A. Commingled recyclables, newsprint and residential corrugated
cardboard shall be placed in containers or bundled as described in
§ 107-4 and placed at the curbside or other designated collection area
or may be brought to the Recycling Center at the Public Works Garage.
B. The owner, lessee or occupant of any commercial establishments shall
be responsible for disposing of all recyclable materials through private
contracts. Commingled recyclables, newsprint, office paper and/or
cardboard may also be brought to the Recycling Center at the Public
Works Garage. Documentation of recycling must be provided to the
Recycling Coordinator as required.
C. Yard waste shall be placed in containers or tied as described in § 107-4
and placed at the curbside or other designated collection area.
§ 107-18 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-19
105:249
§ 107-20. Commingled recyclables.
Prior to disposal, said owners, lessees or occupants shall remove the caps
and shall rinse out glass and plastic bottles and aluminum and tin cans.
§ 107-21. Unauthorized collection prohibited.
From the time that recyclable materials are placed at the curbside for
collection, they shall become the property of the Borough of Madison or
its authorized agents. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such material
unless expressly authorized by the Borough of Madison. Each and every
such unauthorized collection in violation of this section shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense and may be punishable as provided in
§ 107-16.
§ 107-22. Sale or donation of recyclable materials permitted.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any owner,
lessee or occupant of any premises in the Borough of Madison from taking
any recyclable material to any recycling center for sale or donation, nor
shall it prohibit drives by nonprofit organizations or groups from collecting
recyclable materials. Any such nonprofit organization or group shall obtain
a permit from the Borough Clerk to conduct a recyclable materials
collection drive.
D. Tires are to be brought to service stations or tire retailers.
E. Vehicular batteries and motor oil are to brought to service stations.
F. Metal appliances are to be set at the curbside or other designated
collection area to be picked up by Borough employees as directed in
§ 107-7.
G. Oil-contaminated soil and natural wood waste shall be brought to an
accredited recycling facility.
H. Household batteries are to be brought to the county recycling center
during designated hazardous waste days.
§ 107-19 MADISON CODE § 107-22
105:250
ARTICLE V
Recycling Coordinator
§ 107-23. Appointment.
The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Borough Council, upon
the recommendation of the Administrator, and shall be compensated as set
forth in the Salary Ordinance.59
§ 107-24. Duties.
§ 107-25. Distribution of public information.
The Recycling Coordinator shall prepare and distribute public information
to residential, commercial, educational and nonprofit organizations and
houses of worship in the Borough of Madison and other entities as
enumerated in the Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan, which will
promote and/or facilitate recycling and to summarize the recycling program
and the general regulations of this chapter.
A. The Recycling Coordinator shall compile all recycling documentation
and shall file reports to the County of Morris and State of New Jersey as
required and prescribed by laws or rules and regulations passed
pursuant thereto.
B. The Recycling Coordinator shall from time to time make
recommendations to the Borough Council for changes in the recycling
program which will enhance its effectiveness and/or bring it into
compliance with changes in the law.
C. The Recycling Coordinator shall assist the Clean Communities
Coordinator implementing the New Jersey Clean Communities Grant
Program.
59.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 107-23 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-25
105:251

ARTICLE VI
Medical Waste
§ 107-26. Separation of medical waste required; applicability.
§ 107-27. Collection of nonmedical solid waste from medical
facilities.
The collection of nonmedical waste from medical facilities shall be provided
in accordance with the applicable solid waste collection contract provided
for by § 107-2B of this chapter; provided, however, that as a condition of
such collection of nonmedical waste, the collection contractor may impose
additional requirements, such as but not limited to the provision by the
operator of a medical facility of satisfactory proof and/or a certification that
separate contractual arrangements have been made for the collection and
disposal of all medical waste from the medical facility and that no medical
waste will be included with the nonmedical solid waste.
§ 107-28. Liability for Borough costs.
Any person who fails to exclude medical waste from solid waste collected
as part of the normal solid waste collection service within the Borough in
contravention of the requirements of this chapter shall be liable for any
additional costs imposed upon the Borough in connection with the disposal
of said medical waste.
A. All medical facilities shall exclude all medical waste from all solid waste
to be collected as part of the regular solid waste collection service
within the Borough of Madison. The operator of such medical facility
shall be responsible, at his or her own cost and expense, for making
separate contractual arrangements for the collection and disposal of all
medical waste in a lawful manner, which may require separate
arrangements for infectious and noninfectious medical waste.
B. The foregoing exclusion of medical waste from all other solid waste
shall not apply to waste such as diapers, pill vials and bandages
generated by an individual residential household; provided, however,
that it shall be unlawful for medical waste from a medical facility to be
included with any solid waste placed for collection at a residence or any
other location as part of the regular solid waste collection service
within the Borough of Madison.
§ 107-26 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-28
105:253

ARTICLE VII
Severability
§ 107-29. Severability.
If any section, sentence or any part of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this chapter.
§ 107-29 GAMES OF CHANCE § 107-29
105:255
Chapter 109
GASOLINE STORAGE TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison.
OPERATOR — The person who runs the business from the premises of the
owner.
OWNER — The owner of the premises upon which the gasoline storage tank
is located.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity, as well as individuals.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real estate owned by an individual person, as
person is defined herein.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any roads, streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way
dedicated to public use, and shall further include stormwater sewers, catch
basins, streams, brooks and rivers (whether the latter shall cross public or
private property).
§ 109-2. Supervision of gasoline transfers required.
§ 109-3. Removal of spilled gasoline; payment of costs.
A. No person shall within the Borough fill a gasoline storage tank from a
tank truck or any other source unless there shall be a person, during
the entire time of the transfer, in constant attendance and in constant
observation of the transfer.
B. The owner or operator, or both, of the gasoline storage tank shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with Subsection A above.
C. In the event of failure to comply with the requirements of this section,
the owner or operator, or both, of the storage tank shall be presumed
liable to the penalties and conditions of this chapter.
A. In the event gasoline shall spill over, out of or from any storage tank,
hose, line, tank truck or other source and go into, on or upon public
and/or private property and the owner or operator, or both, shall fail to
immediately remove the gasoline from said public and/or private
§ 107-29 MADISON CODE § 109-3
109:256
§ 109-4. Collection of costs.
The Borough Administrator shall certify the cost of removing the spilled
gasoline to the Council of the Borough of Madison, which shall examine the
certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands of the owner on which the gasoline storage tank
is located. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such
lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon such lands. The same shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 109-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
Chapter 110
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 185.
property, the Fire Chief of the Borough is hereby directed to remove
said gasoline, at his discretion, by either utilizing employees and
equipment of the Borough or by hiring, without advertisement for
bids, an independent contractor to remove said gasoline. The owner or
operator, or both, shall, upon the spilling of gasoline as hereinabove set
forth, notify immediately the Fire Department of the Borough or, in the
event the Fire Department cannot be reached, the Police Department.
B. In the event the Fire Chief shall be required to remove spilled gasoline,
the owner of the premises on which the gasoline storage tank is located
shall be liable for payment of the amount of either:
(1) The cost of services of the independent contractor, or
(2) The cost of the Borough employees' services at an hourly rate
established by dividing the rate of pay of said employee whose
services are required by 2,080 and multiplying by the number of
hours worked, and the cost to the Borough of all materials, supplies
and equipment utilized.
§ 109-3 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 109-5
110:257
§ 110-1. Designation of spaces. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No.
1-2001; 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 8-2003]
The areas listed, a copy of which list is on file in the Borough Clerk's office,
are hereby designated as handicapped parking spaces for the exclusive use
of persons who have been issued special identification cards by the Division
of Motor Vehicles. Said designation shall be indicated on the parking space
in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways. Each space shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide.
§ 110-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
47-2003]
The penalty for violating § 110-1 shall be a fine of $250 for the first offense
and a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service for all
subsequent offenses, on such terms and in such form as the court shall
deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 110-3. Repealer; when effective.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, and this chapter shall take effect as provided by law.
§ 110-4. Removal of snow and ice; time limit; violations and
penalties. [Added 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 35-94]
Chapter 111
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 111-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for reimbursement for the cost
of the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment which is required
A. Owners of premises, whether public or private, having parking spaces
reserved for handicapped drivers, must clear said handicapped parking
spaces and access thereto of snow and/or ice.
B. No owner or operator of premises, whether public or private, having
parking spaces reserved for handicapped drivers and no tenant,
contractor or other person may block access to such parking stalls
reserved for handicapped drivers by the plowing, piling or placement of
snow or ice in such spaces.
C. Handicapped parking spaces must be cleared of snow and ice within 12
hours after the same shall fall or form thereon.
D. The penalty for violating this section shall be $200 per offense.
§ 109-5 MADISON CODE § 111-1
111:258
by state and federal regulations to be made available in the Borough in
case of fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material. The
provisions of this chapter entitle the Borough of Madison to reimbursement
for any expendable items used by the Borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling any
spill of hazardous materials.
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which cannot be
reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire, leak
or spill. These include, but are not limited to, fire-fighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums and
specialized protective equipment, including but not limited to acid suits,
acid gloves, goggles, protective clothing, turnout equipment, station and
dress uniforms and personal effects.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the National Fire Protection Association Guide of Hazardous
Materials or the Department of Transportation Guide Book.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractor
trailers, construction equipment, farm machinery, planes and boats.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box cylinder or tank used to hold, contain,
carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 111-3. Reimbursement to be paid for hazardous materials
incidents.
A. Reimbursement shall be paid by the following parties to the Borough of
Madison for expendable items used in connection with extinguishing
any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling any spill of
hazardous material:
(1) The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak
or spill of hazardous material.
(2) The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing
hazardous material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or
private property, whether stationery or in transit, whether
accidental or through negligence.
(3) The owner or person responsible for any property from which any
leak or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or
through negligence.
§ 111-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 111-3
111:259
§ 111-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1994 by Ord. No.
5-94; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
§ 111-5. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this chapter.
Chapter 112
HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
Official map — See Ch. 131.
Land development — See Ch. 195.
§ 112-1. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to assist implementation of the historic
preservation element of the Master Plan, to provide guidance in achieving
preservation of historic resources in the designated Historic District and to
advance the following public purposes:
(4) Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
material on public or private property, whether accidental or
through negligence.
B. Any person listed in Subsection A shall also provide reimbursement for
services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or other
technical assistance called for by the Fire Department or Office of
Emergency Management to handle such hazardous materials incident.
The amount of said reimbursement shall be in accordance with a
schedule of reasonable charges annexed hereto and incorporated
herein by reference.
C. Any reimbursement required to be paid under this section shall be paid
within 45 days after receipt of a bill from the Borough for said
reimbursement
§ 111-3 MADISON CODE § 112-1
111:260
§ 112-2. Definitions.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in building size, floor area or height.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — For purposes of this Historic Preservation
Ordinance, the Borough Engineer shall be the administrative officer.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height
or the moving from one location or position to another, or the change in
appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement.
CERTIFICATE OF HISTORIC REVIEW — A document issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission confirming their review of any alteration or
addition to a site or a property within the Historic District. Such review is
based upon plans presented for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation
or alteration of an existing property, or the demolition, addition, removal,
repair or remodeling of any feature on an existing building within the
Historic District or for any new construction within the Historic District.
DEMOLITION — "Demolition" is the total razing, dismantling or more than
partial destruction of any historic site or any improvement within the
Historic District.
DESIGNATED SITE — A site that has been designated per § 112-4 herein.
GUIDELINES — The guidelines for both the Historic Preservation
Commission and applicants for a certificate of historic review shall be
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, adopted by
A. To promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough and its visitors and to promote
civic pride in the Borough's historic resources.
B. To foster private reinvestment in the historic district and sites and
balance the purposes of historic preservation with current needs.
C. To encourage preservation of sites of historic, archaeological, cultural,
social and architectural significance.
D. To encourage the continued use of historic sites and to facilitate their
appropriate reuse.
E. To maintain and promote an appropriate and harmonious setting for
existing historic resources within the Borough.
F. To recognize and preserve historic resources in the Borough as an
essential element of municipal character and identity which contributes
to the reputation of Madison as a place of beauty and architectural
value.
G. To encourage appropriate alterations to historic sites and new
construction which is in keeping with the character of historic districts
and sites.
§ 112-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-2
111:261
reference. Design guidelines developed specifically for the Madison Historic
Preservation Commission are set forth herein in § 112-7 and may take
precedence over the Secretary of the Interior's Standards where more
specifically applicable to the buildings and sites within Madison.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and certain intervening
or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of historic site or sites, as specifically designated herein.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
designated in the Master Plan as being of historic, archaeological, cultural,
scenic or architectural significance at the national, state or local level,
as specifically designated herein. The designation of an historic site or
landmark shall be deemed to include the Tax Map lot on which it is located
as well as the right-of-way contiguous thereto. When used in this chapter,
the word "landmark" may be substituted for historic site.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof installed upon public
or private property and intended to be kept at the location of such
construction or installation.
INTEGRITY — The authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced
by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's
historic or prehistoric period.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet criteria of
designation specified herein.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Repair of any deterioration,
wear or damage to a structure in order to return the same as nearly as
practicable to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration,
wear or damage with material and workmanship of the same quality.
Ordinary maintenance shall further include replacement of exterior
elements or accessory hardware, including signs, using the same materials
and workmanship and having the same appearance.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures to sustain
the existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure and
the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial
stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the
historic building's materials.
PROTECTION — The act or process of applying measures designed to
affect the physical condition of a property by defending or guarding it from
deterioration, loss or attack or to cover or shield the property from danger
or injury.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure or
object, or any part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.
§ 112-2 MADISON CODE § 112-2
111:262
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a property to a state
of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the
property which are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural
values.
REPAIR — Any work done on an improvement that is not an addition and
does not change the exterior appearance of any improvement; provided,
however, that any such repairs must be done with materials and
workmanship of the same quality.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the form and
details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of
time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing
earlier work.
STREETSCAPE — The visual character of the street, including but not
limited to the architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
storefronts, signs, lighting, parking areas, materials, color, sidewalks,
curbing and landscaping.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land. The word "structure" shall also include any
building or improvement with a roof.
§ 112-3. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Responsibilities. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To identify, record and maintain a system for survey and inventory
of all buildings, sites, places, improvements and structures of
historical or architectural significance based on the Secretary of
the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and
Historic Preservation (Standards and Guidelines for Identification);
and to aid the public in understanding their worth, methods of
preservation, techniques of gathering documentation and related
matters.
(2) To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the
implications for preservation of historic sites of any other Master
Plan elements.
(3) To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites and
landmarks in the recommended capital improvement program.
(4) To participate in the Technical Coordinating Committee and advise
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
NJ.S.A. 40:55D-110.
§ 112-2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-3
111:263
(5) To provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 on the
application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions concerning historic
preservation.
(6) To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Borough.
B. Establishment.
(1) Members. The Historic Preservation Commission, previously
established by ordinance and appointed by the Mayor, is hereby
continued consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The
Commission shall consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members. Members shall serve without compensation. At
least one member shall be designated of each of the following
classes: [Amended 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 30-2005
(a) Class A. A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(b) Class B. A person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(c) Class C. Citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except for
membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment. At least one Class C member shall be the owner of
commercial property within Madison.
(d) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members. At the time of appointment, alternate members shall
be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Of
the seven regular members, a total of at least one less than a
majority shall be of Classes A and B.
(2) Terms.
(a) There shall be no change in the term of office of those
members serving on the Commission at the time this chapter
becomes effective. Thereafter, the term of a regular member
shall be four years; the term of an alternate member shall be
two years. [Amended 12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 54-2003]
(b) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled within 60 days for the unexpired term only.
(3) Alternates. The alternate members may participate in discussions
of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
§ 112-3 MADISON CODE § 112-3
111:264
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(4) Budget. The governing body shall make provision in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Commission may employ, contract for and fix the
compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall
deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from
the municipal attorney at the rate of compensation determined by
the governing body, unless the governing body, by appropriation,
provides for separate legal counsel for the Commission.
Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for the Commission's use.
(5) Rules of Commission.
(a) The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman
from its members and select a Secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Commission or a municipal employee.
(b) The Commission shall adopt written rules for the transaction of
its business and for the consideration of applications for
certificates of historic review and for designations of historic
districts and sites. Such rules shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter and shall include but not be limited
to rules pertaining to all notices and hearings required herein.
(c) In order to make available to the public information useful to
the preservation and protection of historic districts and sites
and to provide the basis for consistency of policy, the
administrative officer, on behalf of the Commission, shall
maintain complete files and records, including but not limited
to data used in the classification of buildings, places and
structures, minutes of Commission meetings, applications for
certificates of historic review, along with collateral data,
decisions and appeals associated therewith, and information,
materials and references submitted to the public related to
historic preservation. A record of the proceedings shall be kept
and made available, but a formal verbatim record shall not be
required.
(d) The Commission Secretary shall keep minutes and records of
all meetings and proceedings, including voting records,
attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, decisions
and applications. Copies of all minutes shall be delivered
promptly to the Borough Clerk.
(e) No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Mere ownership or residence in
a designated historic district and/or ownership of a designated
§ 112-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-3
111:265
§ 112-4. Designation of historic sites and districts.
historic site or a nondesignated site shall not be deemed a
personal or financial interest unless a member resides or owns
property within 200 feet of property which is the subject of an
application.
(f) The office of any member who shall be absent from three
consecutive meetings of the Commission without just cause
may be deemed vacant, at the discretion of the Mayor, and his
or her membership on the Historic Preservation Commission
terminated. If the Commission determines that a member is
absent from any meeting without just cause, it shall be duly
noted in the minutes of that meeting, and it shall be the duty of
the Chairperson to so notify that member in writing. The
mailing of the minutes of a particular meeting to the
Commission members shall constitute written notice to each
member. A member of the Commission may, after a public
hearing, if requested, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
(6) Meetings; quorum.
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish and post
in Borough Hall a regular schedule of a minimum of 10
meetings per year. Additional meetings may be called by the
Chairman or Vice Chairman when the regular meetings are
inadequate to meet the needs of its business, to handle
emergencies or to meet time constraints imposed by law.
(b) Four members shall constitute a quorum. Ex-officio members
are not entitled to vote. A majority vote of those present and
voting shall prevail and shall be sufficient to grant or deny a
certificate of historic review. Not less than a majority of the
appointed membership shall be required to grant or change a
historic site or district designation.
(c) The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare an annual
report which shall be available to the public and placed on file
in the Borough Hall. The report shall detail all activities,
including problem solving, advice and support given and
success stories.
A. Survey. The Commission shall perform a comprehensive survey of the
Borough of Madison to identify historic districts, sites and
improvements which are worthy of protection and preservation.
B. Criteria for designation. The survey shall be used as a basis for
identifying sites and districts worthy of designation. The criteria for
evaluating and designating historic districts and sites shall be guided
by the National Register Criteria. The Commission or any interested
§ 112-3 MADISON CODE § 112-4
111:266
party may recommend designation of historic sites or districts that
have integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and
association and that meet one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the Borough, State or nation.
(2) Association with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history.
(3) Association with the lives of persons significant in our past.
(4) Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture or engineering.
(5) Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the Borough, sate or nation.
(6) Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or
craftsmanship that render an improvement architecturally
significant or structurally innovative.
(7) Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a
district or site an established or familiar visual feature.
(8) That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important
in prehistory or history.
C. Procedures for designation.
(1) Interested parties shall contact the administrative officer regarding
consideration of a proposed historic site or district. The
Commission may also initiate the designation of an historic site or
district. The administrative officer will schedule a hearing before
the Commission to review the proposed historic site or district.
(2) The formal historic district nomination shall include: a building-bybuilding
inventory of all properties within the district; black and
white photographs of all properties within the district; a property
map of the district showing boundaries; and a physical description
and statement of significance which address the criteria for
designation set forth herein. The formal historic site nomination
shall include: a black and white photograph, a tax map of the
property and a physical description and statement of significance
which address the criteria for designation set forth herein.
(3) Upon review and approval of the proposed site or historic district
by the Historic Preservation commission, and after hearing the
comments of the public, if any, the Commission shall forward the
proposed site or district nomination to the Planning Board for
consideration. Notification shall be by public notice in the official
paper and by prominent posting in the Municipal Building at least
§ 112-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-4
111:267
§ 112-5. Referral from municipal agencies for development
applications.
30 days prior to the Planning Board hearing. The interested parties
or the Commission shall submit to the Planning Board a complete
list of involved properties.
(4) Upon review and approval of the proposed site or district by the
Planning Board, the site or district nomination will be sent to the
Borough Council for adoption to amend and supplement the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(5) All other requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law60 regarding
adoption of development regulations shall be followed and the
owner of the proposed site(s) or the owners within a proposed
historic district shall receive notice, at least 10 days prior to the
hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the hearing
by the Borough Council of the adoption of an ordinance designating
the proposed historic site or district.
D. Designation of districts. The following historic districts are delineated
and described in the Master Plan and are each hereby a designated
historic district for purposes of this chapter: [Amended 3-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 15-2008]
(1) Designated districts.
(a) Madison Civic Commercial Historic District. The designated
historic district is set forth on the Zoning Map of the Borough
of Madison which is incorporated herein by reference.
(b) The Bottle Hill Historic District. The designated historic
district is set forth on the Zoning Map of the Borough of
Madison which is incorporated herein by reference.
(2) Additional districts. Any additional designated districts and sites
and/or any changes in the designation of historic districts and
historic sites shall be effectuated by amendment of this chapter in
accordance with procedures provided for under Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the procedures set forth
herein.
A. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall refer to the
Commission every application for development or zone change request
submitted to either Board for development in historic districts or on
historic sites designated on the Zoning Map. This referral shall be made
when the application for development is filed with the administrative
officer. Failure to refer the application as required shall not invalidate
any hearing or proceeding. The Commission may provide its advice,
which shall be conveyed through its delegation of one of its members or
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 112-4 MADISON CODE § 112-5
111:268
§ 112-6. Certificate of historic review.
staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain
any written report which may have been submitted.
B. On all matters referred to the Commission which require approval by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the decision of the
Commission shall be a recommendation only.
C. An approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, does not relieve the applicant of the requirements to
obtain a certificate of historic review for properties within the Historic
District.
A. When required. A certificate of historic review issued by the
Commission shall be required before a permit is issued or before work
can commence for any of the following activities within the historic
district:
(1) The demolition of any building, improvement, site, place or
structure. When considering applications involving demolition as
defined herein, the Commission's report shall contain advice and
recommendations for the applicant in regard to the
appropriateness of the proposed action, and the report may contain
mandatory conditions. The administrative officer shall include the
advice and recommendations of the Commission in the permit.
(2) Addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory building
or structure. When considering applications involving new
construction as defined herein, the Commission's report shall
contain advice and recommendations for the applicant in regard to
the appropriateness of the proposed action, and the report may
contain mandatory conditions. The administrative officer shall
include the advice and recommendations of the Commission in the
permit.
(3) Change in the exterior appearance of any building, improvement,
site, place or structure by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
maintenance. Exterior change for all primary and accessory
buildings shall include special consideration of character defining
features visible from the public right-of-way. When considering
applications involving change in exterior appearance, the
Commission's report shall contain advice and recommendations for
the applicant in regard to the appropriateness of the proposed
action, but the report shall not contain any mandatory conditions.
The administrative officer shall include the advice and
recommendations of the Commission in the permit but the
applicant is not required to comply with the recommendations.
§ 112-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-6
111:269
B. When not required. A certificate of historic review shall not be required
before a permit is issued by the Construction Code Official for changes
only to the interior of a structure.
C. Procedures.
(1) All applicants shall complete an application form. Application forms
shall be made available in the office of the administrative officer/
Borough Engineer. Completed applications shall be filed with the
administrative officer/ Borough Engineer.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions and other information to show the
proposed alterations, additions, changes or new construction. The
Commission may require additional materials as it reasonably
requires to make an informed decision.
(3) The Commission shall reach a decision on an application and
submit its report to the administrative officer within 45 days of
referral of same by the administrative officer. Nothing herein shall
prohibit an extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant
and the Commission.
(4) Informational meetings. Persons considering action that requires a
certificate of historic review, as set forth in this section, are
encouraged to request an informal informational meeting with the
Commission and/or its Chairman. Requests for such informational
meetings can be made to the administrative officer, who will
contact the Chairman of the Commission. The Commission shall
hold such informational meetings within 15 days of receipt of such
request. The purpose of an informational meeting is to review with
the applicant the standards of appropriateness and the procedures
for obtaining a certificate of historic review.
(5) Application review.
(a) In addition to complying with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Act,61 and except in the event of an
emergency, at least 15 days prior to such meeting notice shall
be given to the applicant of the time, date, place and specific
subject of the meeting.
(b) A certificate of historic review shall be valid for a period of two
years from date of issue unless reasonable extensions are
requested by the applicant or the Commission.
(c) The owner shall post the certificate of historic review on a
conspicuous spot on the site visible to the public during the
entire process of work.
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 112-6 MADISON CODE § 112-6
111:270
(d) An applicant is encouraged to attend the Historic Preservation
Commission meeting when the project is to be reviewed.
However, the applicant shall not be required to appear or to be
represented at the meeting to consider the application for a
certificate of historic review and the Commission may take
action in the absence of the applicant.
(e) When an application is approved, the Commission shall
forthwith issue a certificate of historic review which shall be
forwarded to the applicant. Failure to report within a forty-fiveday
period shall be deemed to constitute a default approval in
favor of the proposed work.
(6) Emergency procedures.
(a) When a structure or improvement requires immediate repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the structure and/or the
health and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs
may be performed in accordance with construction codes
without first obtaining a certificate of historic review. Under
such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such
as are necessary to protect the health and safety of the
occupants of the structure or others and/or to maintain the
habitability of the structure.
(b) A request for the Commission's review shall be made
simultaneously with the onset of emergency work. Such
emergency work shall be permitted only if the administrative
officer certifies the immediate necessity for such permit
issuance. Upon notice to the full Commission by telephone,
personal contact or other appropriate means of
communication, at least three members of the Commission
shall convene as soon as possible and such convening members
shall proceed to review the certificate of historic review
application as provided in this chapter. Subsequent to such
review, a certificate of historicc review may be issued upon a
majority vote of the members convened.
(7) Procedure for granting certification of appropriate municipal
actions.
(a) It is recognized that the intent and purposes of this chapter
would not be fully served if the municipality were to control the
actions of others but fail to apply similar constraints to itself.
Accordingly, a certificate of historic review shall be required
before final approval of any municipal actions on public as well
as private lands, streets, easements and rights-of-way within
the Historic District or listed in the Historic Sites Inventory of
the Master Plan. This requirement shall be deemed to include
any action by any party which requires the approval or
concurrence of the municipality or any municipal agency and
§ 112-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-6
111:271
§ 112-7. Standards, design guidelines and criteria.
The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards, design
guidelines and criteria for the regulations of the Historic District for use by
the Historic Preservation Commission. All projects requiring a certificate of
historic review and all applications for development in the Historic District
shall be guided by the principles of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings.
which is not otherwise covered by the provisions of this
chapter.
(b) In those circumstances where the municipality cannot require
compliance, as in certain cases involving the county, state and
federal governments, the Borough urges, most strongly, the
voluntary cooperation of such agencies in seeking a certificate
of historic review and hereby authorizes the Commission to
consider such requests and applications. This does not relieve
the property owner from complying with applicable state and
federal regulations regarding historic preservation.
A. Secretary of Interior's Standards. In carrying out all of its duties and
responsibilities, the Commission shall be guided by the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings which are
as follows:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, a structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible. In the event that replacement is
§ 112-6 MADISON CODE § 112-7
111:272
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual
qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
shall be substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence
rather than on conjectural design or the availability of different
architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale,
color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
B. Visual compatibility factors. In assessing the design of any proposed
additions or new construction, the following visual compatibility factors
shall be considered in conjunction with the Secretary of Interior's
Standards set forth above by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids
to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
§ 112-7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-7
111:273
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, its mass in relation to open
spaces and its windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(12) Exterior features. A building's related exterior features, such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those buildings and places
to which it is visually related and shall be appropriate for the
historic period for which the building is significant.
C. Madison design guidelines for the Civic Commercial District; intent.
(1) In assessing change in the exterior appearance of any building,
improvement, site, place or structure by addition, reconstruction,
alteration or maintenance, the Commission's deliberations shall be
guided by the Madison Design Guidelines for the Civic Commercial
District, which are adopted as an appendix to this chapter and
which are incorporated by reference, and shall be considered in
conjunction with the Secretary of Interior's Standards set forth
above by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(2) It is not the intent of this chapter to discourage contemporary
architectural expression or to encourage new construction which
emulates existing buildings of historic or architectural style but
§ 112-7 MADISON CODE § 112-7
111:274
§ 112-8. Demolition.
rather to preserve the integrity and authenticity of the historic
preservation districts and to ensure the compatibility of new
structures therein.
A. As set forth in § 112-6A(1) hereinabove, a certificate of historic review
and compliance is required for the demolition of any building,
improvement, site, place or structure.
B. Criteria. In regard to an application to demolish or move an historic
building, site, place or structure, the following matters shall be
considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic significance in
relation to the criteria of § 112-4B.
(2) Its current and potential use for those purposes currently
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance or for the use proposed.
(3) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would increase property values,
promote business, create positions, attract tourists, students,
writers, historian, artists and artisans, attract new residents,
encourage study and interest in American history, stimulate
interest and study in architecture, educate citizens in American
culture and heritage or make the municipality a more attractive
and desirable place to live.
(6) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the
historic district.
(7) The structural soundness and integrity of the building and the
economic feasibility of restoring or rehabilitating the structure so
as to comply with the requirements of the applicable building
codes.
(8) The compelling reasons for not retaining the structure or
improvement at its present site, the proximity of the proposed new
location and its accessibility to residents of the municipality and
the probability of significant damage to the structure or
improvement as a result of the relocation.
(9) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this chapter and whether the proposed new location is
§ 112-7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-8
111:275
visually compatible in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
(10) A discussion with the applicant regarding applicant's consent to
the removal and reuse of certain important features of the historic
building or structure.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applications for a demolition permit must be made to the Building
Construction Official. For all properties within the Historic District,
a copy of the application will be forwarded to the Historic
Preservation Commission within 15 days of receipt of the complete
demolition application by the Building Code Official.
(2) When considering applications for demolition permits, the
Commission's report may contain mandatory conditions, in which
event the administrative officer shall include the conditions
contained in the certificate of historic review in any permit which is
issued.
(3) Applications for demolition shall include current and archival
photographs of the interior and exterior of the building and
drawings to document the condition of the building.
(4) The Commission's review of a demolition application may take up
to 45 days from receipt of completed application, just as in the case
of a development application.
(5) Demolition notice posting and publication. Notice of proposed
demolition shall be posted on the premises of the building, place or
structure in a location that is clearly readable from the street. In
addition, the applicant shall publish a notice in the official
newspaper of the Borough within 10 days of an application for a
demolition permit.
(6) Review of application.
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission will review the
application for demolition based on the criteria outlined above.
Its report may:
[1] Approve demolition without conditions.
[2] Stipulate conditions, including but not limited to
documentation of the building prior to demolition and/or
confirmation of applicant's consent to the removal and
reuse of certain important features of the historic building
or structure.
[3] In the event that the Commission disapproves an
application to demolish an historic building, place or
structure, the owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter of
§ 112-8 MADISON CODE § 112-8
111:276
§ 112-9. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether such
application involves any activity which should also be the subject of an
application for a certificate of historic review. If it should, the officer shall
inform both the administrative officer and the applicant, as well as the
Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 112-10. Violations, penalties and injunctive relief.
right, be entitled to raze or demolish such building, place
or structure, provided that all of the other demolition
requirements of the Borough have been fully met.
(7) All new construction on the site of a building demolished within the
Historic District is subject to mandatory review by the Historic
Preservation Commission. The new construction shall be in the
character of the Madison Civic Commercial Historic District, and
all comments of the Commission in these circumstances are
binding upon the applicant. The certificate of historic review will be
issued only when the Historic Preservation Commission is satisfied
that the facades of the replacement structure meets all the criteria
of the Design Guidelines deemed applicable and fits appropriately
within the Historic District.
(8) When a certificate of historic review has been issued, the
administrative officer or his appointee shall, from time to time,
inspect the work approved by such certificate and shall regularly
report to the Commission the results of such inspections, listing all
work inspected and reporting any work not in accordance with
such certificate.
A. Violations.
(1) If any person shall undertake any activity regarding an historic site
or improvement within an historic district without first having
obtained and posted a certificate of historic review, such person
shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
(2) Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally
serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a
notice describing the violation in detail and giving the owner 10
days to abate the violation by seeking review of the extent and
proposed work by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(3) If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality
with said notice, a copy shall be posted on site and a copy sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last
known address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
§ 112-8 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-10
111:277
§ 112-11. Appeals.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.2
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 may be taken by any interested party affected by
any order, requirement, decision or refusal of the administrative officer
pursuant to a report submitted by the Historic Preservation Commission
or Planning Board, including a denial of a certificate of historic review, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111. Such appeal shall be taken within 20
days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal
is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
§ 112-12. Other requirements unaffected.
The requirements of this chapter shall be considered to be in addition to and
in no case shall they be interpreted as a substitute for any other approval,
permit or other action as otherwise provided for.
§ 112-13. Notice.
Notice shall be made to all historic district property owners 30 days prior
to any change(s), addition(s), deletion(s) or revocation(s) affecting the
purposes and conditions set forth herein. Notice shall be made by copy sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last known
address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
B. Penalties. If any person shall undertake demolition or removal or new
construction affecting an historic site or improvement within an historic
district without first having obtained a certificate of historic review or
without subsequent review by the Commission following discovery of
the omission, he may be required to restore same to the previous
condition. In addition, there shall be imposed upon such person the
fines and penalties set forth in § 195-15C of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Madison. There shall be no fines or penalties imposed upon
failure to obtain a certificate of historic review for change in the
exterior appearance of any building improvement, site, place or
structure by addition, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance, for
which action mandatory conditions are not imposed in relation to
§ 112-6A(3).
C. Injunctive Relief. In the event that any action which would permanently
and adversely change an historic site or historic district, such as
demolition or removal, is about to occur without a certificate of historic
review having been issued, the Zoning Officer may apply to the
Superior Court of New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is necessary
to prevent the destruction of such site or landmark.
§ 112-10 MADISON CODE § 112-14
111:278
§ 112-14. Interpretation.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth
herein. In the event that this Ordinance conflicts with state law, state law
shall take precedence.
§ 112-15. When effective; superseder.
This Ordinance shall take effect upon publication after final passage and
approval, as provided by law, and shall supersede, in its entierty, Ordinance
No. 31-93 codified as Chapter 112 of the Madison Borough Code.
Chapter 113
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 24.
Property Maintenance Emergency
Committee — See Ch. 36.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
77.
Fire prevention - See Ch. 101.
Property maintenance - See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
§ 113-1. Enforcement officer. [Amended 5-10-1971 by Ord. No.
8-71]
The Housing Officer of the Borough of Madison is hereby designated as
the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and he shall
serve in such capacity at such salary as shall be set by the annual Salary
Ordinance of the Borough.62
§ 113-2. Adoption of standard code by reference.
Pursuant to the provision of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.R.S. 40:49-5.1), the
New Jersey State Housing Code, as approved by the Departments of Health
and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of
State's office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established as the standard
to be used as a guide to determining whether dwellings in this municipality
are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New
Jersey State Housing Code is annexed to this chapter, and three copies of
the same have been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and are
available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
62.Editor's Note: For information pertaining to the Salary Ordinance, see Ch. 42, Salaries and
Compensation.
§ 112-14 HOUSING STANDARDS § 113-3
113:279
§ 113-3. Inspections. [Amended 5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71]
The Housing Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the condition of dwelling units, rooming units and premises
located within the Borough of Madison in order that he may perform his
duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections
the Housing Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and
rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing
Officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 113-4. Determination that a building is unfit; notice of violation.
[Amended 5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71]
A. Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Officer by a public
authority, as defined in N.J.R.S. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of
the Borough of Madison charging that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the Housing
Officer, on his own motion, that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Housing Officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that: [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
(1) A hearing will be held before the Housing Officer, or his designated
agent, at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than
30 days after the serving of said complaint.
(2) The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
(3) The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Housing Officer.
B. If, after such notice and hearing, the Housing Officer determines that
the building under consideration is unfit for habitation or occupancy or
use he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the owner to repair, or
§ 113-3 MADISON CODE § 113-4
113:280
§ 113-5. Failure to comply with order of removal. [Amended
5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71]
§ 113-6. Costs as lien; credits from sale of materials; right of owner
to contest costs. [Amended 5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71]
improve the said building within a reasonable time, which time shall be
set forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have
the said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the
order.
C. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time specified in
the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
said building within a reasonable time as specified in the said order of
removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Housing
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The Housing Officer may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Housing Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
A. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken
under this chapter and by statute determined in favor of the
municipality, and such cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Housing Officer, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Borough Tax Collector and a copy thereof shall be forthwith
§ 113-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 113-6
113:281
§ 113-7. Service of complaints or orders. [Amended 5-10-1971 by
Ord. No. 8-71]
Complaints or orders issued by the Housing Officer or his designated agent,
pursuant to this chapter, shall be served upon persons either personally or
by registered mail, but ff the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and
the same cannot be ascertained by said Housing Officer or his designated
agent in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the said Housing Officer
or his designated agent shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the
serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by
publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the Borough of Madison. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or order
shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording officer
of the county in which the dwelling is located.
§ 113-8. Emergencies. [Amended 5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71]
Whenever the Housing Officer or his designated agent finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Housing Officer or his designated agent, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon
his findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Housing
Officer or his designated agent shall continue such order in effect, modify it
or revoke it.
forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits
exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Housing Officer, shall be secured in such manner
as may be directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to
the order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in
any way the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances
and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise.
C. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 113-6 MADISON CODE § 113-9
113:282
§ 113-9. Additional powers of Housing Officer. [Amended 5-10-1971
by Ord. No. 8-71]
The Housing Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 113-10. Occupancy of unfit dwellings prohibited.
No person shall occupy as owner occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 113-11. Registration of rental properties. [Added 5-10-1971 by
Ord. No. 8-71]
A. To investigate the building conditions in the Borough of Madison in
order to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. Using due process of law, to enter upon premises for the purpose of
making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be
made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the persons in possession.
A. All owners and the management of every building and structure in the
Borough of Madison which is occupied by two or more families as
tenants of the owner or lessor shall register with the Clerk of the
Borough on a form prescribed by and furnished by the Borough at the
Clerk's office. The registration form shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the owner.
(2) Name and address of the lessor, if other than the owner.
(3) Name and address of the agent in charge of the premises in the
Borough.
B. Every owner or lessor of a building and structure, where said owner or
lessor resides outside the Borough of Madison, or off the premises, shall
designate an agent for such premises who resides in the Borough.
C. When any notice is required to be served upon the owner, lessor or
agent of the owner or lessor of any building or premises pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or any ordinance of the Borough and the
owner or lessor shall have failed to register his premises with the
Borough Clerk and designate an agent for the premises who resides in
§ 113-9 HOUSING STANDARDS § 113-11
113:283
§ 113-12. Effect of provisions on other ordinances and regulations.
[Added 5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 8-71; amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of the Borough of Madison to enforce
any provisions of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or to punish
violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or
ordinance.
§ 113-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Chapter 119
LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS
§ 119-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
the municipality, or where such agent has been designated but cannot
be found at the address given in the registration then it shall be
sufficient notice to the owner or lessor, and proper service upon them,
to post the notice upon the premises in a conspicuous place. [Amended
6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by one or more of the following in the discretion
of the Judge: a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. In the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this
section, such fine shall be no less than $100. Each violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
B. If a fine in an amount greater than $1,250 is administered upon an
owner for a housing violation, then a thirty-day period shall be provided
in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate
the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a
court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the
property, it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.
§ 113-11 MADISON CODE § 119-1
119:284
BORROW — The receipt of library materials from the Madison Public
Library by means of or by charging the same to a library card pursuant to
procedures as established by the library requiring the return of said library
material within a specified period of time.
LIBRARY — The Madison Public Library established and funded by the
Borough of Madison pursuant to the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
LIBRARY MATERIALS — Any books, other written materials, phonograph
records, videocassettes, other audiovisual materials and any other materials
provided by the library for borrowing by its patrons, including materials
provided pursuant to reciprocal and interlibrary loan programs.
§ 119-2. Rules, regulations and procedures.
The Board of Trustees of the Madison Public Library shall adopt and post
in a conspicuous place in the library reasonable rules, regulations and
procedures governing the borrowing of library materials which may be
available for borrowing to the public and concerning such other matters as
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Board of Trustees.
§ 119-3. Damage prohibited.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any library
materials or other property borrowed from, owned by or in the custody of
the Madison Public Library.
§ 119-4. Compliance with rules for borrowing required.
No person shall remove from the library any materials or other property
owned by or in the custody of the library, unless such person shall have
complied with the applicable rules, regulations and procedures of the
library governing the borrowing of such library materials.
§ 119-5. Timely return of materials.
No person shall detain or fail to return any library materials borrowed from
the Madison Public Library after 30 days have elapsed from the date of
posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding
return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the
library. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be in addition
to the requirements of any library regulations governing fines for the late
return of borrowed library materials.
§ 119-6. False information; unauthorized use of library card.
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address to obtain a
library card or use without the owner's permission any library card other
than the one issued to said person for the purpose of borrowing library
materials from the Madison Public Library.
§ 119-1 LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS § 119-7
119:285
§ 119-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Director of the
Madison Public Library or such person as may, from time to time, be
designated by the Board of Trustees of the Madison Public Library.
§ 119-8. Separate violations.
§ 119-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
35-93]
§ 119-10. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such determination shall not be
deemed to affect the constitutionality or validity of remaining portions of
this chapter.
A. Any violation of § 119-3, 119-4 or 119-5 of this chapter shall constitute a
separate violation as to each item of library materials or property
damaged, removed without authorization or not timely returned to the
library.
B. In the case of any violation of § 119-5 of this chapter, each thirty-day
period after receipt of the initial notice provided for therein during
which library materials are not returned shall constitute a separate
violation.
A. Persons charged with a violation of this chapter shall be permitted to
pay the penalties through the Violation Bureau, provided that all library
materials are returned to the library, fine paid to the library and a
receipt therefor exhibited to the Violations Clerk. For the first offense,
the penalty shall be $25; and for the second offense, the penalty shall be
$30. For further offenses and for other violations of this chapter, a court
appearance is required, and a penalty will be assessed, in the discretion
of the Judge of the Municipal Court, not to exceed the penalty provision
of Subsection B. [Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004]
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each separate
violation, as specified in § 119-8 hereof.
§ 119-7 MADISON CODE § 119-10
119:286
Chapter 120
LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 73.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Maintenance of sidewalk area — See Ch. 166,
Art. II.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 183.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 120-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Madison.
A. Prevent the throwing, placing or other disposal of any refuse, rubbish,
waste, debris or other materials on or in any street, sidewalk, parking
area, public building or other public place in the Borough of Madison,
New Jersey, whereby such action would impede or interfere with the
safe, free or unrestricted use of the same by the public or whereby the
same might be rendered unsightly in appearance or detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Prevent the throwing, casting or distribution of any handbill, circular,
card or other advertising or printed matter or articles in such a manner
that the same will be blown or scattered upon the streets or other
public places.
C. Require property owners to remove earth, rocks and rubbish from
sidewalks abutting their lands.
D. Prevent accumulation upon property within the Borough of Madison of
brush, ragweed, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, automobile bodies or body parts, automobile
parts, junk, discarded items, such as furniture, machines, appliances or
parts thereof, metal, trash and debris and to compel the removal or the
destruction thereof in order to preserve the public health, safety and
general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard. [Amended 5-12-1969 by
Ord. No. 10-69; 11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 23-69]
§ 119-10 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 120-2
120:287
LITTER — Includes garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste
material which, if thrown, deposited or stored as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.[Added 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, corporation, club,
society or any other form of association or organization and shall include
both the singular and plural.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Includes any and every building and the approaches
thereto owned, leased or within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough
of Madison or any of its agencies, and shall include but not be limited to
the Municipal Building, the Health Center, the Public Library and the public
schools.
PUBLIC PARKING AREA — Any area which is owned by or under the control
of the Borough of Madison and which is used for the parking of vehicles.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any and every public place within the Borough
of Madison which is within the jurisdiction or under the control of the
Council of the Borough of Madison, or other local municipal body, or which
is or which may be open to and used by the general public. This shall include
but is not limited to any park, plaza, playground, parking area, railroad
station and the approaches thereto, and also includes any property owned
by or under the control of the Board of Education of the Borough of Madison
and the Trustees of the Madison Public Library.
STREET — Includes any highway, road, avenue, boulevard, court, public
lane, alley, sidewalk, footpath and any other area dedicated for public
passage and travel.
§ 120-3. Certain materials declared detrimental to public health
and a fire hazard. [Added 11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 23-69]
The presence on land lying within the Borough of Madison of brush; weeds,
including ragweed; dead and dying trees; stumps; roots; obnoxious growths;
filth; garbage; automobile bodies or body parts; automobile parts; junk;
discarded items, such as furniture, machines, appliances or parts thereof;
metal; trash; and debris, is hereby declared to be detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare and of such a character as to be a fire
hazard.
§ 120-4. Encumbrance of streets and public places; deposit of
materials.
No person, without the permission of the Council or its duly authorized
representative, shall, within the said Borough:
A. Encumber or obstruct any street, public place or public building with
any article or thing whatsoever.
B. Dump or deposit any earth, dirt, rock, rubbish or other article upon any
public street or public place.63
§ 120-2 MADISON CODE § 120-5
120:288
§ 120-5. Litter in streets and public places prohibited.
No person shall throw, sweep, cast, put or place, or direct, suffer or permit
any servant, agent or employee to throw, sweep, cast, put or place in or
upon any street, sidewalk, gutter, public alley, parking area or other public
place within the Borough, any dirt, wastepaper, garbage, filth, ashes, offal,
vegetables, dross, cinders, shells, straw, shavings, broken glass, crockery,
bottle, can, carton, container or any rubbish or refuse of any kind
whatsoever.
§ 120-6. Duty of merchants. [Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
Persons owning or occupying places of business within the Borough shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
§ 120-7. Scattering or spilling materials from vehicles prohibited.
No one who is an owner, driver, operator or conductor of a cart, wagon,
truck or other vehicle or of any receptacle shall scatter, drop or spill or
permit to be scattered, dropped or spilled any dirt, sand, mud, gravel, clay,
loam, stone, traprock, nails, paint, cement, lime or other building materials;
hay, straw, sawdust, shavings, bottles, glass, paper or other light materials
of any sort; or manufacturing, trade or household waste, refuse, rubbish,
ashes, manure, garbage or other organic refuse or any offensive matter, in
or upon any street or public place within the Borough.
§ 120-8. Deposit of slippery substances prohibited.
No person shall cast, throw or deposit on any sidewalk or crosswalk in
any street or public place in the Borough, any fruit or vegetable or other
substance, or any part or portion thereof, which might be liable to cause or
does cause any person to slip and fall.
§ 120-9. Discharge of wastewater and other liquids.64
No person shall, within the Borough, direct, discharge or otherwise drain or
permit the direction, discharge, flow or drainage into any gutter, or upon or
across any sidewalk, street, public alley, park or parking area, or any other
public place, of any:
A. Refuse or wastewater from any sink, stable, toilet, septic tank, cesspool,
sewer lateral or sewage disposal unit.
B. Waste- or wash water from any laundry, automobile filling station,
garage or car-washing establishment.
C. Gasoline, fuel, or lubricating oil or other petroleum product or
derivative; or any solvent, thinner, lacquer, paint, paint remover,
63.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 166, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Obstructions,
Encroachments and Nuisances, and Art. III, Openings and Excavations; Encumbrances.
64.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 166, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III.
§ 120-5 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 120-9
120:289
§ 120-10. Handbills and newspapers.
No person shall, within the Borough:
§ 120-11. Removal of earth and similar material from sidewalks or
streets.
In all cases where the sidewalk or roadway of any street in the Borough
shall be encumbered or obstructed by the caving in, washing down or
falling off of any earth, rocks, rubbish or anything whatsoever from any lot
adjoining such sidewalk or roadway, the owner or tenant of such lot shall
cause such earth, rocks, rubbish or other things to be removed and cleaned
from such sidewalk or roadway within three days after a written notice to
do so shall have been given to such owner or tenant in accordance with the
provisions of § 120-13 hereof.
§ 120-12. Removal of brush and trash from private property.
[Amended 11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 23-69]
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the Borough is hereby required
to remove from such lands or destroy brush; weeds, including ragweed;
dead and dying trees; stumps; roots; obnoxious growths; filth; garbage;
automobile bodies or body parts; automobile parts; junk; discarded items,
such as furniture, machines, appliances or parts thereof; metal; trash; and
debris within 10 days after receipt by such owner or tenant of a written
notice in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 120-13. Notice to remove material; costs as lien. [Amended
5-12-1969 by Ord. No. 10-69]
varnish, cleaning fluid or other cleansing preparation, or anything of a
corrosive, explosive or flammable nature.
A. Distribute, place, throw or cast, or cause to be distributed, placed,
thrown or cast, any paper or bill, circular, card or other advertising
matter whatever in or upon any public street or public place; or place
the same in or upon any vehicle in or on any street, parking area or
public place.
B. Distribute, throw or otherwise place any paper, newspaper, periodical,
book, catalogue, magazine, handbill, circular, card, rubbish or sample
of merchandise in front of, alongside of or upon the doorstep or porch,
or in the hall or vestibule of any building or other place from which such
matter could be blown by the wind onto a street or public place.
A. The notices required to be given in and by §§ 120-11 and 120-12 of this
chapter shall be mailed by the Borough Health Officer to said owner or
tenant by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his last
known address; or if unknown, in the case of an owner, to his address as
the same appears on the tax records of the Borough; or in the case of a
tenant, to the property address.
§ 120-9 MADISON CODE § 120-13
120:290
§ 120-14. Collection of costs. [Amended 5-12-1969 by Ord. No.
10-69]
§ 120-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70]
B. The period of time provided for removal of detrimental or hazardous
material shall commence on the date of the return receipt obtained by
the postal authority for the delivery of such notice or, if undelivered, on
the date of the return thereof to the Borough.
C. Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal of the
detrimental or hazardous material, warn the owner or tenant that
failure to effect such removal within the time stated in said notice will
necessitate such removal by or under the direction of the Health
Officer, Police Chief or Fire Chief, or other delegated Health, Police or
Fire Department Officer, or the Borough official in charge of Public
Works, and that the cost of such removal will be charged to the owner
or tenant. In the latter event, the cost of such removal shall forthwith
become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become a part
of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the same, to bear
interest at the same rate and to be collected as in the case of such taxes
as hereinafter provided.
A. In all cases where brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or other debris are removed
from any lands under this chapter by or under the direction of the
Borough Health Officer, Police Chief or Fire Chief, or other delegated
Health, Police or Fire Department Officer, or the Borough official in
charge of Public Works, to effect such removal such official shall certify
the cost thereof to the Council, which shall examine the certificates
and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and
form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
B. The said costs of removal shall be additional to any other penalties
which may be imposed under this chapter, provided that service of
notice has been properly effected.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following in the discretion of the
Judge: a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days. In the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section,
§ 120-13 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 120-15
120:291
§ 120-16. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or repeal the provisions
of existing ordinances for the removal of snow, ice, trash or weeds or
prohibiting obstructions in streets and abating nuisances, except where
inconsistent therewith, in which event the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
Chapter 122
(RESERVED)
Chapter 125
MODEL CAR RACEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 58.
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 70.
Pool and billiard halls — See Ch. 142.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
Noise — See Ch. 217.
§ 125-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RACEWAY OR TRACK — Includes a unit of construction or an installation
in which is incorporated one or more slots or individual lanes on which
miniature or model automobiles are operated.
§ 125-2. License required.
No person, persons, firm, association, club or corporation shall, within the
Borough of Madison, maintain, operate, conduct or pursue the business
or occupation of keeping any public room or place wherein there shall be
operated or used devices commonly known as "slot car raceways" or "model
such fine shall be no less than $100. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
B. In default of the payment of any fine imposed hereunder, the person
convicted may, in the discretion of the Judge by whom he was convicted,
be imprisoned in the Morris County Jail for a term not exceeding 90
days.
C. Each day during which a violation of this chapter continues shall be
deemed a new and separate offense.
§ 120-15 MADISON CODE § 125-2
120:292
car raceways," or where miniature cars are operated, without having first
obtained a license therefor from the Council of the Borough of Madison as
hereinafter provided.
§ 125-3. Application for license.
Every application for a license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, on
forms to be furnished by him, which forms shall require to be included the
following information:
§ 125-4. Issuance of license; term.
All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk only
after a resolution of the Council of the Borough of Madison shall have
been adopted approving said application and only after the payment of the
license fee herein provided for. All such licenses shall be valid from the first
day of January in the year in which the license is issued until the 31st day of
December next after the same is issued, unless sooner revoked.
§ 125-5. License contents; transfer of license.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
C. In the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers,
directors and all stockholders presently holding stock and all who for
six months prior to the making of said application have been officers,
directors or stockholders.
D. In the case of clubs or associations, the names and addresses of all
officers.
E. Whether or not the person or persons named in the application have
ever been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or municipal law.
F. The location of the premises to be licensed.
G. The number of slot or model car raceways or tracks to be located upon
the premises to be licensed.
A. Such license shall bear:
(1) The date of issue.
(2) The name of the licensee.
(3) The purpose for which issued.
(4) The location of the room or building wherein the licensee is
authorized to carry on and conduct any such business.
B. Such license shall not be transferable by the holder to any other person,
persons, firm, association, club or corporation, but such license may be
§ 125-2 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 125-5
120:293
§ 125-6. License fees.
The annual fees to be paid for such license are hereby fixed as follows:
§ 125-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
transferred by the holder to another address, provided that the licensee
shall make written application for such transfer to the Borough Clerk
and such transfer is approved by resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Madison.
A. For the first slot car or model car track or raceway located upon the
premises to be licensed, the sum of $50.
B. For each additional slot car or model car track or raceway located upon
the premises to be licensed, the sum of $25.
A. The Council of the Borough of Madison may suspend or revoke the
license of any licensee on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Violation of any of the laws of the State of New Jersey upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives.
(2) Violation of any ordinance of the Borough of Madison upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives.
(3) If said license was procured by fraudulent conduct or a false
statement of a material fact or if a fact concerning the applicant
was not disclosed at the time of filing the application where such
fact would have constituted just cause for refusing to issue said
license.
(4) Permitting or suffering any activity upon the licensed premises
which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
(5) Conducting or permitting bookmaking or the taking or placing of
bets or suffering gambling in any form in or at the licensed
premises.65
B. In all such cases, written notice of the charge or charges and the time
and place of hearing thereon shall be served on the licensee, either in
person or by certified or registered mail addressed to the licensed
premises. No revocation or suspension shall occur unless the licensee
shall have been afforded an opportunity to be heard in his defense.
C. In the event that any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall
not be entitled to the return of any portion of the license fee.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding drunk or disorderly persons, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 63-2008.
§ 125-5 MADISON CODE § 125-8
120:294
§ 125-8. Certain premises ineligible for license.
Any premises which shall be declared unsafe by the written report of the
Building Inspector or a fire hazard by the written report of the Fire Chief
shall be deemed to be ineligible for a license.
§ 125-9. Hours and days of operation.
The hours of operation of any establishment licensed for the operation of
slot or model car tracks or raceways shall be between 1:00 p.m. and the
following 12:00 midnight on any Sunday, and between 9:00 a.m. and the
following 12:00 midnight on any weekday, prevailing time.
§ 125-10. Location of licensed premises in buildings; view of
interior required.
The premises in which the slot or model car tracks or raceways are operated
shall be on the street floor of any building and shall be so arranged and
lighted that a full view of the interior may be had at all hours from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the public is admitted.
§ 125-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70]
Any person, persons, firm, association, club or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500 or confinement in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court. Each day such violation shall be continued shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 128
NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION BOXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering and handbills — See Ch. 120.
§ 128-1. Purpose and intent.
The regulation of newspaper distribution boxes, as provided for in this
chapter, is intended to advance the public purposes of furthering vehicular
and pedestrian traffic safety, preventing obstructions to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, facilitating the maintenance of public sidewalks and
public areas and preventing unsightly and aesthetically undesirable uses of
public sidewalks, public areas and other areas open to public view.
§ 125-8 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 128-2
120:295
§ 128-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
DISPLAY WINDOW — A window used for the display of merchandise.
MAINTAIN — To place, install, maintain or operate a newspaper distribution
box.
NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION BOX — Any self-service or coin-operated box,
stand, rack, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or
maintained for the purpose of offering for sale, vending, distributing or
giving away any publication.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
other entity.
PUBLICATION — Any newspaper, magazine, periodical or similar printed
matter.
REGULATED NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION BOX — Any newspaper
distribution box which is subject to the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with § 128-3.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — The area between the edge of the roadway and the property
line adjacent thereto, including both paved and unpaved areas.
STREET — All areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
including but not limited to roadways, alleys and sidewalks.
UNPROTECTED LANDSCAPED AREA — An area improved with flowers or
shrubs that is not protected by either a man-made barrier, such as a fence,
or a natural barrier, such as a hedge.
§ 128-3. Compliance required.
No person shall maintain a newspaper distribution box on a sidewalk or at
an outdoor location visible from a sidewalk or roadway except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 128-4. Registration required: term of registration.
A. The owner of each regulated newspaper distribution box shall file a
completed registration form for each such box with the Zoning Officer
and pay the applicable inspection fee within one business day of initially
locating or changing the location of any such box within the Borough of
Madison.
B. In the case of regulated newspaper distribution boxes located within
the borough as of the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any
such box shall comply with the registration requirements within 30
days of said effective date.
§ 128-2 MADISON CODE § 128-4
120:296
§ 128-5. Registration procedure.
§ 128-6. Inspection; fees.
§ 128-7. Location of boxes.
C. The registration for each newspaper distribution box shall be valid for
one year from the date of registration. A new registration form shall be
filed on or prior to the expiration of said one-year registration period.
A. Registration forms, which shall be provided by the Zoning Officer, shall
require the registrant to state the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the newspaper distribution
box.
(2) The specific location of the newspaper distribution box, with
reference to the street address of the property in front of which it is
located.
(3) An accurate description of the newspaper distribution box,
including its dimensions and any unique identifying mark, such as
its serial number.
(4) The name, title, address and telephone number of an individual
responsible for repair and maintenance of the box and to be served
with any notice provided for under this chapter.
(5) The name, title and address of the individual completing the
registration form, which individual shall be a duly authorized
representative of the owner of the newspaper distribution box. The
named individual shall sign the registration form, which signature
shall signify his or her belief that the information contained therein
is accurate.
B. A separate registration form must be filed for each regulated
newspaper distribution box.
C. At the time of filing any registration form, the registrant shall pay the
inspection fee provided for by § 128-6.
A. Following the filing of each registration form, an inspection shall be
conducted by the Zoning Officer of the borough to verify that the
newspaper distribution box has been located in accordance with the
provisions of § 128-7 and complies with the provisions of § 128-8.
B. If the inspection indicates that one or more provisions of §§ 128-7 and
128-8 have not been adhered to, then the registrant shall be sent a
notice in accordance with the provisions of § 128-9.
C. The annual fee for each such inspection shall be $75 per box.
[Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 34-2011]
§ 128-4 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 128-7
120:297
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection B, a newspaper distribution box
maintained on a sidewalk shall be either:
(1) Parallel to the curb, with the outer edge not less than 12 inches nor
more than 18 inches from the edge of such curb; or
(2) Parallel to the wall of a building, with the inside edge not more than
six inches from such wall, but not less than three feet from any
entrance or exit of a building; or
(3) If a building does not abut the sidewalk, parallel to the curb and not
more than six inches from the opposite edge of the sidewalk.
B. No person shall place, install, maintain or operate a newspaper
distribution box at any of the following locations:
(1) On or projecting over any portion of a roadway.
(2) Within six feet of any marked crosswalk as measured along the
curbline.
(3) Within 15 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk, as
measured along the curbline.
(4) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(5) Within six feet of any driveway which provides access to a street.
(6) Adjacent to the curb at any bus stop, as designated by § 185-40 of
the Madison Borough Code, if located so as to obstruct or
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian access to buses.
(7) Except with the owner's written permission, within six feet, as
measured along the building line, of any display window of any
building abutting the sidewalk or at any location which impedes or
interferes with the reasonable use of such window for display
purposes or in front of any other window if it will block in any way
the view into or out of such window.
(8) Within three feet of any publicly owned, unprotected landscaped
area.
(9) At any location where installation of the box would reduce the clear
space for the passage of pedestrians to less than four feet.
(10) At any location where the box would unreasonably interfere with or
obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic, the ingress into or
egress from any residence, place of business or any legally parked
or stopped vehicle or at any location where the machine would
endanger the safety of persons or property.
§ 128-7 MADISON CODE § 128-7
120:298
§ 128-8. Additional requirements.
Every newspaper distribution box which is subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall comply with the following standards:
§ 128-9. Notice of violations.
(11) At any location where the box would unreasonably interfere with
the use of poles, posts, traffic signs, traffic signals, hydrants,
mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location.
(12)Within 200 feet within the same block and on the same side of a
street of any other box containing the same publication.
(13) Adjacent to the curb at any location designated as a loading zone or
taxi stand pursuant to §§ 185-38 through 185-39 of the Madison
Borough Code.
A. No box shall be larger than five feet in height, 30 inches in width and
two feet in depth.
B. No box shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any private or
public property without the consent of the owner of such property.
C. A box may be chained or otherwise attached to other boxes; however,
no more than three boxes may be joined together in this manner.
D. No box or group of attached boxes shall weigh, in the aggregate, in
excess of 125 pounds when empty.
E. No box shall be used for advertising, signs or publicity purposes, other
than to identify the publication sold or distributed therein.
F. Each box shall be maintained in a clean, neat and well-painted
condition and in good repair at all times.
G. The owner of each box shall permanently affix thereto his name,
address and telephone number in a place where such information may
be easily seen.
H. No box or group of attached boxes shall be located within 500 feet of
any other box or group of attached boxes. [Added 11-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 34-2011]
A. If any newspaper distribution box is determined to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, then a notice of violation shall be sent to the
person designated to receive notices in the registration form.
B. The notice shall state the specific provisions of this chapter which have
not been adhered to and notify the owner that the box must either be
removed or brought into compliance with the specified provisions of
this chapter within seven business days. If the owner elects to cure the
specified violation or violations within said time period, then the owner
§ 128-7 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 128-9
120:299
§ 128-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-11-1994 by Ord. No.
5-94]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, after having
been served with a notice of violation and having failed to correct or
eliminate said violation or violations in accordance with § 128-9, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $55 and not more than $200. Each violation
of a separate section of this chapter and each violation by a different
newspaper distribution box shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 128-11. Impoundment of dangerous boxes.
shall take all necessary curative actions prior to the expiration of said
time period.
C. Upon request, the official issuing a notice of violation shall meet with
the recipient of such notice to discuss the basis for the determination
that a violation exists and any proposed means of eliminating any
violations. A request for such a meeting shall not toll the time for
correcting or eliminating any violation, unless the official is unavailable
for a meeting at any reasonable time within three business days
following the receipt of a request. Following any such meeting, the
official issuing the notice of violation may rescind the notice if he
determines that there was no violation. The official may also grant an
extension of up to one week for the correction of any violation, upon
request and a showing of good cause.
A. The police of the Borough of Madison may impound any unregistered
newspaper distribution box, any newspaper distribution box that
creates an imminent danger of personal injury or property damage to
pedestrians or vehicles and any abandoned or unused newspaper
distribution box containing publications dating 30 days or more past the
regular cycle of said publication. [Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
34-2011]
B. Upon impounding any box, the police shall make reasonable efforts to
give prompt notice to the owner by telephone, and written notice of any
impoundment shall be sent to the owner of the impounded box within
one business day. The owner shall be entitled to obtain the return of any
impounded box from the police upon request during normal business
hours, provided that the box is not being held as evidence in any
criminal proceeding.
C. The police may dispose of any impounded newspaper distribution box
which is not claimed by the owner within 60 days after the written
notice of impoundment has been sent. [Added 11-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 34-2011]
§ 128-9 MADISON CODE § 128-12
120:300
§ 128-12. Severability.
If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall continue
in full force and effect and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 128-13. Multiple newsrack zone. [Added 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
34-2011]
A. There is hereby established a multiple newsrack zone consisting of the
following streets:
(1) Lincoln Place;
(2) Waverly Place;
(3) Main Street from Community Place to Alexander Avenue.
B. Purpose.
(1) To protect and enhance the streetscape in the downtown district.
(2) To provide safe and convenient access to lands in the downtown
district.
C. The zone need not be contiguous. Within the multiple newsrack area,
the placement, installation and maintenance of newsracks shall be
prohibited, except as authorized by the Borough of Madison for the
placement, installation and maintenance of multiple newsracks. The
Borough of Madison shall determine the areas that require such
designation based upon the following considerations:
(1) The current number of newsracks within or near the proposed area
so as to avoid undue concentration of newsracks.
(2) The impact on pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic and
accessibility to public transportation.
(3) The inconsistency of individual newsracks with the character of the
surrounding streetscape.
(4) The impact on and proximity to buildings used for residential
purposes.
(5) At a particular area, give priority to Morris County publications.
D. The Borough of Madison will have the authority on where the
placements of multiple newsracks within the multiple newsrack area
are to be located.
§ 128-12 LITTERING; HANDBILLS; BRUSH AND TRASH § 128-13
120:301
Chapter 131
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 168. Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 131-1. Title; statutory authority.
This chapter shall be known as the "Official Map Ordinance for Public Parks
and Playgrounds and the Location and Width of Streets of the Borough of
Madison" in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et seq.
§ 131-2. Purpose.
The establishment of an Official Map for public parks and playgrounds
and for the location and width of streets, whether existing or proposed,
is declared to be for the purpose of conserving and promoting the public
health and safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough of Madison.
E. The Borough of Madison will have the authority to determine the
number of compartments for publications in the multiple newsrack
zone.
F. In determining which publications shall be permitted at a given
multiple newsrack location, the Borough shall utilize the following
criteria:
(1) Limit access of each publication to one compartment at each
designated area whenever the number of publications sought to be
distributed exceeds the number of compartments available.
Publications containing legal notices and local (Morris County)
news content, and published at least weekly may maintain up to
two compartments, provided each newsrack is individually licensed
by the Borough.
(2) At a particular area preference shall be given to publications
containing legal notices and local (Morris County) news content,
and published at least weekly.
(3) At a particular area, preference shall be given to publications that
had been contained in single newsracks that were replaced with
multiple newsracks at that area.
(4) When more than one application is filed simultaneously than may
be accommodated at a specific multiple newsrack location, priority
shall be determined by lottery.
§ 128-13 MADISON CODE § 131-3
131:302
§ 131-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined to mean:
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by ordinance of the Mayor and Council
showing the location and width of streets and the location and extent of
public parks and playgrounds whether existing or proposed.
PLAT — The map of any subdivision or subdivisions.
PUBLIC PARK — Any land used or intended to be used for parks, recreation,
play areas, school parks, playgrounds, land conservation or other public
uses.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road. lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
the Municipal Planning Act (1953) or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
SUBDIVISION — The creation or combination of a parcel or parcels of
land as defined and regulated by the Subdivision of Land Ordinance of the
Borough of Madison.66
§ 131-4. Adoption of Official Map.
The Official Map of the Borough of Madison is hereby adopted and is made
a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. It shall be deemed conclusive with
respect to the location and width of streets and the location and extent of
public parks and playgrounds shown thereon whether existing or proposed
and whether improved or unimproved.67
§ 131-5. Reservations for future use.
After the effective date of the chapter, upon the application of approval of a
plat, the Borough of Madison may reserve for future public use the location
and extent of such streets and public parks and playgrounds shown on the
Official Map and within the area of said plat for a period of one year after
the approval of the final plat or within such further time as agreed to by
the applying party. Unless within such one-year period or extension thereof
the Borough of Madison shall have entered into a contract to purchase or
shall have instituted condemnation proceedings, according to law, for the
tract or parcel of land or property so reserved for any of such purposes,
such applying party shall not be bound to observe the reservation of such
tract or parcel of land or property set forth on the Official Map. During such
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Subdivision of Land.
67.Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file and available for public inspection in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
§ 131-3 OFFICIAL MAP § 131-5
131:303
period of one year or any extension thereof, the applicant for plat approval
and his assigns and successors in interest may use the area so reserved for
any purpose other than the location of buildings or improvements thereon,
consistent with the Borough of Madison Zoning Ordinance heretofore or
hereafter adopted; provided, however, that the topography thereof and
the trees and shrubs thereon shall not be changed, altered, destroyed or
removed without the prior consent in writing of the Planning Board of the
Borough of Madison upon application by the applying party.
§ 131-6. Issuance of building permits.
No permits for the erection of any building or buildings shall be issued
by the Building Inspector of the Borough of Madison on or for any land
or lands reserved on the Official Map if said land or lands shall not be
part of a subdivision, for a period of one year from the date of application
for said permit. No permits for the erection of any building or buildings
shall be issued by the Building Inspector of the Borough of Madison on
or for any land or lands reserved on the Official Map if said land or lands
shall be part of a subdivision, for a period of one year from the date of
approval of a final plat. In either case, the applying party may agree to an
extension or extensions of said one-year period. Unless within such oneyear
period or any extension thereof the Borough of Madison shall have
entered into a contract to purchase or shall have instituted condemnation
proceedings for said park or playground according to law, such applying
party shall not be bound to observe the reservation of such public park
or playground. During such period of one year or any extension thereof,
the applicant for plat approval and his assigns and successors in interest
may use the area so reserved for any purpose other than the location of
buildings or improvements thereon, consistent with the Borough of Madison
Zoning Ordinance heretofore or hereafter adopted; provided, however, that
the topography thereof and the trees and shrubs thereon shall not be
changed, altered, destroyed or removed without prior consent in writing
of the Planning Board of the Borough of Madison upon application by the
applying party.
§ 131-7. Construction of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to limit any power or powers otherwise
granted to the Borough of Madison or to the Board of Adjustment of the
Borough of Madison set forth in the Official Map and Building Permit Act
(1953), contained in N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et seq.
Chapter 132
OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND
§ 132-1. Establishment and purpose.
There is hereby established an Open Space Trust Fund, which shall be
administered by the Borough Council. The Open Space Trust Fund shall be
§ 131-5 MADISON CODE § 132-1
131:304
used to finance the acquisition and preservation of lands and easements
for open space; active and passive recreation; preservation of natural
resources, including water supplies; and historic preservation.
§ 132-2. Powers and duties.
§ 132-3. Funding.
A. The Borough Council is authorized to use the Open Space Trust Fund to
acquire all types of interests in real property, including but not limited
to fee simple acquisitions, easements, licenses and/or development
rights, or any other lesser interest in real estate in the Borough or
outside the Borough for the purposes as provided for herein. The
Council also is authorized to accept grants, gifts, donations and
testamentary bequests of property and/or property rights and to use its
power of eminent domain pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq. to acquire
property or property rights.
B. The Council shall determine the amount of funds to be used for each
acquisition of rights or property. The Council shall also determine what
use may be made of any real property or property rights acquired by
use of the Open Space Trust Fund. In making its decisions, the Council
shall take into account the recommendations of the Open Space,
Recreation and Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
C. The Open Space Trust Fund may also be used to acquire real property
which has improvements upon it at the time of acquisition, provided
that the Council determines the principal purpose of the acquisition is
to preserve open space, recreation and/or historic preservation. In the
event the Council shall find it appropriate to apportion the cost of
acquisition between open space and improvements, it may do so and
charge the Open Space Trust Fund for the approximate value that it
deems appropriate relative to open space and the Borough's capital
account for the value that it determines attributable to improvements.
The deed of any property or property rights acquired with funds from
the Open Space Trust Fund shall contain a specific statement reflecting
that the property was acquired with funds from the Open Space Trust
Fund.
A. The Open Space Trust Fund shall be established and maintained as a
separate account in the Borough's general capital fund and shall be
known and designated as the "Open Space, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund." A separate bank and/or investment account
shall be opened and maintained for this purpose. The Council may
invest funds in the Open Space Trust Fund as provided in the Borough's
Cash Management Plan and Investment Policy. Funds in the Open
Space Trust Fund shall be used solely for the purposes set forth in this
chapter.
B. The Open Space Trust Fund shall be funded through the collection of an
amount of $0.018 per $100 of assessed valuation of each annual
§ 132-1 OFFICIAL MAP § 132-3
131:305
§ 132-4. Disposition of property or other property rights.
No property or rights acquired with funds from the Open Space Trust Fund
shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the Borough unless the Council has
authorized such disposition after and in accordance with a binding public
referendum.
§ 132-5. Review.
In the event that no property or property rights are acquired under this
chapter for a period of five consecutive years, then the Council shall review
its activities and issue a report with recommendations and conclusions
concerning the future use and disposition of the Open Space Trust Fund.
The Open Space Trust Fund may not be closed except in accordance with a
binding public referendum.
Chapter 134
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking in fire zones — See Ch. 103.
Parking of trailers — See Ch. 177.
Parking restrictions generally — See Ch. 185.
§ 134-1. Definitions; interpretation of terms.
Borough property tax levy. The Open Space Trust Fund shall also be
permitted to accept grants, gifts, donations and testamentary bequests.
The funds accumulated within the Open Space Trust Fund may be
utilized to acquire all types of interests in real property, including
but not limited to, fee simple acquisitions, easements, licenses, and/or
development rights, or any other lesser interest in real estate in the
Borough or outside the Borough for the purposes as provided in this
chapter or as a down payment for the issuance of bonds for the same
purpose at the discretion of the Council. Any and all interest accruing
shall remain in the Open Space Trust Fund and may be utilized for
the above-described purposes. [Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No.
7-201368]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison.
68.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective for the third and
fourth tax quarters of 2013 and the first and second tax quarters of 2014.
§ 132-3 MADISON CODE § 134-1
131:306
CENTER ISLAND — An area, not part of a driveway, between two rows
of parking spaces.
COMMUTER RESIDENT VEHICLES — Those vehicles owned by a
resident of the Borough but not an owner or employee of a merchant/
employee establishment of the Borough.
DIVIDING STRIP — Any strip or area between parking spaces or
between parking spaces and the boundaries of a parking area, not part
of a driveway or center island.
DRIVEWAY — A space within a parking area maintained for the travel,
movement and distribution of vehicles to and from parking spaces.
ENTRANCE — The area between the curbline of a street and the
property line across which a vehicle may be operated in order to gain
access to a parking area.
EXIT — The area between the curbline of a street and the property
line across which a vehicle may be operated in order to depart from a
parking area into a street.
MERCHANT/EMPLOYEE VEHICLES — Those vehicles owned by an
owner or employee of a merchant/employee establishment of the
Borough.
PARKING AREA — Any area described in this chapter whereon parking
of vehicles is permitted, which is either owned or leased by the Borough
of Madison or otherwise exclusively under its control or owned by
the Madison Housing Authority and for which the Borough has been
authorized to enforce parking regulations.
PARKING SPACE — Any space within a parking area marked or
otherwise designated for parking a motor vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL TENANT VEHICLES — Tenants of dwelling places
authorized by the Borough to obtain parking permits. Tenants of the
following buildings are eligible to obtain one residential tenant parking
permit per dwelling unit unless otherwise noted:
(1) Dwelling places within the Downtown Historic District.
Other dwelling places specifically approved by Borough Council
action based on past (grandfathered) necessity. Currently identified
grandfathered dwelling places are:
Dwelling places on the south side of Kings Road from Green
Avenue west to 14 Kings Road.
(a)
(b) 42 Cook Avenue.
(c) 44 Cook Avenue.
(d) 50 Cook Avenue.
(e) 30 Central Avenue.
(2)
§ 134-1 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-1
131:307
§ 134-2. Identification of lots and parking areas.
WALKWAY — Any portion of a parking area restricted to the exclusive
use of pedestrian travel.
Apartment building at Green Avenue and Wilmer Street
(southwest corner), maximum of 10.
(f)
B. Interpretation. Whenever a time is stated in this chapter, the same shall
mean prevailing time.
A. For the purpose of identification in this chapter:
(1) "Kings Road Lot" shall mean and include a portion of Lot 1 in Block
3802, owned by the Borough bounded on the west by the Public
Safety Complex, on the north by Kings Road, on the east by
privately owned Lots 2 and 4.
(2) "Prospect Street Lot" shall mean and include the easterly portion of
Lot 1 in Block 2803, owned by the Borough, bounded on the north
by Kings Road, on the east by Prospect Street, on the south by the
Madison Volunteer Ambulance Corp property, on the west by the
Maple Avenue Lot.
(3) "Maple Avenue Lot" shall mean and include the portion of Lot 1 in
Block 2803 owned by the Borough, situated on the easterly side of
Maple Avenue opposite the Hartley Dodge Memorial bounded on
the north by Kings Road and on the east by the Prospect Lot.
(4) "Train Station Lot" shall mean and include the crescent parking lot
at the Madison Train Station off Kings Road, known as a portion of
Block 2703, Lot 1 on Kings Road between Green Avenue and
Prospect Street, which is leased from NJ Transit.
(5) "Green Avenue Lot" shall mean and include the area owned by the
Borough, situated on the northwesterly side of Green Avenue in
said Borough, known as Lot 6 of Block 2801, southwest of where
Green Avenue intersects Kings Road.
(6) "Waverly Green Lot" shall mean Lot 17 in Block 2701, owned by the
Borough, located on the interior of the Green Village Road, Main
Street, Waverly Place block.
(7) "Cook Avenue Lot" shall mean and include the area owned by the
Borough, situated on the southwesterly side of Cook Avenue,
known as Lot 25 in Block 1502 on the Official Tax Map.
(8) "Elmer Street Lot" shall mean Lot 14 in Block 1802, owned by the
Borough bounded on the north by Elmer Street.
(9) "Civic Center Lot" shall mean and include the portions of land
improved for parking facilities located and described as follows,
Walnut Street, Block 1601, Lot 42.
§ 134-1 MADISON CODE § 134-2
131:308
§ 134-3. General parking restrictions in all lots.
(10) "Madison Public Library Lot" shall mean and include the portions
of land improved for parking facilities located at Block 3803, Lot
21, bounded on the north by Keep Street and on the southwest by
Belmont Avenue.
(11) "Madison Housing Authority Lots" shall mean and include the
portions of land improved for parking facilities located and
described as follows:
(a) Belmont Avenue, Block 380, Lot 61.
(b) Community Place, Block 1601, Lot 23.
(c) Park Avenue, Block 1203, Lot 24.
(d) John Avenue, Block 1207, Lot 15.
(e) Rexford S. Tucker Apartments, Belleau Avenue, Block 0402,
Lot 1.
(f) 24 Central Avenue, Block 1601, Lot 9.
(12) "Rear of Hartley Dodge Memorial" shall mean and include the
paved area in the rear of the Hartley Dodge Memorial (Municipal
Building) between Green Avenue and Maple Avenue.
B. Lot and block designations above referred to are those indicated on the
Borough of Madison Official Tax Map.
A. No operator of a vehicle shall, at any time, within the areas designated
in § 134-2, Identification of lots and parking areas, stand or park a
vehicle:
(1) In any driveway.
(2) On a crosswalk or walkway.
(3) On a center island or dividing strip.
(4) On any grass area or planted space.
(5) In any entrance to or exit from any parking area.
(6) In any space other than within a single space designated for
parking by pavement marking or otherwise.
(7) In any manner other than headed into and facing a center island,
when occupying an interior parking space, or facing the outside
boundary of the area, when occupying an exterior parking space.
(8) In any manner so as to block or impede the progress of any other
vehicle, or so as to prevent access by another vehicle to a vacant
§ 134-2 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-3
131:309
§ 134-4. Entrances to and exits from certain lots.
Every operator of a vehicle may enter or leave within the areas designated
in § 134-2, Identification of lots and parking areas, by designated
entranceways and exits.
§ 134-5. Obedience to directions of police officers.
Every operator of a vehicle shall, when entering or leaving any parking area
subject to this chapter, or any parking space therein, or while operating,
standing or parking such vehicle within any such parking area, at all times
obey any direction or signal given by a police officer of the Borough.
§ 134-6. Use regulations for individual lots.
parking space or exit from a parking space occupied by another
vehicle.
(9) In any space or driveway where parking is prohibited as indicated
by a "no parking" sign or any other marking or sign restricting
parking.
(10) Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the streets or highways, the Borough reserves the right to
enact emergency parking prohibitions and require that cars be
removed from all Borough parking lots in an expedited manner in
order. Parking prohibitions will remain in effect until the parking
lots have been plowed sufficiently.
B. Handicapped parking: No vehicle shall be parked in space marked
"handicapped parking only" unless such vehicle is a passenger vehicle
owned or operated by a handicapped person, such vehicle is equipped
with special attachments and devices that the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles deems necessary to provide for the safe operation
thereof by such person and such person is the holder of a current New
Jersey driver's license. Vehicles not equipped with special attachments
and devices may be parked in spaces designated "handicapped parking
only," provided that the owner or operator has exhibited on the vehicle
a decal issued by the Borough Police Department permitting such
parking. Decals may be issued for those vehicles owned by persons
suffering from physical disabilities making it difficult to enter or leave
the vehicle or to walk any substantial distance.
C. Allocation of spaces in all lots shall be set annually by resolution of the
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Chief of Police.
A. Kings Road Lot. Parking hours and areas designated as follows:
(1) Monday through Friday, commuter resident vehicles may be parked
from 4:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. provided that said vehicles must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The parking permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
§ 134-3 MADISON CODE § 134-6
131:310
(2) Merchant/employee permit vehicles. All spaces shall be allocated
for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Saturday,
between 9:30 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.; the lot is reserved for vehicles
owned by persons who own or are employed by a merchant/
employee establishment in the Borough of Madison. The vehicle
must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear
view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
(3) Paid daily parking spaces. Monday through Friday, any vehicle may
be parked in a space designated as paid daily parking space. The
owner of the vehicle must remit the required fee, for each twelvehour
period, as specified by Borough Council resolution and posted
at the payment kiosk and/or on the mobile application.
(4) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
(5) Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m. and all day Saturday and
Sunday the lot may be used by the general public.
B. Prospect Street Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as
follows:
(1) Monday through Friday, commuter resident vehicles, as defined
below, from 4:30 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on those days.
(2) Commuter resident vehicles. Vehicles are those owned by a
resident of the Borough but not an owner or employee of a
commercial establishment in the Borough. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The parking permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
(3) Merchant/employee permit vehicles. All other spaces shall be
allocated for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Sunday,
between 9:30 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. for vehicles owned by persons
who own or are employed by a commercial establishment in the
Borough of Madison. The vehicle must display a parking permit by
hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror. The permit shall be
obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
(4) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
§ 134-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-6
131:311
(5) Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m. and all day Saturday and
Sunday the lot may be used by the general public.
C. Maple Avenue Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Parking is reserved for parking of vehicles owned by the Borough of
Madison or owned by an officer, employee or person in the service
of the Borough. Appropriate Borough identification shall be
displayed by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
(2) Twenty marked spaces designated for commuter parking by permit
only. Monday through Friday, commuter resident vehicles, as
defined below, from 4:30 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on those days.
(3) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
(4) Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m. and all day Saturday and
Sunday the lot may be used by the general public.
D. Train Station Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Train Station Lot: all spaces are available for paid daily parking
Monday through Saturday. The owner of the vehicle must remit the
required fee for each twelve-hour period, as specified by Borough
Council resolution and posted at the payment kiosk and/or on the
mobile application. Overnight parking is not permitted.
(2) On Sunday, the lot may be used by the general public.
E. Green Avenue Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
(2) Merchant/employee permit vehicles. All spaces shall be allocated
for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Saturday,
between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.; the lot is reserved for vehicles
owned by persons who own or are employed by a merchant/
employee establishment in the Borough of Madison. The vehicle
must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear
view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
F. Waverly Green Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
§ 134-6 MADISON CODE § 134-6
131:312
(1) Public parking. Parking is limited to two hours in spaces not
specifically designated for Borough vehicles only, except that no
public parking is permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday.
G. Cook Avenue Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Two-hour spaces. Parking is limited to two hours in all spaces not
otherwise designated for merchant/employee permit parking.
(2) Merchant/employee permit vehicles. All spaces shall be allocated
for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Saturday,
between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.; the lot is reserved for vehicles
owned by persons who own or are employed by a merchant/
employee establishment in the Borough of Madison. The vehicle
must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear
view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
(3) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
H. Elmer Street Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Two-hour spaces. Parking is limited to two hours in all spaces not
otherwise designated for merchant/employee permit parking.
(2) Merchant/employee permit vehicles. All spaces shall be allocated
for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Saturday,
between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.; the lot is reserved for vehicles
owned by persons who own or are employed by a merchant/
employee establishment in the Borough of Madison. The vehicle
must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear
view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
(3) Residential tenant vehicles. Vehicles must be owned by a resident
of a dwelling place as defined in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display
a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9. Residential
tenant parking is available Monday through Saturday, between
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day Sunday.
I. Civic Center Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated as follows:
(1) Parking is reserved for parking of vehicles owned by the Borough of
Madison or owned by an officer, employee or person in the service
of the Borough and all visitors to any Borough department or
commercial tenant housed in the Madison Civic Center.
§ 134-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-6
131:313
Appropriate Borough identification shall be displayed by hanging it
on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
(2) Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m. and all day Saturday and
Sunday the lot may be used by the general public, except that no
public parking is permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday.
J. Madison Public Library Lot. Parking hours and limitations designated
as follows:
(1) Parking for patrons is allowed at any time, except between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Housing Authority parking for residents of Belmont Avenue, Block
380, Lot 61.
K. Madison Housing Authority Lots. Parking hours and limitations
designated as follows:
(1) Parking is restricted to vehicles displaying a valid parking permit
hanging on the vehicle's rear view mirror, which permit shall have
been issued pursuant to § 134-9E, except that this restriction shall
not apply to any parking spaces which may be designated and
marked for visitors' parking by the Madison Housing Authority.
(2) The Madison Housing Authority Lot located at 24 Central Avenue,
Block 1601, Lot 9 will have eight parking spaces designated for
merchant/employee permit vehicles. All spaces shall be allocated
for merchant/employee parking, Monday through Saturday,
between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.; these spaces are reserved for
vehicles owned by persons who own or are employed by a
merchant/employee establishment in the Borough of Madison. The
vehicle must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's
rear view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
These spaces will also be available for residential tenant vehicles.
Vehicles must be owned by a resident of a dwelling place as defined
in § 134-1A. The vehicle must display a parking permit by hanging
it on the vehicle's rear view mirror. The permit shall be obtained
pursuant to § 134-9. Residential tenant parking is available Monday
through Saturday, between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and all day
Sunday.
L. Rear of Hartley Dodge Memorial:
(1) Parking is reserved for parking of vehicles owned by the Borough of
Madison or owned by an officer, employee or person in the service
of the Borough. Appropriate Borough identification shall be
displayed by hanging it on the vehicle's rear view mirror.
(2) Specific temporary exceptions may be granted by the governing
body on a case-by-case basis.
§ 134-6 MADISON CODE § 134-7
131:314
§ 134-7. Merchant/employee permit designated street parking
zones.
The locations listed below are hereby designated as merchant/employee
permit street parking zones. Vehicles with merchant/employee permits may
park in these areas without regard to posted parking time limits. The
vehicle must display a parking permit by hanging it on the vehicle's rear
view mirror. The permit shall be obtained pursuant to § 134-9.
# of
Spaces
Name of
Street Side Location
Applicable Days
and Hours
14 Kings Road Both From Maple
Avenue to
Prospect Street
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
15 Kings Road North 15 most westerly
spaces between
Green Village
Road and
Madison Avenue
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
8 Maple Avenue Both From Kings
Road to the
Hartley Dodge
Memorial
Driveway
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
15 Green Avenue West From Kings
Road to Wilmer
Street
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
23 Chapel Street North From
Greenwood
Avenue to
Central Avenue
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
18 Cook Avenue North From Central
Avenue to
Community
Place
6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
§ 134-8. Unlawful overtime parking.
A. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a vehicle
registered in his name to remain in any parking space while the
payment kiosk and/or mobile application indicates that the time for
which the privilege granted to park in said space has expired.
B. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a vehicle
registered in his name to remain parked in violation of the two-hour
time limits set forth in § 134-6G and H. Each additional and consecutive
two-hour period in which a vehicle remains parked in violation of the
§ 134-7 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-8
131:315
§ 134-9. Parking permits.
applicable time limit shall constitute a separate and independent
offense.
A. Applications for parking permits shall be made to the Chief of Police on
forms supplied by the Police Department. Permits are issued to
individuals not vehicles, thereby enabling permit holders to transfer
said permits from vehicle to vehicle provided the vehicles are
registered with the Police Department.
B. Fees.
(1) When making application for a permit, the vehicle owner
requesting the same shall show proof that the applicant qualifies
for a permit as defined in § 134-1.
(2) When making application for a permit, the vehicle owner
requesting the same shall pay to the Borough the following fee for
each permit as follows:
(a) Commuter (resident only) vehicles: $425.
(b) Merchant/employee permit vehicles: $100 per year. Six
permits for $500.
(c) Residential tenant permit vehicles: $150 year.
(3) Fees for commuter (resident only) vehicles and residential tenant
vehicles shall increase by $25 beginning on January 1, 2020, and
shall increase every year thereafter by $25 of each year on January
1 ending on December 31, 2024.
(4) The replacement fee for a lost or damaged permit shall be lesser of
50% or the prorated balance of the annual permit fee.
(5) The fee for daily parking spaces in Kings Road Lot shall be $7 for
each twelve-hour period. This fee shall be posted at any payment
kiosk or mobile application.
(6) Train Station Parking Lot. The fee for parking in the Train Station
Lot shall be $7 for each twelve-hour period. This fee shall be posted
at any payment kiosk or mobile application.
C. Parking permission is subject to the following conditions:
(1) Permits shall be and remain in effect until the end of the year
during which the same are issued, unless surrendered or revoked
prior thereto.
(2) The issuance of a permit shall not obligate the Borough to furnish
parking facilities to the holder of said permit.
D. Permission to park may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
§ 134-8 MADISON CODE § 134-9
131:316
§ 134-10. Violations and penalties; removal of vehicles.
(1) Falsely representing the ownership of a vehicle or the residence of
the owner.
(2) The commission by the holder of a parking permit of any unlawful
act prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey or any act in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or contrary to any
regulations of the Borough pertaining to the use and occupation of
any parking area while entering, parking in or leaving such parking
area.
(3) Withdrawal of use of facilities or discontinuance of operation
thereof by the Borough in the area for which the permit was issued.
E. Parking permits for Madison Housing Authority Lots.
(1) Parking permits for the Madison Housing Authority Lots shall be
governed exclusively by the provisions of this Subsection E,
notwithstanding the other provisions of this § 134-9.
(2) Application for parking permits for the Madison Housing Authority
Lots shall be obtained from and processed by the Madison Housing
Authority.
(3) Permits shall be issued only to tenants of the Madison Housing
Authority.
A. Penalties for specific violations shall be as follows:
Section
Violated Fine
§ 134-3 Improper parking $45
§ 134-6 Overtime parking/no permit
[municipal lots]
$30
§ 134-6B Subsequent violation [3-4 violations
within 365 days]
$45
§ 134-6C Subsequent violation [5 or more
violations within 365 days]
$100
§ 134-6(1) Parking without paying [municipal
lots]
$30
§ 134-6(1)(b) Subsequent violation [3-4 violations
within 365 days]
$45
§ 134-6(1)(c) Subsequent violation [5 or more
violations within 365 days]
$100
§ 134-6J Handicapped parking violation
(mandatory court appearance)
§ 134-8 $30
§ 134-9 OFFICIAL MAP § 134-10
131:317
Chapter 136
PARKS
§ 136-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to establish rules and regulations for the protection,
care and control of the public parks and playgrounds in the Borough and to
regulate the conduct of persons on or within such parks and playgrounds or
using the facilities thereof.
§ 136-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Includes all public parks, playground facilities and other
recreational areas in the Borough of Madison.
§ 136-3. Use of park property and facilities.
Section
Violated Fine
§ 134-9E $22
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by statute or is specifically
provided in this or some other section of this chapter, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both; every person
convicted of committing subsequent violation of § 134-6J shall be liable
to a penalty of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on
such terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.
C. In addition to the imposition of the above or any other penalty which
may be imposed by law for the violation of the provisions of this chapter,
the Borough may provide for the removal of any vehicle which is
allowed to stand or be parked in any parking area subject to this
chapter, where such standing or parking is contrary to any of the
provisions of this chapter. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of
the removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, alter, disturb, tamper
with, damage or destroy any trees, shrubs, soil, grass, plant life or any
structure, building, post, playground equipment, water fountain,
railing, fence, bench, seat, table, platform, walkway, telephone or
electric pole, wires, pipes or appurtenances or any other park or
recreational equipment or facility, or any hydrant, water, storm or
§ 134-10 MADISON CODE § 136-3
131:318
§ 136-4. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall bring into, sell, buy, expose for sale, consume, use or give
away any alcoholic beverage in any park.69
§ 136-5. Narcotic drugs.
No person shall bring into, sell, buy, expose for sale, use or give away any
narcotic drug or any other drug prohibited by law.
sewer drain, pipe, main, basin covering, manhole or any appendage
or appurtenance thereof, or any sign, inscription, post or monument
erected or marked for any lawful purpose; or injure or in any way
interfere with the operation of any machinery or equipment used under
the direction of the Borough or any of its departments, agencies or
officials; or deface, destroy, alter, damage or tamper with any drive,
path, walk, bridge, parking area or shelter; or take up, remove or carry
away any asphalt, concrete, stone, rock, wood, gravel, clay or earth or
make any excavation of any kind.
B. No person over the age of six years shall use the rest rooms and
washrooms designated for the use by the opposite sex. Every person
using the rest rooms and washrooms shall cooperate to maintain them
in a neat and sanitary condition.
C. No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary in nature, or run or string any
public service utility lines into, upon or across any such lands, except
upon written authorization of the Borough Council.
D. No person shall pick or remove the flowers, leaves or seeds of any plant
or tree; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance
to any tree or plant or park facility; nor shall any person in any other
manner injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
E. No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments,
statues, water fountains, railings or fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
F. No person shall tie or hitch any animal to any tree, plant, fence post or
any other property in any area.
G. No person shall hunt, molest, kill, frighten, trap, chase, tease, shoot or
throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or
molest the eggs or young of any animal, reptile or bird.
69.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to the public consumption of alcoholic beverages,
see Ch. 56, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. VI.
§ 136-3 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-6
131:319
§ 136-6. Fires.
No person shall kindle, build or maintain a fire within any park except in
such areas as may be designated for that purpose. Only charcoal shall be
used for cooking fires. No fire shall be left unattended and any fire shall be
put out immediately after use.70
§ 136-7. Rubbish.
No person shall take into, carry through, leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop or
discharge into or upon, or suffer or permit any agent, employee or person
in his or her charge to take into, carry through, leave in or throw, cast,
lay, drop or discharge into or upon any park any ashes, cinders, paper, dirt,
sand, oil, stone, brush, stumps or any other material, objects or rubbish
of any kind, or sick, diseased or dead animals, organic refuse or other
offensive matter, including, without limitation, swill, brine, urine, offal, fecal
matter, garbage or rubbish. All rubbish, trash and garbage shall be placed
in containers provided for that purpose.71
§ 136-8. Domestic animals.
No domestic animal shall be allowed to run at large on or within any park.
Any person who takes a dog into any park shall comply with the provisions
of Ch. 89, Dogs, of this Code, providing for the regulation of dogs in the
Borough of Madison.
§ 136-9. Participation in games for money.
No person shall, in any park, play, engage or take part in any game or
competitive sport for money or other valuable thing. This section shall not
prohibit the awarding of prizes for performances in athletic contests or
similar activities.
§ 136-10. Gambling.
No person shall participate in acts of gambling or wagering in any park.
§ 136-11. Firearms and weapons.
No person shall bring into any park or use in any park any rifle, shotgun,
hand gun, air gun, knife, slingshot or other similar weapon or instrument.72
70.Editor's Note: For additional provisions pertaining to outdoor fires, see Ch. 101, Fire
Prevention, § 101-7E.
71.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to littering, see Ch. 120, Littering; Handbills;
Brush and Trash; for provisions pertaining to garbage containers and the disposal of
garbage, rubbish and refuse, see Ch. 228, Solid Waste.
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 99, Firearms and Hunting.
§ 136-6 MADISON CODE § 136-12
131:320
§ 136-12. Archery and golf.
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of archery or golf, except
while under the supervision of qualified instructors approved by the
Recreation Department.
§ 136-13. Rough games.
The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games, such as football,
baseball and soccer, is prohibited, except on the fields and in the specific
locations provided therefor.
§ 136-14. Fireworks.
No person shall have in his possession, set off or otherwise cause to explode
or discharge any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or
explosions of flammable materials.73
§ 136-15. Proper clothing.
No person shall appear at any park in other than proper clothing, with
the exception of the restricted bathing areas. "Properly clothed" shall be
construed to prohibit the wearing of trunks or clothing that does not cover
both the upper and lower portions of the body.
§ 136-16. Throwing of objects.
No person shall throw or propel any stone, stick, glass, metal or other hard
or offensive object or substance in any park.
§ 136-17. Sale of commodities.
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any such article or thing. Exception is hereby made as to any
regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Recreation Department.74
§ 136-18. Park hours.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information and shall be determined, from time to time, by
resolution of the Borough Council. If no opening or closing hours are
established and posted as herein provided, the parks shall be open from
sunrise to sunset.
73.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Fire Prevention, and in particular § 101-7D.
74.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to the licensing and regulation of peddlers and
solicitors generally, see Ch. 139, Peddling and Soliciting. For the licensing of mobile and
temporary retail food establishments, see Ch. 209, Retail Food Establishments.
§ 136-12 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-18
131:321
§ 136-19. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall conduct himself in a disorderly or indecent manner, commit
any indecent act or use profane, indecent or obscene language in any public
park. No person shall unreasonably interfere with or disturb any other
person in the use of any park.75
§ 136-20. Interference with officials.
No person shall interfere with or fail to obey any police officer or parks and
playground personnel in the proper performance of their duties in any park.
§ 136-21. Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area. Such use shall be in accordance with any posted directions
and the directions of any attendant who may be present. In addition, no
person shall leave a vehicle unattended or parked at night, between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. anywhere in any park.76
§ 136-22. Use of waters or waterways.
No person shall swim, fish, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or
adjacent to any park, except in such waters or waterways provided for that
purpose, if any.
§ 136-23. Pollution of waters, or waterways.
No person shall cast, lay, drop or discharge into or leave in the waters or
waterways of any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid.
§ 136-24. Bicycles.
No person shall be permitted to ride a bicycle on other than a paved
vehicular road or path designated for that purpose in any park. A bicyclist
shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area
or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
§ 136-25. Animals and wild life.
No animals or wild life shall be brought into any park, except domestic pets
subject to the limitations referred to in § 136-8 hereof. Without limitation of
B. Any part or the whole of any park may be declared closed to the public
by the Recreation Department or the Borough Council at any time and
for any interval of time, as it shall find reasonably necessary.
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 122, Loitering.
76.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to parking on Borough streets generally, see Ch.
185, Vehicles and Traffic. For the regulation of Borough parking lots, see Ch. 134, Parking
Lots.
§ 136-18 MADISON CODE § 136-25
131:322
the foregoing, no person shall ride or drive in or bring any horse into any
park.
§ 136-26. Roller skates.
No person shall use roller skates in any park, except at such times and upon
such places as may be provided for that purpose.
§ 136-27. Motor vehicles.
No person shall drive, operate, use or bring into any park any motorbike,
minibike, motorcycle or any other motor vehicle, except for duly licensed
vehicles and then only in areas, if any, designated for the parking or
operation of such vehicles.
§ 136-28. Sledding.
No persons shall coast with hand sleds, wagons or other vehicles on wheels
or runners in any park, except at such places as may be provided for that
purpose.
§ 136-29. Solicitation.
No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose in any park.77
§ 136-30. Advertising.
No person shall post, exhibit or otherwise display any sign, poster or other
advertising material in any park, except where authorized in connection
with the issuance of permits for special events under § 136-32.78 This
section shall not apply to bulletin boards erected or maintained by the
Borough or any of its departments or agencies.
§ 136-31. Lighted matches and smoking materials.
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any
park or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
§ 136-32. Special event permits. [Amended 7-8-1996 by Ord. No.
14-96; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 52-2008]
A. A "special event" is any event which is conducted sponsored or
permitted by an individual or an organized group of persons and which
involves any advance publicity or advertising by or from said group.
77.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 139, Peddling and Soliciting.
78.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to the distribution of handbills, see Ch. 120,
Littering; Handbills; Brush and Trash.
§ 136-25 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-32
131:323
B. Permits for parades or special events on municipal property shall be
obtained by application, in writing, to the Borough Clerk, in accordance
with the following procedures:
(1) The person or group of persons seeking issuance of such permit
shall file an application, in writing, signed by the applicant and all
sponsors, with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Madison, at
least 60 days before the special event, stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and the hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The property and portion thereof for which such permit is
desired.
(e) A reliable estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(f) The type and nature of activity for which such permit is
desired.
(g) The anticipated age group of the expected participants.
(h) The names and addresses of the adult persons who would
supervise and be responsible for the proposed activity. The
ratio of adults shall be sufficient to properly supervise the
anticipated participants.
(i) Such other information as may be reasonably required.
(j) Insurance certificate naming the Borough of Madison as
additional insured as to the special event for bodily injury to
any one person in the amount of $1,000,000 and any
occurrence in the aggregate amount of $3,000,000 and for
property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate amount
of $5,000,000.
(k) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Madison, its officers, employees and
agents, from any and all liability, expense, claim or damages
resulting from the use of public lands.
(l) A contractual agreement with the Madison Police Department
for paid police coverage during the time indicated in the
permit.
(m) Proof of service of written notification of proposed dates and
lands to be used for event activities to any and all tenants and
property owners who will be directly affected by the event and
its site location, such notification to take place at least three
§ 136-32 MADISON CODE § 136-32
131:324
business days prior to the requested event date, with proofs
submitted to the Borough Clerk prior to issuance of the permit.
(n) A written approval from the Madison Police Department
authorizing issuance of the permit and providing any traffic
control requirements and public safety conditions.
(o) Event fees made payable to "Borough of Madison" commercial
applicants: $100 application fee; nonprofit applicants: $25
application fee; the posting of a cash bond of $500 or
maintenance bond of $1,000 running in favor of the Borough
and protecting and insuring that the location utilized will be
left after the event in a satisfactory condition, free of debris,
rubbish and equipment, and that due observance of all
Borough ordinances, rules and regulations will be followed;
within two business days of the completion of the event, the
Borough will return the bond if there has been no damage to
public property or public expense caused by the event; bona
fide educational institution for noncommercial use: fees
waived.
(p) If any services are required by employees from Borough
Departments, the cost of such employees is to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of the event. The hourly rate for outside
duty will be provided upon request by the Borough
Administrator and will be billed to applicant.
(2) A permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk in consultation with
the appropriate department head and Business Administrator and
approval by the governing body upon the recommendation of the
Business Administrator, provided that a permit for use of the
Hartley Dodge Memorial may only be issued upon approval of the
governing body, and for all permits on all properties after making
the following findings: [Amended 5-23-2011 by Ord. No.
18-2011]
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the municipal property will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public enjoyment of the subject property.
(b) That the nature and character of the proposed activity or use of
the property is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence,
crime or disorderly conduct.
(c) That the proposed activity or use of the property will not entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense on the public safety
operations of the Borough.
(d) That the property or facility desired has not been reserved for
other use at the date and hour desired in the application.
§ 136-32 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-32
131:325
§ 136-33. Shelter area permits.
(e) That all conditions on the special event permit application as to
insurance, security, indemnification, fees and bonding have
been satisfied.
(f) The Borough reserves the right to waive any and all conditions
or to reject the application in their sole discretion.
(g) Cosponsorship of any special event as defined herein shall
require specific prior written approval of the governing body.
(h) Such other reasonable conditions as may be required by the
municipality.
(i) The requirements for obtaining a permit under this chapter
shall not relieve any person or group of persons from obtaining
such further permits or approvals as may be required now or in
the future by reason of any state or federal law.
C. The Borough Council may delegate its authority for the enforcement of
this permit and the conditions relating thereto to the Chief of Police or
any other responsible official. A violation of any condition of the permit
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the Borough
Council or by its duly authorized agent.
D. For the Madison Community Arts Center, a permit shall be issued by the
Director of Business Development in consultation with the appropriate
department head and Business Administrator for use of the Madison
Community Arts Center. [Added 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. 47-2018]
(1) See application for rate schedule.
(2) $250 fee for use of the exterior space. Intent must be noted at time
of application.
(3) $150 fee for service/consumption of alcoholic beverages, and proof
of insurance specifically covering the consumption of alcoholic
beverages is required.
A. A permit shall be required for the use of shelter areas for any proper
purpose.
(1) Such permit shall be issued, by the Chief of Police or Acting Chief of
Police or, in their absence, a Captain of Police, to any responsible
group of persons, at least two of whom shall be adults over 21 years
of age, upon receipt of a written request therefor, including an
acknowledgment of responsibility in a form prescribed by the
Borough Council and a deposit of $15 for keys.
(2) Shelter areas shall be available during park hours as herein
prescribed.
§ 136-32 MADISON CODE § 136-33
131:326
§ 136-34. Liability of permittees.
The person or persons to whom a permit is issued under this chapter shall
be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever
by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit
shall have been issued.
(3) The Chief of Police may withhold permits if, in his discretion, he
finds that:
(a) The proposed use of the shelter is reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(b) The proposed use will unreasonably interfere with or detract
from the general public enjoyment of the park.
(c) The proposed use will entail extraordinary or burdensome
expense of police operation by the Borough.
(d) The shelter area desired has been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested.
B. Issuance of permit; appeals.
(1) Within five days after receipt of a written application for the permit
provided for herein, the Chief of Police, or the issuing officer, shall
apprise the applicant, in writing, of his reasons for refusing a
permit, and any aggrieved person or group of persons shall have
the right to appeal, in writing, within 10 days to the Borough
Council, which shall consider the application under the standards
and procedures set forth in § 136-32B and sustain or overrule the
decision of the Chief of Police within 10 days from the date of the
filing of the appeal with the Borough Clerk.
(2) If the decision of the Chief of Police is sustained on appeal, the
reasons for the refusal of the permit shall be set forth in writing. If
the decision of the Chief of Police is overruled and a permit
granted, the Council may attach reasonable conditions to the
issuance of such a permit, consistent with this chapter.
C. The Council may delegate its authority for the enforcement of this
permit and the conditions relating thereto to the Chief of Police or any
other responsible official. A violation of any condition of the permit shall
be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the Borough Council
or by its duly authorized agent.
D. The requirements for obtaining a permit under this chapter shall not
relieve any person or group of persons from obtaining such further
permits or approvals as may be required now or in the future by reason
of any state or federal law.
§ 136-33 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-35
131:327
§ 136-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
§ 136-36. Fees. [Added 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 42-84]
A. All groups or organizations using the Memorial Park soccer field,
excluding Borough recreation programs, shall pay a use fee as follows:
[Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(1) Madison groups or organization.
(a) Use of field with no lights: $25 per use.
(b) Use of field with lights: $50 per use.
(2) Non-Madison groups or organizations.
(a) Use of field with no lights: $40 per use.
(b) Use of field with lights: $75 per use.
B. All groups or organizations using the skating area or baseball fields at
Memorial Park or using other Borough playing fields, excluding
Borough recreation programs, shall pay a use fee as follows:
[Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(1) Madison groups or organizations.
(a) Use of field with no lights: $15.
(b) Use of field with lights: $35 per use.
(2) Non-Madison groups or organizations.
(a) Use of field with no lights: $35 per use.
(b) Use of field with lights: $50 per use.
C. Use of Dodge Field. [Added 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 41-86]
(1) Madison groups or organizations.
(a) Use of field with no lights: $25 per use.
(b) Use of field with lights: $50 per use.
(2) Non-Madison groups or organizations.
§ 136-35 MADISON CODE § 136-36
131:328
§ 136-37. Field rentals [Added 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 45-2013]
(a) Use of field with no lights: $50 per use.
(b) Use of field with lights: $100 per use.
D. There shall be a $25 user fee per player per season for the use of the
Madison Recreation Complex Fields 1 and 2 ("turf fields") by the
following recreation and/or travel sports programs, which are
recognized by the Borough Recreation Department: boys and girls
soccer, boys and girls lacrosse, girls field hockey, girls softball, boys
football, boys Little League Baseball, and any other sports that use
fields for scheduled practices or games as determined by the
Recreation Director. [Added 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 45-2013;
amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 53-2019]
E. There shall be a user fee of $40 per player per sport for any nonresident
participant in any Borough recreation program that uses Borough
fields; however, the Administrator, with the advice of the Recreation
Director, may reduce this rate to $25 per player per sport, provided the
nonresident's municipality offers field space or other meaningful
enhancement to the Borough recreation program. [Added 11-13-2013
by Ord. No. 45-2013; amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 53-2019]
F. The fees established by this section shall be collected in accordance
with policies established by the Recreation Director and the Recreation
Advisory Committee and shall be used for the debt service, operation
and maintenance of the turf fields at the Madison Recreation Complex.
[Added 11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 45-2013]
A. Field rental permits for the use of any Borough field, except for any use
thereof authorized pursuant to §§ 136-32 and 136-33, shall be obtained
by application, in writing, to the Borough Clerk, in accordance with the
procedures established by the Borough Administrator, Recreation
Director and the Borough Attorney. All applications shall include:
(1) An insurance certificate naming the Borough of Madison as
additional insured as to the field rental for bodily injury to any one
person in the amount of $1,000,000 and any occurrence in the
aggregate amount of $3,000,000 and for property damage for each
occurrence in the aggregate amount of $5,000,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Madison, its officers, employees and
agents, from any and all liability, expense, claim or damages
resulting from the use of public lands.
(3) If the applicant is a sports camp or substantially similar program, a
pre-approved waiver executed by each participant and/or his or her
guardian, expressly agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the
Borough of Madison, its officers, employees and agents from any
§ 136-36 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-37
131:329
and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use
of public lands and participation in the sports camp or substantially
similar program.
(4) If any services are required by employees from Borough
departments, the cost of such employees is to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of the field rental. The hourly rate for outside
duty will be provided upon request by the Borough Administrator
and will be billed to the applicant.
(5) The posting of either a cash bond in the amount of $300 or in an
amount equal to 1/2 the agreed-upon rental fee, whichever is
greater, running in favor of the Borough, or a check made payable
to the Borough of Madison in an amount of $300 or 1/2 the agreedupon
rental fee, whichever is higher. These fees shall be used to
protect and insure that the location utilized will be left after the
event in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and
equipment, and that due observance of all Borough ordinances,
rules and regulations will be followed. Within 30 days of the end of
the rental period, the Borough will return the bond and/or money if
there has been no damage to public property or public expense
caused by the field rental. The applicant shall reimburse the
Borough for any damage and the cost of repairs to the rented
property.
B. Field rental permits shall be issued by the Borough Clerk or his/her
designee in consultation with the Recreation Department and Business
Administrator after making the following findings:
(1) That the nature and character of the proposed activity or use of the
field is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or
disorderly conduct.
(2) That the proposed activity or use of the field will not entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense on the public safety
operations of the Borough.
(3) That the field desired has not been reserved for other use at the
dates and hours desired in the application.
(4) That all conditions of the field rental application, including, but not
limited to, insurance, indemnification, and fees and have been
satisfied.
(5) The Borough reserves the right to waive any and all conditions or to
reject the application in its sole discretion.
(6) Such other reasonable conditions as may be required by the
Borough.
(7) The requirements for obtaining a permit under this chapter shall
not relieve any person or group of persons from obtaining such
§ 136-37 MADISON CODE § 136-37
131:330
further permits or approvals as may be required now or in the
future by reason of any state or federal law.
C. No applicant shall be denied a field rental permit on account of his or
her sex, affectional or sexual orientation, race, color, religion, national
origin, age, disability, ancestry, or atypical hereditary cellular or blood
trait.
D. Denial of permit; appeals.
(1) Within five days after receipt of a written application for the permit
provided for herein, the Borough Clerk, or the issuing officer, shall
apprise the applicant, in writing, of his/her reasons for refusing a
permit, and any aggrieved person or group of persons shall have
the right to appeal, in writing, within 10 days to the Borough
Administrator, who shall consider the application under the
standards and procedures set forth in § 136-37B and sustain or
overrule the decision of the Borough Clerk within 10 days from the
date of the filing of the appeal with the Borough Clerk.
(2) If the decision of the Borough Clerk is sustained on appeal, the
reasons for the refusal of the permit shall be set forth in writing. If
the decision of the Borough Clerk is overruled and a permit
granted, the Administrator may attach reasonable conditions to the
issuance of such a permit, consistent with this chapter.
E. Field rental fees shall be determined by the Recreation Director in
consultation with the Borough Administrator. All field rental fees will be
reasonable, and any fees collected for the use of the turf fields shall be
used for the debt service, operation and maintenance of the turf fields
at the Madison Recreation Complex. If the applicant is a sports camp or
other public program, Borough residents shall be entitled to:
(1) First priority to sign up for the program; and
(2) A discount of 10% for the program fee.
F. Additional field rental rules and regulations, including but not limited to
refunds, revocation of permits, discipline, rain dates and maintenance,
shall be established by the Borough Administrator and the Recreation
Director with advice and input from the Recreation Advisory
Committee. The rules and regulations will be published.
G. The Recreation Director, in consultation with the Borough
Administrator and Recreation Advisory Committee, shall manage the
schedule for the rentals of Borough fields.
H. The enforcement of this permit and the conditions relating thereto is
the responsibility of the Recreation Director or any other responsible
official. A violation of any condition of the permit shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit by the Borough Council.
§ 136-37 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-37
131:331
§ 136-38. Parks Advisory Committee. [Added 12-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 60-2019]
I. The requirements for obtaining a permit under this chapter shall not
relieve any person or group of persons from obtaining such further
permits or approvals as may be required now or in the future by reason
of any state or federal law.
J. The applicant shall return the rented property in a satisfactory
condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and shall observe all
Borough ordinances, rules and regulations.
K. The Borough reserves the right to establish additional policies and
procedures as it determines in its absolute discretion, and the Borough
may revoke any permit issued for any reason whatsoever, at any time,
by reimbursing the applicant the field rental fee and any other deposit.
A. Establishment. The Madison Parks Advisory Committee is hereby
established to be known as "the Parks Advisory Committee of the
Borough of Madison" (hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The
Committee shall consist of nine members.
B. Purpose and responsibilities.
(1) To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding the
operations of the Madison parks and any future activities of the
Committee.
(2) The Committee will provide education and outreach on parks to the
community, all Borough Committees, Boards and Commissions, and
the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Committee will seek grants to achieve these goals.
(4) The Committee will submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the
end of each calendar year, concerning ongoing activities and
grants. In addition, the Committee shall regularly circulate to the
Mayor and Council copies of its meeting minutes. All records,
reports and data shall be available to the Council for inspection at
any time.
(5) The Committee will hold a minimum of four public meetings
annually which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open
Public Meetings Act79 and shall take place at the Hartley Dodge
Memorial, unless otherwise noted.
C. Membership.
(1) Membership shall consist of nine members. All members of the
Committee shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 136-37 MADISON CODE § 136-38
131:332
be comprised of the following persons, appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council:
(a) One liaison member of the Council (ex officio).
(b) Nine regular members, who are residents of the Borough.
(2) The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
D. Voting powers, quorum and limitation of powers.
(1) A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute
a quorum.
(2) The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power
of condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of
the municipality and from creating any debt against the
municipality.
E. Borough departmental assistance.
(1) General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined
by the Mayor and Council, in so far as may be practicable, the
employees and professional staff of the Borough of Madison,
including the Borough Attorney, shall be available to assist the
Committee in the performance of its duties.
(2) Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff
assistance shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any
project that requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff
and professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to
commencement of the project.
F. Terms of office.
(1) The Council liaison shall serve annually.
(2) The nine resident members shall serve for a term of three years
(staggered terms). The terms of office shall commence upon the
day of each member's appointment, unless otherwise specified at
the time of appointment, and be for the initial respective periods of
one, two, and three years (three members shall initially be
appointed for one year, three members shall initially be appointed
for two years and three members for three years). The term of each
appointee shall be designated in his or her appointment. All
subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the
full three-year term, to take effect on January 1 next succeeding
such appointment.
§ 136-38 OFFICIAL MAP § 136-38
131:333
Chapter 136A
PLASTIC BAGS, SINGLE-USE
§ 136A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(3) The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall
annually select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall
call the initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the
adoption of this chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish
its meeting schedule, which shall be duly published.
G. Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or
removal of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council. In the event that the
Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after a position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by the vote
of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have
no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
H. Reporting responsibilities.
(1) A parks management plan shall be created and updated every five
years, in order to plan routine maintenance and phase in special
projects.
(2) The Committee shall submit an annual report to Mayor and
Council.
I. Conflict of interest.
(1) Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease,
mortgage, sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any
such project or to the Committee without forthwith making written
disclosure to the Committee of the nature and extent of the
interest. Such disclosure shall be entered in writing upon the
minutes of the Committee.
(2) Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described
herein shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
§ 136-38 MADISON CODE § 136A-1
131:334
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods or services from a retail
establishment.
OPERATOR — Any person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the
operation of a retail establishment, which may include, but is not limited to,
the owner of the retail establishment.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group however; organized.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any store or commercial establishment that
sells perishable or nonperishable goods, including, but not limited to,
clothing, food, and personal items directly to the customer and is located
within the geographical limits of the Borough of Madison. Retail
establishments include a business establishment that generates a sales or
use tax; a drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience
food store, food mart, or other commercial entity engaged in the retail sale
of a limited line of goods that include milk, bread, soda, and snack foods; a
public eating establishment (i.e., a restaurant, take-out food establishment,
or any other business that prepares and sells prepared food to be eaten
on or off its premises); and business establishment that sells clothing, a
hardware store, or any other nonperishable goods.
REUSABLE BAG — A durable carry-out bag with stitched handles for
reinforcement made from any natural or synthetic materials other than
plastic film, including, but not necessarily limited to, woven or nonwoven
plastic or cloth, that is at least 10 mils thick, and that is specifically
designated and manufactured for multiple reuse, and that is washable
or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected
regularly.[Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — Any bag made predominantly of
plastic that is not made or intended for reuse that is provided by an operator
of a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale. This definition
specifically exempts the following from the category of "single-use plastic
carry-out bag":
Bags provided by operators and used by consumers inside retail
establishments to:
Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candies,
or small hardware items;
(1)
Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether packaged or
not;
(2)
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be an issue;
(3)
(4) Contain live animals, such as fish or insects sold in pet stores;
(5) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
(6) Contain pharmacy prescriptions or medicines; or
A.
§ 136A-1 OFFICIAL MAP § 136A-1
131:335
§ 136A-2. Use prohibited; effective date.
§ 136A-3. Mandatory fee; effective date.
Function as "produce bags" or "product bags," which shall mean
bags used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items
to the point of sale inside a retail establishment or, for reasons of
public health and safety, to prevent such food items from coming
into direct contact with other purchased items.
(7)
Newspaper bags for home delivery, door-hanger bags, laundry and/or
dry-cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags
intended for use as food storage bags, garbage bags, yard waste bags,
or pet waste bags.
B.
A. Effective March 1, 2020, no retail establishment shall provide to any
customer, or to any person, a single-use plastic carry-out bag, as
defined in § 136A-1. This prohibition applies to bags provided for the
purpose of carrying goods away from the point of sale and does not
apply to product bags or produce bags used to carry product(s) or
produce within the retail establishment to the point of sale. The
prohibition applies to single-use plastic carry-out bags used for take-out
deliveries from retail establishments within the Borough of Madison.
The point of sale in such transactions is deemed to be at the retail
establishment, regardless of where payment for the transaction
physically occurs. [Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
B. Effective March 1, 2020, single-use plastic carry-out bags may not be
distributed on Borough property or at Borough-sponsored events.
A. Effective March 1, 2020, all retail establishments shall make available
to customers, upon request by the customer, one of the following types
of bags for the purpose of carrying goods or other materials away from
the point of sale, subject to the provisions of this chapter: a reusable
bag as defined herein or a paper bag, for a fee of $0.10 per bag. The fee
charged shall be reflected in the sales receipt and shall be subject to
applicable tax. The fee charged shall be retained by the retail
establishment. [Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
B. The following bags provided by operators of retail establishments shall
be exempt from the $0.10 fee:
(1) Bags to package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains,
candies, or small hardware items;
(2) Bags that contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
(3) Bags to take home uneaten food that has been served in a
restaurant;
§ 136A-1 MADISON CODE § 136A-3
131:336
§ 136A-4. Promotion of reusable bags.
§ 136A-5. Exempt customers.
(4) Take-out foods intended for consumption away from the retail
establishment for reasons of public health and safety during the
transportation of such food products;
(5) Bags that contain pharmacy prescriptions and medicinal products;
[Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
(6) Bags that function as "produce bags" or "product bags," which shall
mean bags used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food
items to the point of sale inside a retail establishment or, for
reasons of public health and safety, to prevent such food items from
coming into direct contact with other purchased items; or
[Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
(7) Paper bags provided by retail establishments with 10 or fewer
employees. [Added 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
A. Each retail establishment shall be strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to promote the use of reusable bags and to post signs encouraging
customers to use reusable bags rather than paper carry-out bags.
B. Each retail establishment shall be strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to ask customers if they have their own reusable bags before
offering paper carry-out bags to the customer.
C. Each retail establishment shall inform customers that if they choose a
paper carry-out bag they will be charged a fee of $0.10 per paper bag.
D. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type
that they choose to bring to retail establishments themselves, in lieu of
using bags available for a fee from the retail establishment, or from
carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a retail establishment from
providing a credit to a customer who has supplied his/her own bags.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a retail establishment from
offering for sale reusable bags, as defined above. [Amended
2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
G. The Borough of Madison shall undertake a reusable bag education
program that includes:
(1) Distributing information and free reusable bags as part of a bring
your own bag (BYOB) campaign; and
(2) Maintaining "give one take one" reusable bag collection boxes in
municipal and other facilities.
§ 136A-3 OFFICIAL MAP § 136A-5
131:337
§ 136A-6. Enforcement/penalties.
A. Any customer who states that she or he participates in, or is a
beneficiary of, any United States government federal welfare program,
including but not limited to the Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) or any local or county
welfare assistance program, or any New Jersey State welfare program,
including but not limited to the New Jersey Supplemental Nutritional
Assistance Program (SNAP) or the New Jersey State Supplemental
Security Income Program (SSI) shall be provided paper bags without
charge. No further identification is necessary.
B. Any person who receives food, household items and/or personal care
items from a food pantry or food distribution program shall be provided
paper or reusable bags without charge.
A. The Madison Health Officer and/or his/her designee has the
responsibility for enforcement of this chapter and may promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations in order to enforce the provisions
thereof, including, but not limited to, investigating violations and
issuing summons and fines.
B. Any retail establishment that willfully violates or fails to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter after an initial written warning
notice has been issued for that violation shall be liable for an infraction.
C. If a retail establishment has subsequent violations of this chapter after
the issuance of an initial written warning notice of a violation, a
summons will be issued and the following penalties will be imposed and
payable by the operator of the retail establishment:
(1) $100 for the first violation after the first written warning notice is
given;
(2) $200 for the second violation after the written warning notice is
given; and
(3) $500 for the third and any subsequent violations after the written
warning notice is given.
D. Fines shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to
continue. A retail establishment shall not be subject to more than one
fine for violations or continuing violations that occur on the same day.
E. Appeal of a written warning notice or fine shall be conducted pursuant
to standard municipal regulations and procedures concerning matters
to be heard in the Joint Municipal Court of Madison, the Chathams,
Harding and Morris Township.
F. The Madison Health Officer and/or his/her designee is hereby
empowered to utilize discretion in providing administrative exceptions
§ 136A-5 MADISON CODE § 136A-6
131:338
Chapter 137
RECREATION DEPARTMENT CODE AND POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteers — See Ch. 49. Parks — See Ch. 136.
§ 137-1. Creation and purpose.
There hereby is created a Recreation Department in the Borough of
Madison. The Recreation Department shall have as its purpose to maintain,
promote and facilitate use of Borough-owned parks and recreational
facilities and to provide both passive and active recreational programs,
including, but not limited to, athletics and related physical programs.
§ 137-2. Departmental administration.
There shall be a Borough of Madison Recreation Department, the head of
which shall be the Recreation Director. With guidance from the Borough
Administrator and the Recreation Advisory Committee, the Recreation
Director shall: administer and operate athletic fields and facilities for indoor
and outdoor sports, athletics, and recreational programs for children and
adults; support and administer cultural and recreational programs,
activities, and organizations; and administer and enforce all rules,
ordinances, and regulations relating to Recreation Department activities.
§ 137-3. Recreation Department rules and regulations.
The Madison Recreation Department shall control all lands, playgrounds
and recreation places in a safe and wholesome condition for use. Suitable
rules, regulations, and by-laws for the care of Borough property, for the
conduct of all such persons while on or using such property, and any other
appropriate regulations pertaining to Borough Recreation Programs shall
be adopted by the Recreation Department with the advice and consent of
the Borough Administrator and the Borough Attorney. Any person who shall
violate any such rules, regulations, or by-laws shall be adjudged to be a
disorderly person.
§ 137-4. Organization of sport programs.
regarding the implementation and enforcement of the provisions
herein. [Added 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
A. The Borough of Madison will recognize one organization for each sport
as the primary organization for that sport annually by resolution; that
organization shall be the one with the largest number of Madison
youths participating; and that organization shall receive priority when
reserving facility space. One primary contact per organization shall be
§ 136A-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 137-4
131:339
§ 137-5. Facility allocation, use and maintenance.
§ 137-6. Mandatory criminal history record background checks.
designated to represent each organization. Each sports organization is
required to have a minimum three-person Board of Directors.
B. Unless waived by the Administrator, any sports program that is a
separate legal entity which is granted permission to conduct
recreational activities at Borough facilities shall provide a certificate of
insurance in the amount of $500,000, combined single limit, covering
property damage, liability and workers compensation, and naming the
Borough as an additional insured with a thirty-day notice of
cancellation.
A. Facility use will be allocated to the various sports programs in
accordance with policies established by the Recreation Director and the
Recreation Advisory Committee, with the advice and consent of the
Borough Administrator.
B. Use of Borough facilities shall occur only after all required paperwork
has been submitted to the Recreation Director as directed in this
chapter, including but not limited to coach information, verification of
coach training, criminal history record background checks, player
information, and proof that the Code of Conduct has been distributed
and enacted by every person involved.
C. After each practice or event, the user must return the facility in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and shall
observe all Borough ordinances, rules and regulations. Failure to do so
shall be considered a violation of Borough regulations and shall result
in penalties as described in § 137-8 of this chapter.
A. The Borough of Madison requires that all employees and volunteers, 18
years of age and older, of a nonprofit youth-serving organization as a
condition of coaching or using the Borough of Madison's facilities,
submit to a criminal history record background check by an authorized
vendor. The criminal history record background check shall be required
of any coach or any person with direct access to minors involved in any
youth-serving recreation program as determined by the Recreation
Director. The criminal history record background check shall be
performed annually or in a frequency as determined by state statute.
The costs of said criminal history record background check will be
borne by the applicant.
(1) A nonprofit youth-serving organization or organization is defined as
any corporation, association or organization established pursuant
to Title 15 or Title 15A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, or other
law of this state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and
that provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other
§ 137-4 MADISON CODE § 137-6
131:340
services for persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt
from federal income taxes.
B. An authorized vendor is defined as a vendor which is recognized by the
Recreation Department and authorized by the State of New Jersey to
conduct criminal history record background checks. A criminal history
record background check is defined as a background check that
complies with State of New Jersey Public Law 199, Chapter 432,80 and
all other appropriate statutes.
C. Criminal history record information furnished shall not be disseminated
to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records for
authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited solely to the
authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not be
disseminated to any unauthorized persons or entities. Any person
violating federal or state regulations governing access to criminal
history record information may be subject to criminal and/or civil
penalties.
D. Failure to comply with this section may result in the Borough
withholding funding for the program or league, and/or prohibiting use
of Borough facilities.
E. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetent, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes except Paragraph (4) of
Subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offense described in Subsection E(1) of this section.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
§ 137-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 137-6
131:341
§ 137-7. Safety regulations and coach training policy.
F. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth servicing organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Borough-sponsored programs
involving minors, the Borough shall presume that the employee or
volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions on the record.
G. Challenge of accuracy of criminal history report.
(1) If a criminal history record may disqualify an employee or
volunteer for any purpose, the employee or volunteer shall be
provided with an opportunity to complete and challenge the
accuracy of the information contained in the criminal history
record. The employee or volunteer shall be afforded a reasonable
period of time to correct and complete this record. A person is not
presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions indicated on the record. The Recreation
Department shall coordinated between the employee or volunteer
and the Division of the State Police or the authorized vendor any
such opportunity to complete or challenge the accuracy of the
information contained in the criminal history record.
(2) No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal
action brought by a party based on any written notification on filed
with the Police Department pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
H. Notification of subsequent disqualifying offense. If an employee or
volunteer is convicted of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in
Subsection E hereof after such person has cleared the required
background check, such person must immediately (but no later than
three days after such conviction) notify the Borough Administrator of
that fact. Such person shall be immediately disqualified from his or her
position.
I. Violation and penalties. Failure to comply with this section may result in
the Borough withholding funding for the program or league, and/or
prohibiting the use of Borough facilities.
A. Regulations regarding the suspension of activity due to lightning or
other safety related issues shall be established by the Borough
Administrator and the Borough Attorney with advice and input from the
Recreation Director and Recreation Advisory Committee. Said
regulations shall apply to all recreation programs and all organizations
that have acquired field rental permits. Signs shall be posted at each
park referencing the safety and lightning regulations.
§ 137-6 MADISON CODE § 137-7
131:342
§ 137-8. Madison Recreation Department Code of Conduct.
B. A policy regarding minimum coach training including but not limited to
training in safety and conduct, shall be established by the Borough
Administrator and the Borough Attorney with advice and input from the
Recreation Director and Recreation Advisory Committee.
A. All organizations affiliated with the Madison Recreation Department
must distribute and enforce a Code of Conduct as determined by the
Recreation Department with the advice and consent of the Borough
Administrator and the Borough Attorney. Sports organizations are
required to report all potential Code of Conduct violations to the
Recreation Director and Borough Administrator as soon as possible and
no later than 48 hours after the incident.
B. Signs referencing the Code of Conduct shall be placed at every
Borough-owned sports facility.
C. Compliance with Code of Conduct. Every participant, parent, guest,
spectator, coach, or official attending or participating in any manner in
any recreational activity, conducted under the auspices of the Madison
Recreation Department, shall comply with the Code of Conduct. The
Code of Conduct shall apply whether or not the event occurs within the
Borough of Madison, provided it is conducted under the auspices of the
Madison Recreation Department. Failure to comply with the Code of
Conduct may result in suspension or other penalty as described in
§ 137-9 of this chapter. Without limitation, the following conduct is
prohibited and shall be considered a violation of the code of conduct as
determined by the Recreation Director:
(1) Fights, scuffles, aggressive verbal arguments, and threats.
Initiating a fight, scuffle, aggressive verbal argument or any type of
physical altercation or abuse or threats of abuse, towards any
participant, parent, guest, spectator, coach or official.
(2) Interference with recreational activities. Interfering with
recreational activities, including, but not limited to, entering the
field of play, court, or rink, during any recreational activity
conducted under the auspices of the Madison Recreation
Department for the purpose of physically or verbally abusing or
confronting coaches.
(3) Use of obscene or profane language. Using obscene or profane
language, verbally abusing an official, player, or spectator, which
abuse shall be deemed to include the use of obscene or profane
language, or gesture, or racial, ethnic or sexual slurs.
(4) Throwing objects onto the field of play. Throwing or causing to be
deposited any object onto the field of play, court, or rink.
§ 137-7 OFFICIAL MAP § 137-8
131:343
§ 137-9. Violations and penalties; appeals process.
(5) Bullying, harassment or other forms of aggressive behavior.
Bullying harassing, or exhibiting other forms of aggressive
behavior.
(6) Aggressive physical contact with participants. Having aggressive
physical contact with recreation participants, including, but not
limited to, hitting, kicking, pushing or other forms of aggressive
physical contact.
(7) All other detrimental behavior. Other behavior which may be
determined by the Recreation Director to be inappropriate and
detrimental to recreational participants shall include, but not be
limited to, encouraging recreation participants to engage in
prohibit activity or inappropriate activity.
(8) Refusing to follow the order of officials. Parents, coaches,
spectators, and all other parties at any recreation event must
comply with the requests and demands of all field officials,
including appointed league officials. Such authority shall include
the authorization to direct any person or person to immediately
remove themselves from the premises.
D. Enforcement of Code of Conduct. The Recreation Director is hereby
directed to review behavior at events at which teams or individuals
participate under the auspices of the Madison Recreation Department,
including events outside the Borough of Madison, and to make every
effort to ensure that behavior at said events complies with the Code of
Conduct established by this chapter. Individual sports organizations
shall not take any enforcement action with regards to potential Code of
Conduct violations. The Recreation Director and the Borough
Administrator shall be responsible for enforcement of the Code of
Conduct. Any and all allegations, claims, or charges regarding
violations of the Code of Conduct may be presented to the Recreation
Director and the Borough Administrator.
A. Any and all allegations, claims, or charges regarding violations of any
rule or regulation established under this chapter including but not
limited to Code of Conduct, safety regulations, coach training, criminal
history record background checks, or facility maintenance shall be
presented to the Recreation Director. The Recreation Director shall
inform the Borough Administrator before any action is taken. No
complaint needs to be filed in order for the Recreation Director or the
Borough of Madison to take action. Any penalty issued by the
Recreation Director requires approval of the Borough Administrator.
Penalties may include, but are not limited to, suspension of or reduction
in an individual, program or organization's use of the Borough athletic
field and facilities. Any penalty issued by the Recreation Director that
involves a suspension in excess of three months must be reviewed by
the Recreation Advisory Committee. Any individual, sports program or
§ 137-8 MADISON CODE § 137-9
131:344
§ 137-10. Additional policies and procedures possible.
The Borough of Madison reserves the right to establish additional policies
and procedures as they determine in their absolute discretion.
§ 137-10.1. Recreation Advisory Committee. [Added 12-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 59-2019]
organization that is subject to penalty pursuant to this chapter shall not
have the right to reserve the use of Borough facilities until such penalty
has expired or terminates.
B. Appeals process. An Appeal Committee shall be appointed when
necessary to consider appeals from penalties imposed by the
Recreation Director for violations of the Code of Conduct, lightning
regulations or any other rules established under this chapter. The Final
Appeal Committee shall consist of the Borough Administrator, the Chair
of the Recreation Advisory Committee, and the Recreation Director. The
Final Appeal Committee shall establish whatever procedures it deems
appropriate for it to review the matter, and shall be authorized to make
a determination regarding the appropriateness of the penalty. Any such
individual, program or organization wishing to appeal a penalty must
file a written notice with the Recreation Department within 10 days
after receipt of written notice of such penalty.
A. Establishment. The Recreation Advisory Committee is hereby
established to be known as "the Recreation Advisory Committee of the
Borough of Madison" (hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The
Committee shall consist of 12 members.
B. Purpose and responsibilities.
(1) To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding the
needs of recreational activities conducted by the Borough and
assist in the coordinating of existing programs of various
organization and for planning future recreational needs.
(2) The Committee will provide information to the Mayor and Council
on these special needs.
(3) The Committee will submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the
end of each calendar year, concerning ongoing activities. In
addition, the Committee shall regularly circulate to the Mayor and
Council copies of its meeting minutes. All records, reports and data
shall be available to the Council for inspection at any time.
(4) The Committee will hold a minimum of four public meetings
annually which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open
Public Meetings Act81 and shall take place at the Hartley Dodge
Memorial unless otherwise noted.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 137-9 OFFICIAL MAP § 137-10.1
131:345
C. Membership.
(1) Membership shall consist of representative of recreation groups
listed in the annual resolution recognize the primary sport
recreational groups and organizations within the Borough of
Madison. All members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation. The Committee shall be comprised of the following
persons, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
Council:
(a) One liaison member of the Council (ex officio).
(b) Regular members, who are residents of the Borough,
representative of recreation groups appointed at the annual
reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council and listed in
the resolution recognized as the primary sport recreational
groups and organizations.
(c) Recreation Director (ex officio).
(d) One at-large member.
(2) The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
D. Voting powers, quorum and limitation of powers.
(1) A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute
a quorum.
(2) The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power
of condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of
the municipality and from creating any debt against the
municipality.
E. Borough departmental assistance.
(1) General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined
by the Mayor and Council, in so far as may be practicable, the
employees and professional staff of the Borough of Madison,
including the Borough Attorney, shall be available to assist the
Committee in the performance of its duties.
(2) Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff
assistance shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any
project that requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff
and professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to
commencement of the project.
F. Terms of office.
(1) The Council liaison shall serve annually.
§ 137-10.1 MADISON CODE § 137-10.1
131:346
§ 137-11. Severability.
If any section, provision or any other part of this chapter, or the application
of any such provision to any person or circumstances, shall be adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this chapter to the extent
it can be given effect or the application of such provision to person or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be
affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
(2) The 12 resident members and Recreation Director (ex officio) shall
serve for a term of one year.
(3) The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall
annually select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall
call the initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the
adoption of this chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish
its meeting schedule, which shall be duly published.
G. Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or
removal of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council. In the event that the
Mayor fails to make a nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after a position
becomes vacant or the Borough Council fails to confirm a nomination,
then the appointment shall be made by the Borough Council by the vote
of a majority of the members present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have
no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
H. Reporting responsibilities. The Committee shall submit an annual
report to Mayor and Council.
I. Conflict of interest.
(1) Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease,
mortgage, sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any
such project or to the Committee without forthwith making written
disclosure to the Committee of the nature and extent of the
interest. Such disclosure shall be entered in writing upon the
minutes of the Committee.
(2) Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described
herein shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
§ 137-10.1 OFFICIAL MAP § 137-12
131:347
§ 137-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 137-13. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2015.
Chapter 139
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 139-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic,
political, religious, not-for-profit or eleemosynary group, association or
corporation which solicits and collects contributions for charitable
purposes.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, political, religious or eleemosynary purpose.
CONTRIBUTION — The promise or grant of any money or property of any
kind or value.
MERCHANDISE — Includes all goods, wares, food, fruit, vegetables, farm
products, magazines, periodicals and all kinds of articles of personal
property for domestic use, including product samples. Orders of contracts
for a service home improvement or alteration and market and opinion
surveys or polls are, for the purposes of this chapter, deemed
"merchandise."
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Includes a peddler or solicitor who transports
prepared food, food-stuffs to be prepared or cooked prior to sale and
beverages for sale in the Borough by vehicle or pushcart, such food or
beverage to be sold to individual patrons while said vehicle is stopped or
parked. Mobile vendors of frozen products only, such as ice cream, frozen
ices or frozen confectionary products are specifically excluded from the
definition of "mobile food vendor."82
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
the streets and roads or from house to house carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to customers. The word "peddler" shall include the words
82.Editor's Note: The former definition of "peddler or solicitor," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011.
§ 137-12 MADISON CODE § 139-1
131:348
"hawker," "huckster" and "vendor."[Added 8-22-2011 by Ord. No.
26-2011]
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural and any person, firm
or corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any other
organization.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER[Added 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011] —
VEHICLE — Includes wagons, carts, trailers, motor trucks, motor vehicles,
service dispensers or other type of conveyance.
§ 139-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor, as defined in § 139-1 of this
chapter, to engage in such activity within the Borough of Madison without
first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 139-3. Application for license.
All applicants shall pay the license fee required by § 139-5, if applicable, and
file with the Police Department a sworn written application, in duplicate,
on forms to be furnished by the Police Department which shall give the
following information:
Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on the streets and
roads or from house to house taking or attempting to take orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future, including orders for improvements to real
property, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale
a sample of the object to be sold and whether or not he is collecting
advance payments on such sales.
A.
The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser," provided that
this definition shall not include wholesalemen calling on retail
merchants.
B.
A solicitor or canvasser also is deemed to be one who is not in the
business of selling goods, but one who makes surveys for research
purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any such similar work,
which, by nature, involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity, and
shall include persons going from door to door or place to place or
being in or on any public or quasi-public areas of the Borough for the
purpose of seeking contributions, donations or alms for any person or
organization.
C.
A. The name and a description of the applicant, including date of birth,
driver's license number and social security or tax identification number.
B. The permanent home address and full local address, if any, of the
applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
§ 139-1 OFFICIAL MAP § 139-3
131:349
§ 139-4. Investigation; denial or issuance of license.
C. The name and address of employer, firm or person represented,
together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
D. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise or service to be sold or distributed.
E. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
F. The length of time for which the license is required.
G. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its license
number.
H. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
I. The place where the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale is
manufactured or produced, the place where such merchandise is
located at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery.
J. A photograph of the applicant taken 60 days immediately prior to the
date of the application, which photograph shall clearly show the head
and shoulders of the applicant and shall measure two inches by two
inches.
K. Each and every solicitor/peddler shall agree to be fingerprinted for the
purpose of verifying that he/she has no criminal record. The fingerprint
impressions will be taken by Sagem Morpho, Inc. The necessary form
and instructions will be handed out at the time the application is filed
with this Department. [Amended 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 23-2013]
L. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate the same.
M. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this § 139-3 supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this subsection
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by said employee or agent.
A. Investigation; criminal background check. [Amended 6-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 23-2013]
(1) Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of Police shall cause to
be made such investigation of the applicant’s business and moral
character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public
good. The Chief of Police requires a criminal history background
§ 139-3 MADISON CODE § 139-4
131:350
check to be conducted through Morpho-Trak, in accordance with
§ 34-18 of the Borough Code, for which each applicant/solicitor
must complete prior to issuance of license. All fees required by
Morpho-Trak will be paid by each individual applicant.
(2) The criminal background check from Morpho-Trak will be valid for
a twelve-month period. If applicants seek an additional solicitor
permit after the twelve-month period has expired, they will be
required to have a criminal history check for a noncriminal justice
purpose through the New Jersey State Police and pay the fees
required directly to the New Jersey State Police.
(3) The criminal history check shall be kept confidential. For purposes
of this background check, the Madison Police Department is hereby
authorized to have access to criminal history record information
through the State Bureau of Investigation.
B. If, as a result of each investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and shall notify the
applicant that his application is disapproved. Any determination by the
Chief of Police that an application is unsatisfactory shall be based upon
one or more of the following findings with respect to the applicant:
(1) Conviction of a crime relating adversely to the occupation of
peddling or soliciting, which shall be determined in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2 and set forth in a written
explanation provided to the applicant based upon consideration of
the following factors or any other factors:
(a) The nature and duties of the business for which a license is
sought;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the crime;
(c) Circumstances under which the crime occurred;
(d) The date of the crime;
(e) The age of the person when the crime was committed;
(f) Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Social conditions which may have contributed to the crime;
and
(h) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric
treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or
vocational schooling, successful participation in correctional
work-release programs, or the recommendation of persons
who have or have had the applicant under their supervision.
§ 139-4 OFFICIAL MAP § 139-4
131:351
(2) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Record of breaches of soliciting contracts.
(5) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
(6) Concrete evidence of bad moral character.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse his approval on the application and deliver to the
applicant his license. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all licenses
issued and all complaints received, if any, concerning each license.
D. The license issued hereunder shall contain the signature of the issuing
officer and shall show:
(1) The name, address and photograph of the licensee.
(2) The class of license issued.
(3) The kind of merchandise or services to be sold or distributed
thereunder.
(4) The date of issue.
(5) The length of time the license shall be operative.
(6) The license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in the peddling or soliciting activity licensed.
E. The Police Chief shall issue to each licensee at the time of the delivery
of his license a badge which shall show the nature of the license in
letters and figures easily discernible. Such badge must be worn
constantly by the licensee in such a manner as to be readily visible
when engaged in the activities herein. Upon issuance of said license
and badge, each applicant shall pay to the Police Chief the sum of $5 as
a deposit for said badge, refundable to said applicant upon return to the
Police Chief. If the licensee fails to return the badge to the Police Chief
within 14 days after the expiration date indicated on the badge, the
licensee shall forfeit the deposit. [Amended 7-9-1990 by Ord. No.
25-90]
F. No more than a total of 10 yearly licenses shall be issued; no more than
one per person. No more than five yearly licenses shall be issued to
mobile food vendors. Peddlers and solicitors who are already licensed
by the Borough shall have 10 days prior to the expiration date of the
licenses to renew the same at the required fee. This right to renew shall
not be assigned or transferred and shall be forfeited if not reviewed
within the ten-day period prior to expiration.
§ 139-4 MADISON CODE § 139-4
131:352
§ 139-5. License fees. [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
The nonrefundable fee to be paid by each applicant at the time of submitting
an application for a license shall be as follows:
§ 139-6. Regulations governing operations.
G. No license shall be issued where any person who would use the
proposed license is under 16 years of age.
A. For a weekly license: $75 per week. For the purposes of this chapter, a
"week" shall constitute any six consecutive days, excluding Sundays.
B. For a monthly license: $150 per month.
C. For a yearly license: $500 per year.
D. With respect to a peddler or solicitor conducting his or her business
door-to-door: $20 per day for a daily license.
A. Every holder of a peddler's or solicitor's license issued by the Police
Chief under the authority of this chapter or by the Clerk of the County
of Morris under the authority of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be required to
carry such license with him while engaged in the business or activity
licensed within the corporate limits of the Borough. When the licensed
activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle, the license
shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle. Each
vehicle used shall display a license tag bearing the words, "Sales
License for the Year." In all other cases the licensee shall have the
license in his possession at all times and shall display it upon the
request of any citizen or official of the Borough of Madison.
B. Every such licensee shall restrict his selling activity within the Borough
to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and shall notify the police
officer on duty at least once in every week in which he plans to conduct
said activity, before commencing his selling, soliciting or distributing
activity. Such notification shall include a statement of the general area
of the Borough in which the licensee intends to conduct said activity
and a schedule of dates and times when said activity shall be
conducted. The licensee shall notify the police officer on duty of any
change in the area or time of solicitation, should such changes be made
during the week. [Added 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
C. Every such licensee shall carry liability insurance covering its
operations in the minimum amount of $500,000 per loss with the
Borough named as an additional insured. Peddlers and solicitors
engaged in the door-to-door sale of merchandise are not required to
carry said insurance.
D. When parked on a time regulated public street, a peddler or solicitor
must obey all existing parking ordinances.
§ 139-4 OFFICIAL MAP § 139-6
131:353
§ 139-7. Geographic limitations.
E. Vehicles moved or parked on public streets in connection with a
peddler's or solicitor's operation must comply with all state and motor
vehicle laws.
F. No signs are to be erected or displayed without the approval of the
Zoning Code Official, except for signs on vehicles that stipulate prices
on food offered.
G. Mobile food vendors must provide for the disposal of recycling cans
and/or bottles. Mobile food vendors are not to use public receptacles for
garbage attributable to that peddler's operation.
H. Peddlers and solicitors are prohibited from serving drivers or
passengers of vehicles and are only allowed to serve pedestrian
customers.
I. Peddlers and solicitors are prohibited from the use of temporary public
utility hookups without prior approval of the Construction Code Official.
J. No peddler or solicitor, nor any person in their behalf, shall shout, cry
out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any
loudspeaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public or private places in the Borough to call
attention to his business or to his merchandise.
K. The pushcart used by a mobile food vendor shall contain all
merchandise and equipment and shall not exceed six feet in length and
four feet in width. [Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 16-92]
A. Stopping or parking on private property; nonsolicitation notices.
[Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 26-2011]
(1) Peddlers/canvassers/solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle on
privately owned property for the purpose of conducting a sale,
without having first filed a written authorization for the same from
the property owner.
(2) Upon going onto any premises in the Borough, peddlers/
canvassers/solicitors shall first examine any notice, as described
below, which may be attached to said property and shall be
governed by the statement contained on any such notice by
immediately and peacefully departing from the premises.
(3) It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such a
residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting, as herein defined, in
defiance of any notice as defined below.
§ 139-6 MADISON CODE § 139-7
131:354
§ 139-8. License not transferable.
Licenses shall not be transferable and must be surrendered upon expiration
or upon the obtaining of a renewed license.
§ 139-9. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Madison to
enforce provisions of this chapter and to require any person seen peddling
or soliciting, who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to
produce his peddler's or solicitor's license. Where applicable, the Health
Department should assist the Police Department in enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
(4) Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by this
§ 139-7 shall notify the Borough of his or her desire to be placed on
the nonsolicitation list maintained by the Chief of Police and/or
shall exhibit upon or near the main entrance door to his or her
residence a notice indicating the words "no solicitors" or "no
soliciting." The letters shall be at least one inch in height, and the
notice shall be at least three inches by six inches in size.
B. Peddlers and solicitors may only park or stop for the purpose of
conducting sales in the Central Business District No. 1, Central
Business District No. 2, General Business Area and Multi-Commercial
Use Area of the Borough; however, peddling and soliciting is not
permitted within the median strip on Waverly Place.
C. A peddler or solicitor must not inhibit pedestrian traffic and must have
at least eight feet between the vehicle and the curbline for pedestrian
traffic.
D. Peddlers or solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle in such a
manner as to block any advertisement, display or entrance to an
existing store.
E. Peddlers and solicitors shall not stop or park any vehicle in an alleyway
or walkway and shall not stop or park any vehicle in such a manner as to
block entrance to said alleyways or walkways.
F. Peddlers or solicitors shall not park any vehicle in such a manner as to
block any municipal sign, public receptacle for garbage, public bench
or other public amenity.
G. Peddlers and solicitors must have their intended location approved by
the Police Department prior to setting up operations. The Traffic Safety
Officer will examine the site to determine if public safety is adversely
affected by the location.
§ 139-7 OFFICIAL MAP § 139-10
131:355
§ 139-10. Records.
The Police Chief shall maintain a record of all licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter and shall record therein all convictions for
violations of this chapter and other pertinent circumstances and incidents
reported to the Chief of Police.
§ 139-11. Revocation of licenses.
§ 139-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the denial of
an application for a permit or license as provided in § 139-4 of this chapter
or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided
in § 139-11 of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Borough
Council of the Borough of Madison. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police after reasonable notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) Violation of any of the provisions contained in this Chapter 139
governing peddling and soliciting.
(4) Conviction of any crime or offense relating adversely to the
occupation of peddling or soliciting as determined according to the
procedure and based upon the considerations set forth in
§ 139-4B(1) of this chapter.
(5) Conducting the business of licensed activity, whether by licensee
himself or his agents or employees, in any unlawful manner or in
any manner that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to
the public health, safety or general welfare.
(6) Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon the
application, pending the results of the investigation provided for in
this chapter, such license shall be summarily revoked if the results
of the investigation are such as would have resulted in the denial of
the application.
B. Notice of hearing for a revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address given by the
licensee in making application under § 139-3 herein, at least five days
prior to the date set for said hearing.
§ 139-10 MADISON CODE § 139-12
131:356
the Borough Council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of
has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Borough Council shall set
a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in § 139-11
of this chapter for notice for hearing or revocation. The decision and order
of the Borough Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. In
accordance with N,J.S.A. 2A:168A-2, if the denial of an application or the
revocation of a license or permit is upheld based upon the grounds set
forth in § 139-4B(1) or 139-11A(4) of this chapter, and the applicant shall be
provided with a written explanation based upon consideration of the factors
enumerated in § 139-4B(1).
§ 139-13. Exceptions.
§ 139-14. Charitable organizations.
A. Any veteran or exempt fireman of a volunteer fire department holding a
special license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10 shall be
exempt from procuring a license or paying the fee as provided herein
but shall be required to comply with all other applicable sections of this
chapter and shall be required to register with the Police Chief and
obtain a permit which will be issued by the Police Chief upon proper
identification and exhibition of such state license.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any public utility or its employees, where said public utility is
subject to regulation by the State Board of Public Utility
Commissioners; provided, however, that such employees shall
display the identification badge or card issued by their employer.
(2) Any person engaged in the delivery of merchandise or other
articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons who had previously ordered the same or were entitled to
receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
C. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply on days when Borough
events are scheduled, including Bottle Hill Day, the Christmas Walk,
Memorial Day Parade and other days specified by the Mayor and
Borough Council.
A. Any charitable organization, as defined in § 139-1, desiring to solicit or
having solicited in its name contributions or financial assistance of any
kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or
merchandise within the Borough for a charitable purpose shall be
exempt from the provisions of §§ 139-3A through M, 139-4 and 139-5,
provided that a sworn application is filed with the Chief of Police, which
shall give the following information:
(1) The name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
§ 139-12 OFFICIAL MAP § 139-14
131:357
§ 139-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-10-1991 by Ord. No.
18-91]
§ 139-16. Nonsolicitation list. [Added 8-22-2011 by Ord. No.
26-2011]
(2) The name and address of the organization.
(3) The period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
(4) The name and address of each agent or representative who will
conduct solicitations and the length of time that said agent or
representative has been employed or affiliated with such
organization, society, association or corporation.
B. Upon receiving the application set forth above, the Chief of Police shall
issue a license without charge to such organization, association, society,
corporation, etc., for each of their or its representatives who will
actually conduct the solicitations. Upon issuance of said license, each
applicant or agent or representative of said applicant shall pay the sum
of $5 as a deposit for the accompanying badge, refundable to the
applicant or his agent or representative upon the return of the badge.
Local charitable organizations with principal headquarters in Madison
shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection to obtain and
pay the deposit fee for a badge for each of its representatives
conducting the solicitations who are 16 years of age or younger.
A. Penalties for specific violations. Penalties shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94; 8-23-2004 by Ord. No.
42-2004]
Section Violated Penalty
§ 139-2
First offense $123
Second offense $273
Third offense Court appearance required
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by statute or is specifically
provided in this or some other section of this chapter, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any supplement thereof
or who commits a third or further offense shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $500 for each offense or imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. The Chief of Police shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Borough that he or she does not wish for any solicitor or
canvasser to enter upon his or her property for solicitation or
canvassing purposes.
§ 139-14 MADISON CODE § 139-16
131:358
Chapter 141
POLICE ESCORT SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 34.
§ 141-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a fee schedule for police escort
services to be provided in connection with the transfer of cash or other
valuables between places of business, residences and places of deposit in
the Borough of Madison.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLICE ESCORT SERVICES — Services provided by the Police of the
Borough of Madison in connection with the transfer of cash and other
valuables between places of business, residences and/or places of deposit
within the borough. This phrase does not apply to escort services involving
emergency services, parades, funerals, public events or other similar
activities and services conducted by the Police Department of the Borough.
§ 141-3. Fee. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
Prior to or immediately following the performance of any police escort
services, the person or persons utilizing said police escort services shall pay
to the borough a fee of $10 for each individual escort service provided.
(1) To be included on this nonsolicitation list, residents must complete
a form which will be made available through the Police Department
and must submit the completed form to the Records Department of
the Police Department.
(2) This list shall be provided to all licensees.
(3) No solicitor or canvasser shall enter upon any private property that
is included upon the nonsolicitation list.
B. Violators of this section will be subject to a fine and/or suspension or
revocation of the license granted under this chapter.
§ 139-16 POLICE ESCORT SERVICES § 141-4
141:359
§ 141-4. Limitation on liability.
Neither the borough nor its various departments shall assume any liability
in connection with the provision of police escort services, and any person
utilizing said services is hereby informed of this limitation on liability.
§ 141-5. Deferment or refusal of services.
The provision of police escort services by the Police Department of the
Borough of Madison shall be dependent upon the availability of police
personnel and police resources, and it shall be within the sole discretion of
the Department to determine whether said police escort services shall be
conducted, deferred or refused.
Chapter 142
POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 58.
Bowling alleys — See Ch. 70.
Model car raceways — See Ch. 125.
§ 142-1. License required.
No person, persons, firm, association, club or corporation shall, within the
Borough of Madison, maintain, operate, conduct or pursue the business
or occupation of keeping any public room or place wherein the games
commonly known as "pool" or "billiards" are played without having first
obtained a license therefor from the Council of the Borough of Madison as
hereinafter provided.
§ 142-2. Application for license.
An application for a license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on forms
to be furnished by him, which forms shall require the following information
to be included:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
C. In the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers,
directors and all stockholders presently holding stock and all who for
six months prior to the making of said application have been officers,
directors or stockholders.
D. In the case of clubs or associations, the names and addresses of all
officers.
§ 141-4 MADISON CODE § 142-2
142:360
§ 142-3. Issuance and term of license.
All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk only
after a resolution of the Council of the Borough of Madison shall have
been adopted approving said application and only after the payment of the
license fee herein provided for. All such licenses shall be valid from the first
day of January of the year in which the license is issued until the 31st day of
December next after the same is issued, unless sooner revoked.
§ 142-4. License contents; transfers.
§ 142-5. Fees. [Amended 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 31-90]
The annual fees to be paid for such license are hereby fixed as follows:
§ 142-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
E. Whether or not the person or persons named in the application have
ever been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or municipal law.
F. The location of the premises to be licensed.
G. The number of pool tables and billiard tables to be located upon the
premises to be licensed.
A. Such license shall bear:
(1) The date of issue.
(2) The name of the licensee.
(3) The purpose for which issued.
(4) The location of the room or building wherein the licensee is
authorized to carry on and conduct any such business.
B. Such license shall not be transferable by the holder to any other person,
persons, firm, association, club or corporation, but such license may be
transferred by the holder to another address, provided that the licensee
shall make written application for such transfer to the Borough Clerk
and such transfer is approved by resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Madison.
A. For the first pool or billiard table located upon the premises to be
licensed, the sum of $50.
B. For each additional pool or billiard table located upon the premises to
be licensed, the sum of $10.
A. The Council of the Borough of Madison may suspend or revoke the
license of any licensee on any one or more of the following grounds:
§ 142-2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 142-6
142:361
§ 142-7. Premises ineligible for license.
§ 142-8. Persons ineligible for license. [Added 3-10-1975 by Ord.
No. 5-75]
No license shall be issued to any person, persons or corporation whose
director or directors has or have been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude.
(1) Violation of any of the laws of the State of New Jersey upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives.
(2) Violation of any ordinance of the Borough of Madison upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, servants,
employees or representatives.
(3) If said license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false
statement of a material fact or if a fact concerning the applicant
was not disclosed at the time of filing the application where such
fact would have constituted just cause for refusing to issue said
license.
(4) Permitting or suffering any activity upon the licensed premises
which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
(5) Conducting or permitting bookmaking or the taking or placing of
bets or suffering gambling in any form in or at the licensed
premises.
(6) Permitting or suffering any intoxicated or disorderly person to be
admitted to the licensed premises or to remain therein or to loiter
in front of said premises.
B. In all such cases, written notice of the charge or charges and the time
and place of hearing thereon shall be served on the licensee either in
person or by certified or registered mail addressed to the licensed
premises. No revocation or suspension shall occur unless the licensee
shall have been afforded an opportunity to be heard in his defense.
C. In the event any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not
be entitled to the return of any portion of the license fee.
A. Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe by the written report
of the Building Inspector or a fire hazard by the written report of the
Fire Chief shall be deemed to be ineligible for a license.
B. No license shall be issued for the operation of any pool or billiard room
which is located within 200 feet of any school, church or publicly owned
building.
§ 142-6 MADISON CODE § 142-9
142:362
§ 142-9. Hours of operation. [Amended 3-14-1966 by Ord. No. 818]
The hours of operation of such pool or billiard rooms shall be between 9:00
a.m. and the following 12:00 midnight on weekdays, and between 1:00 p.m.
and the following 12:00 midnight on Sundays. The hours designated in this
section shall be prevailing time.
§ 142-10. Age restrictions. [Amended 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 857]
No person under the age of 16 years shall be admitted to or permitted
to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to frequent, lounge,
congregate or gather in such room or place unless accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian.
§ 142-11. Card playing prohibited.
In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises licensed under this
chapter, even if such card playing is for social purposes.
§ 142-12. Location of licensed premises in buildings; view of
interior.
All premises in which the games of pool and billiards are played shall be on
the street floor of any building and shall be so arranged and lighted that a
full view of the interior may be had at all hours from the public thoroughfare
or from adjacent rooms to which the public is admitted.
§ 142-13. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any religious, charitable, benevolent or
nonprofit association or corporation which operates or maintains any pool
or billiard table solely for the recreation and amusement of its members,
provided that such organization is bona fide in character and is not intended
as a means or device for evading the terms and provisions of this chapter;
nor shall this chapter apply to the keeping of any pool or billiard table in
private residences.
§ 142-14. Posting of certain information and material.
There shall be conspicuously posted and displayed in any premises licensed
under this chapter:
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. A copy of this chapter, which shall be supplied to the licensee by the
Borough Clerk.
C. Not less than one sign giving notice that no person under the age of 16
years is permitted upon the licensed premises unless accompanied by
his or her parent or guardian. [Amended 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 857]
§ 142-9 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 142-15
142:363
§ 142-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70]
Any person, persons, firm, association, club or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500 or confinement in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court. Each day such violation shall be continued shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 145
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property Maintenance Emergency
Committee — See Ch. 36.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
Littering, brush and trash — See Ch. 120.
Multiple dwellings and hotel
maintenance — See Ch. 146.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
§ 142-15 MADISON CODE § 142-15
142:364
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Madison" and may be referred to in this chapter in the short
form as the "code" or "chapter."
§ 145-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Borough structures
used for residential and nonresidential use which are or may become in the
future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance
or further that such conditions, including but not limited to structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises,
infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or refrigeration
equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and
facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and
air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the
health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and
inhabitants of the Borough. It is further found and declared that by reason
of lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain
properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and
initiating slums and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the creation and growth of slums and blight may be
prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained,
the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and
neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare
protected and fostered.
§ 145-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and
use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators
and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and
nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violation of this code; and
to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use.
§ 145-4. Definitions.
§ 145-1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-4
142:365
A. The following terms wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context. All definitions of the latest
edition of the Building Officials Conference of America, Basic Building
Code are hereby included by reference.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — All trucks, vans, construction equipment
and limousines and other motor vehicles bearing commercial license
plates which are in excess of four tons' net weight.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or part
thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, crackling,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or part of any premises
which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which
are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside
of any building erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
vermin and other such pests.
FRONT YARD — A space extending the full width of the lot between
any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building at its closest point to the front lot line. Said "front yard" shall
be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as
may be permitted elsewhere in the Madison Borough Code or Madison
Land Development ordinance.83
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence of rodents, vermin, insects or other
pests on the premises which constitutes a health hazard.
NUISANCE —
Any condition so defined by common law, the statutes of the State
of New Jersey or the ordinances of the Borough of Madison;
(1)
Any condition which may prove attractive but detrimental to the
health or safety of children;
(2)
Physical condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to health
or persons on or near the premises where the condition exists; or
(3)
Any condition which renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
detrimental to the health of human beings.
(4)
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Land Development.
§ 145-4 MADISON CODE § 145-4
142:366
§ 145-5. Compliance required.
All structures and premises shall comply with the appropriate provisions
of this chapter, whether or not those structures and premises have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this
chapter and irrespective of any permits or licenses which may have been
issued for their use or occupancy prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Vacant lots, lands and premises are also required to comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 145-6. Compliance with other ordinances.
No certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute a defense
against any violation of any other ordinance of the Borough of Madison
applicable to any structure or premises.
§ 145-7. Duties and responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants.
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of a premises.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises or any part thereof, with or without the knowledge and/or
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, has legal or equitable title in any form to any premises, with
or without actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling or premises as owner or agent of the owner,
including but not limited to a fiduciary, executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
REFUSE — All nonputrescible solid wastes, including but not limited
to abandoned vehicles and recreational equipment and parts thereof,
abandoned machinery and parts thereof, household furnishings, dead
animals, debris, junk, appliances, rubbish, scrap lumber, stumps, tires,
trash, grass and yard clippings. (See also "garbage".)
UNOCCUPIED OR VACANT BUILDING — Any structure intended for
residential or commercial use which is not currently occupied or in use.
For the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter, a presumption shall
exist that a structure vacant for six months is not currently occupied or
in use.
A. Owners and operators. Owners and operators shall have all the
responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter, and no owner or operator
shall be relieved from any such duties and responsibilities nor be
entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of
the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
§ 145-4 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-7
142:367
B. Occupants. Occupants shall have all the responsibilities and duties as
prescribed in this chapter, and the occupant shall not be relieved from
any such duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against
any charge of violation therefor and in violation thereof by reason of the
fact that the owner and/or operator is also responsible therefore and in
violation thereof.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this chapter, the respective obligations and responsibilities
of the owner and operator on the one hand and the occupant on the
other shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by
and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.
§ 145-7 MADISON CODE § 145-7
142:368
ARTICLE II
Vacant Residential and Nonresidential Premises
§ 145-8. Vacant buildings.
A. Basic equipment and facilities. Every unoccupied or vacant residential
or nonresidential building must comply with the following minimum
standards for basic equipment and facilities:
(1) Plumbing. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and be
in sound condition and good repair.
(2) Electricity. Every existing outlet and fixture shall be properly
connected. Wiring and service lines shall be maintained in good
and safe working condition.
(3) Heating plant. The heating plant shall be maintained in a safe
condition.
(4) Cooking equipment. All cooking equipment shall be maintained in a
safe condition.
B. Storage and boarding up of building.
(1) No room within any vacant or unoccupied building shall be used for
storage or junk, rubbish or wastes, furniture or building materials
not intended to be used in the existing building.
(2) The boarding up of doors and windows shall not be permitted
except with the permission of the enforcement officer in emergency
situations. When doors and windows are boarded up, they shall be
covered with no less than one-half-inch exterior plywood or
equivalent, which shall be the same color as the building exterior.
C. Safe and sanitary maintenance. All occupied or vacant buildings shall
comply with the following minimum standards for safe and sanitary
maintenance.
(1) Every foundation, exterior wall or exterior roof shall be
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed
thereon.
(2) Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially
rodentproof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(3) Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and
hatchway shall be weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and
locked and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
§ 145-8 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-8
142:369
(4) Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal
use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
(5) Every yard shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.
(6) There shall be a controlled method of disposing of water from roofs
by use of gutters and down spouts, which shall be installed and
maintained in sound condition, free of leaks and obstructions.
(7) Every dwelling's cellar, basement and crawl space shall be
maintained from excessive dampness and leakage.
(8) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be
maintained free of broken windows, loose shingles, crumbling
stone or brick or excess peeling paint.
(9) The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory
structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and all buildings thereof shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood
and such that the appearance of the premises and structures shall
not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor
an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying
diminution of property values.
D. Further responsibilities of owners. All owners of unoccupied or vacant
buildings shall be required to comply with the following standards:
(1) Any yard area (front, side and rear) adjacent to an unoccupied or
vacant building shall be cleared and maintained free of trash, solid
debris or any other materials that cause litter to accumulate to
unhealthy and blighting proportions.
(2) Grass and weeds shall not be permitted to grow or remain on the
side, front and/or rear yards of any unoccupied or vacant building
so as to exceed a height of 10 inches.
(3) Unoccupied or vacant buildings shall not be utilized for storage of
any hazardous materials, whether solid or liquid, including the yard
portion of that building.
(4) When a vacant dwelling is found to be infested with rats, termites,
roaches and/or any other insects and vermin, the owner shall
undertake an expedient means of extermination of such nuisances.
(5) All doors and/or lids on appliances, on furniture utilized for storage
or on heating furnaces shall be locked in order to deny entry to an
individual where the potential for physical harm or death may
§ 145-8 MADISON CODE § 145-8
142:370
result should said door or lid close and prevent the individual's
escape.
E. The standards and requirements of this section shall apply as long as
any dwelling remains vacant or unoccupied. Upon occupancy, the other
appropriate sections of this chapter shall prevail.
F. Creditor responsibility. Pursuant to the provisions of the Public Laws of
2014, Chapter 35, a creditor filing a summons and complaint to
foreclose a lien on a residential property that is vacant and abandoned,
whether the filing of the summons and complaint is made before or
after the determination that the property is vacant and abandoned,
shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of
the exterior of the residential property. This obligation applies whether
the determination that the property is vacant and abandoned is made
by the public officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 145, Article
V, § 145-15, of the Code of the Borough of Madison, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73 or otherwise [Added 10-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 49-2014]
G. Notice to creditor; time to correct violations. If the public officer, or
other authorized municipal official, determines that a creditor obligated
to care, maintain, secure and keep up a vacant and abandoned property
has failed to do so in violation of the provisions of Chapter 145 of this
Code, the public officer or other authorized municipal official shall issue
a notice of violation to the creditor that has filed a summons and
complaint to foreclose on the property in question. The notice shall
require the person or entity to correct the violation within 30 days of
receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the
violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The
issuance of this notice shall constitute evidence that a property is
“vacant and abandoned” for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73. [Added
10-15-2014 by Ord. No. 49-2014]
H. Designated representative of out-of-state creditor; violation. An out-ofstate
creditor shall include the full name and contact information of the
in-state representative or agent in the notice required to be provided to
the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Subdivision a(1) of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
An out-of-state creditor found by a court of competent jurisdiction to
have violated this provision shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each
day of the violation commencing on the day after the ten-day period set
forth in Subdivision a(1) of N.J.S.A. 40:10B-51 with respect to notifying
the Municipal Clerk that an action to foreclose the property has been
filed. [Added 10-15-2014 by Ord. No. 49-2014]
§ 145-8 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-8
142:371

ARTICLE III
Residential Properties
§ 145-9. Applicability.
Every residential structure and the premises on which it is situated shall
comply with the provisions of this article. No license or permit or other
certification of compliance with this code shall constitute a defense against
any violation of any other local ordinance applicable to any structure or
premises.
§ 145-10. Maintenance.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator and/or occupant of residential
structures and premises to keep the exterior of the premises free of
nuisances, which include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Garbage and/or refuse.
(2) Natural growth, such as dead and dying or storm-damaged trees
and limbs or other growth, which, by reason of its condition or
nature, constitutes a hazard to persons lawfully in the vicinity.
(3) Overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and/or snow which,
by reason of their location above ground level, constitute a danger
of falling on persons lawfully in the vicinity.
(4) Ground surface hazards, such as holes, excavations, breaks and
projections, on residential premises within five feet of an unfenced
property line or on any part of a nonresidential premises to which
the public has lawful access.
(5) Sources of infestation, including all environments and conditions
conducive to the increase or spread of vermin.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, operator and/or occupant of residential
structures and premises to keep and maintain the exterior of the
premises and structures so that the appearance of the same shall not
constitute a blighting factor, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used, at a location exposed to public view, equipment and
materials relating to commercial or industrial uses, unless
permitted under the Chapter 195, Land Development.
(2) Landscaping. Premises shall be kept from becoming overgrown
and/or unsightly. Vegetation along the public right-of-way shall be
kept from becoming a hazard to pedestrians and motorists.
(3) Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds, grasses or nondecorative plant growth in excess of 10
inches on residential premises within 10 feet of a property line or
on any part of a nonresidential premises to which the public has
§ 145-9 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-10
142:373
lawful access. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall
be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens.
(4) General maintenance. The exterior of every structure shall be
maintained in good repair for purposes of preservation and
appearance and free of conditions reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance, including but not limited to broken glass,
excessively peeling or deteriorated paint, graffiti, loose shingles
and crumbling stone or brick.
(5) Front yard parking. No person shall park any motor vehicle or boat
in any front yard area except on driveways constructed and
installed in compliance with Borough ordinances. Parking of any
motor vehicle must also comply with all other Borough ordinances,
including Chapter 195, Land Development.
§ 145-10 MADISON CODE § 145-10
142:374
ARTICLE IV
Nonresidential Properties
§ 145-11. Applicability.
Every nonresidential structure (including every structure which is a
combination of residential and nonresidential) and the premises on which
it is situated shall comply with the provisions of this article. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this code shall constitute a
defense against any violation of any other local ordinance applicable to any
structure or premises.
§ 145-12. Duties of owners.
Owners of nonresidential structures and premises shall have the general
duties outlined herein for the maintenance of the premises, and no such
owner shall be relieved from any such responsibility hereunder by reason
of the fact that an agent, employee, occupant or other person shall have
similar responsibilities or shall have failed to report any violation, nor shall
any such owner be relieved of any responsibility by the terms or provisions
of any lease, contract or agreement.
§ 145-13. Requirements.
A. All structures and premises subject to this chapter shall be kept free of
all the following conditions:
(1) Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(2) Dead and dying trees, limbs or other natural growths which, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage and
weathering, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof.
Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
which, by reasons of location above ground level, constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
(4) Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, ice
conditions and other safety hazards of walks, driveways, parking
lots, parking areas and other parts of the premises which are
accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All such holes
and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps
replaced and other conditions removed where necessary to
eliminate safety hazards or unsanitary conditions.
B. Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to eliminate
any recurrent or excessive accumulation of stormwater.
§ 145-11 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-13
142:375
C. Sources of infestation or potential infestation by rodents, mosquitoes,
flies, bees, wasps and other harmful or annoying insects shall be
promptly removed.
D. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
shall be maintained in good repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted and finished where necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling of paint, graffiti or
other conditions reflecting weathering or deterioration or inadequate
maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved and
safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties in the
neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
E. There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk,
streets or other public areas equipment and materials relating to
commercial or industrial uses unless permitted under the zoning
ordinances of the Borough of Madison84 for the particular premises.
F. Natural vegetation, landscaping, lawns, hedges and bushes shall not be
allowed to become overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public
view and where the same constitutes a blighting factor depreciating
adjoining property.
G. All parts of the premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of nuisances and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
84.Editor's Note: For provisions relating to zoning, see Ch. 195, Land Development, which is
included in the separate Land Use Legislation Volume, copies of which are available in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 145-13 MADISON CODE § 145-13
142:376
ARTICLE V
Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 145-14. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any building or structure which is deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 145-15. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement officer. The Health Officer of the Borough of Madison is
hereby designated as the officer in charge with the enforcement of this
chapter and is hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement officer." (The
Construction Code Official of the Borough of Madison, Building
Subcode Official of the Borough of Madison, Borough Engineer, all
members of the Police Department and authorized officers, inspectors
and personnel of the Fire Department and Health Department of the
Borough of Madison are hereby designated as assistant enforcement
officers for the purposes of the enforcement of this chapter.)
B. Inspection. The enforcement officer or designee shall cause to be made
such inspections of premises within the Borough as he shall deem
necessary to effect compliance with this chapter and shall have the
authority to use the services of and public authority in the enforcement
of this chapter.
C. Notice to owner, operator or occupant upon noncompliance. Following
inspection, if the enforcement officer determines that the premises are
not in compliance with this chapter, he shall then issue and cause to be
served upon the owner, operator and/or occupant of the premises a
written notification, stating the nature of the violation and the
corrective action sought, and allow 30 days (exclusive of the day of
service) for its correction.
D. In cases where the violation presents a nuisance which, in the
determination of the enforcement officer, is a substandard condition
which can, in the enforcement officer's opinion, be corrected for not
more than $100, he shall then issue and cause to be served upon the
owner, operator and/or occupant of the premises a written notification,
stating the nature of the violation and the corrective action sought and
allow 10 days (exclusive of the day of service) for its correction.
E. In cases where the violation presents a clear and present danger to
public health and safety, the complaint is to be turned over to the Police
Department or the Board of Health for prompt action within its
jurisdictions.
F. Service of notice. In case of an owner or operator, the notice may be
served personally upon him or by registered mail or certified mail,
§ 145-14 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-15
142:377
§ 145-16. Emergency situations.
Where the violations or conditions existing on the premises are of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the enforcement officer may either cause the violation to be
abated or order the owner, occupant or operator to correct the violation or
condition within a period of time not to exceed three days. Upon failure to
do so, the enforcement officer shall cause the condition to be abated subject
to the provisions of § 145-11 of this chapter. In addition, any other remedies
set forth in other sections of the Madison Borough Code shall be available.
§ 145-17. Abatement by Borough; expense.
Where abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, correction of a defect
in the premises or work necessary to place the premises in a proper
condition so as to conform to ordinances of the Borough or applicable
laws of the State of New Jersey requires expending Borough moneys, the
Borough Engineer shall present a report of work proposed to be done
to accomplish the foregoing to the Mayor and Borough Council with an
estimate of the cost, along with a summary of the proceedings undertaken
by the enforcement officer to secure compliance, including notices served
upon the occupants, owners, operators or their agents, as the case may be.
The Mayor and Borough Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize
the abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work necessary
to place the premises in proper condition and in compliance with this
chapter. The Borough Engineer shall thereafter proceed to have the work
performed in accordance with the resolution at municipal expense, not to
exceed the amount specified in the resolution, and shall, upon completion
thereof, submit a report of the moneys expended and costs to the Mayor
and Borough Council. After review of the report, the Mayor and Borough
Council may approve the expenses and costs, whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law in
conformity with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14. A copy of the resolution approving the
expenses and costs shall be certified by the Borough Clerk and filed with the
addressed to the last known address. If after due diligence, the last
known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the
outside front entrance of the structure. Personal service of the notice
may be upon a member of the family or the owner or operator over
14 years of age, residing in the same dwelling unit with the owner or
operator, as the case may be. In the case of the occupant, notice may
be mailed or delivered to him at his place of business or posted to the
door of the occupant's premises.
G. Additional notice required. Notice of violations of property
maintenance, building or other property codes for any property
declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to this chapter shall be given
a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the procedures of this Code as
required by P.L. 2014, c. 35. [Added 10-15-2014 by Ord. No.
49-2014]
§ 145-15 MADISON CODE § 145-17
142:378
Tax Collector of the Borough, who shall be responsible for the collection;
and a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of the effected premises.
§ 145-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 145-19. Compliance inspection.
Upon issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to this chapter, the property
owner, operator or occupant shall correct the condition and notify the
A. Where any owner, operator or occupant fails to comply with an order
issued pursuant to this chapter, he shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided herein. It shall be
the duty of the enforcement officer to cause a summons to be issued
from the Municipal Court for such violation, but nothing contained
herein shall limit the power of the enforcement officer to take such
further action under the criminal and civil laws of this state through any
court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove or abate
any nuisance. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
the violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 per day and per
offense, levied against the owner, operator or occupant, with a
minimum fine of $100 per day.
C. Where abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, was accomplished
and premises brought into compliance with this chapter through the
expenditures of Borough funds, such costs shall be assessed against the
premises cited as a lien in the same manner as real estate taxes.
D. If a fine in an amount greater than $1,250 is administered upon an
owner for a housing violation, then a thirty-day period shall be provided
in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate
the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a
court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the
property, it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed. [Added 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
E. Violations and penalties. Except as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I,
§ 1-15, and herein, any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of this Code. A
creditor required to care, maintain, secure and keep up a property
under this chapter cited in a notice issued pursuant to § 145-8G shall be
subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. [Added
10-15-2014 by Ord. No. 49-2014]
§ 145-17 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 145-19
142:379
enforcement officer that said condition has been corrected. A compliance
inspection shall then be made. Should full compliance not be achieved at
the time of said inspection, the Borough shall be reimbursed by the property
owner for the cost of all reinspections. Failure to reimburse the Borough
shall result in a lien for said cost being placed against the property in the
same manner as real estate taxes.
§ 145-20. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be
declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining portions
thereof shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and
effect; and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to
be severable.
§ 145-19 MADISON CODE § 145-20
142:380
Chapter 146
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND HOTEL MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property Maintenance Emergency
Committee — See Ch. 36.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 113.
Littering, brush and trash — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
§ 146-1. ARTICLE I — Administration and Enforcement
§ 146-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Multiple Dwellings and Hotel
Maintenance Code" of the Borough of Madison.
§ 146-1.2. Purpose.
§ 146-1.3. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any building or structure which is deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 146-1.4. Enforcement.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable minimum
requirements and standards, based upon current scientific and
engineering knowledge, experience and techniques, and the utilization
of modern machinery, equipment, materials and form and methods of
maintenance for the regulations of the maintenance of hotels and
multiple dwellings in the Borough of Madison in the interest of public
safety, health and welfare.
B. This Code is in addition to the State of New Jersey Regulations for
Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1.1 et seq.
A. Housing Officer. The Housing Officer of the Borough of Madison or his
or her designated agent is hereby designated as the officer in charge
with the enforcement of this chapter and is hereinafter referred to as
the "Housing Officer or his or her designated agent."
B. Inspection. The Housing Officer or his or her designated agent shall
cause to be made such inspections of premises within the Borough as
he or she shall deem necessary to effect compliance with this chapter
§ 145-20 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-1.4
142:381
§ 146-1.5. Violations and penalties.
§ 146-1.6. Scope.
and shall have the authority to use the services of and public authority
in the enforcement of this chapter.
C. Notice to owner, operator or occupant upon noncompliance. Following
inspection, if the Housing Officer or his or her designated agent
determines that the premises are not in compliance with this chapter,
he or she shall then issue and cause to be served upon the owner,
operator and/or occupant of the premises a written notification, stating
the nature of the violation and allow 30 days (exclusive of the day of
service) for its correction. The owner may seek an extension of time to
complete the corrections upon a verbal approval of the Housing Officer.
D. Service of notice. In case of an owner or operator, the notice may be
served personally upon him or by registered mail or certified mail,
addressed to the last known address. If, after due diligence, the last
known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the
outside front entrance of the structure. Personal service of the notice
may be upon a member of the family or the owner or operator over 14
years of age, residing in the same dwelling unit with the owner or
operator, as the case may be. In the case of the occupant, notice may be
mailed or delivered to him at his place of business or posted to the door
of the occupant's premises.
A. Where any owner, operator or occupant fails to comply with an order
issued pursuant to this chapter, he shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided herein. It shall be
the duty of the Housing Officer or his or her designated agent to cause a
summons to be issued from the Municipal Court for such violation, but
nothing contained herein shall limit the power of the Housing Officer or
his or her designated agent to take such further action under the
criminal and civil laws of this state through any court of competent
jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove or abate any violation.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
the violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 per day and per
offense, levied against the owner, operator or occupant, with a
minimum fine of $100 per day. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
A. This chapter shall apply to the repair, demolition, removal,
maintenance, occupancy and use of new and existing hotels and
multiple dwellings in the Borough of Madison.
B. A building section containing not more than two dwelling units shall not
be considered to be a portion of a multiple dwelling if it:
§ 146-1.4 MADISON CODE § 146-1.6
142:382
§ 146-1.7. Interpretation.
§ 146-1.8. Maintenance requirements.
(1) Is held under a condominium or cooperative form of ownership or
by a mutual housing corporation;
(2) Has no dwelling units not occupied by unit owners, if a
condominium, or by shareholders, if a cooperative or mutual
housing corporation;
(3) Has at least two exterior walls unattached to any adjoining building
section; and
(4) Is attached to any adjoining building sections exclusively by fire
walls having a two-hour fire-resistance rating and/or by fireseparation
walls having a fire-resistance rating of 1 1/2 hours.
A. This code shall be liberally interpreted to secure the beneficial
purposes thereof.
B. Any conflict or inconsistency between the requirements of this code and
applicable state and federal laws and regulations shall be resolved in
favor of the more restrictive requirements.
C. Whenever any standard or code is referred to in this chapter the most
recent edition of such standard or code shall be deemed to be
incorporated herein by reference, notwithstanding the fact that such
edition may have been published subsequent to enactment of the
regulation in which the reference to such standard or code is contained.
A. All buildings and all parts thereof shall be maintained as required by
this code and by the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:18.
B. All service equipment, means of egress, devices and safeguards that are
required in a building by the provisions of these regulations or that
were required by the law when the building was erected, altered or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order.
C. The owner shall be responsible at all times for the safe maintenance of
the building and its facilities as prescribed in this chapter.
D. A nonprofit corporation owning or controlling buildings of three stories
or fewer in a retirement community, which are excluded from the
definition of "multiple dwelling" pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 154,85 shall
maintain all such buildings in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:18.
E. All buildings in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code shall be deemed
to be in compliance with the Act insofar as issues of firesafety are
concerned.
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(k).
§ 146-1.6 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-1.8
142:383
§ 146-1.9. Matters covered.
§ 146-1.10. Continuation of lawful existing use.
The lawful occupancy and use of any building may be continued unless a
change is specifically required by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 146-1.11. Inspections.
F. Where not otherwise indicated, all rules in this chapter that are
applicable to hotels shall be applicable to retreat lodging facilities
except as follows:
(1) Section 146-18.1A(1) and (2).
(2) Any regulation that is not substantially related to the protection of
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the facility or of the
public generally.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall cover all matters affecting or
relating to buildings, as set forth in § 146-1.6, and shall extend to all
hotels and multiple dwellings and their appurtenant constructions,
together with all surface and subsurface construction.
B. Any matter or requirement essential for the firesafety or structural
safety of a new or existing building or essential for the safety or health
of the occupants or users thereof or the public and which is not covered
by the provisions of this chapter shall be the subject of determination by
the Bureau of Housing Inspection in specific cases.
A. The Madison Housing Officer or his or her designated agent in the
discharge of their duties shall have authority to enter upon and examine
and inspect at all reasonable times any building, enclosure, or premises
or any part thereof or service equipment attached thereto or contained
therein for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. The Madison Housing Officer or his or her designated agent shall cause
inspections to be made periodically of completed buildings.
C. All inspection reports shall be in writing and signed by the Madison
Housing Officer or his or her designated agent making the inspection,
and a record of all inspections shall be kept by the office of the Madison
Housing Officer.
D. Inspection of private living quarters shall require the consent of the
occupant of the premises, except as hereunder described:
(1) In case of emergencies where facts known to the Madison Housing
Officer or his or her designated agent or statements of persons
having personal knowledge thereof indicate that conditions exist on
any premises subject to the jurisdiction of the Madison Housing
§ 146-1.8 MADISON CODE § 146-1.11
142:384
Officer which are either an immediate threat to the safety or health
of persons using or in near proximity to the premises or of such a
nature that the delay necessary to secure a warrant would render
the inspection of no value in confirming the existence of the
suspected violation, an inspection may be demanded and, if
possible without the use of force, made to determine whether or
not a violation of the law or regulations in fact exists.
(2) Where access to any premises where inspection is desired to
implement the policy of the Madison Housing Officer under this
code and such access has been refused, then such refusal shall be
reported to the Borough Attorney and a search warrant may be
obtained from the Superior Court upon one or more of the following
grounds:
(a) An inspection is required as part of the procedures authorized
by law and limitations.
(b) There is evidence of or indication of a violation of the law or
this chapter requiring an examination to determine whether
the violation in fact exists.
(c) The inspection is part of an area-wide inspection to upgrade
properties in a given area.
(d) The inspection is part of a systematic inspection of buildings
falling into a particular class or category composed in order to
provide adequate protection to the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. It shall be the duty of every owner or managing agent of a hotel or
multiple dwelling, upon receipt of notice from the Madison Housing
Officer that his property is scheduled to be inspected, to notify each
occupant, other than a hotel guest having a permanent residence
elsewhere, of the time of such scheduled inspection and to request that
each such occupant either admit the inspector representing the
Madison Housing Officer to his dwelling unit or authorize the owner or
managing agent to do so. Any occupant who has been so notified, has
allowed the owner or managing agent to retain a key to his dwelling
unit and has not expressed any objection in writing to the inspector's
entering his dwelling unit either to the Madison Housing Officer, or his
or her designated agent or to the owner or managing agent shall be
deemed to have consented to the inspection of his dwelling unit by the
Madison Housing Officer, or his or her designated agent. Any occupant
consenting to an inspection who is unable to be present or to have a
representative present at the time of such inspection shall, upon notice
from either the Madison Housing Officer or the owner, or the
representative of either one of them, give a key to the dwelling unit to
the owner or managing agent. Such key shall be returned to the
occupant within 24 hours after the inspection. It shall be the further
duty of the owner and of any managing agent to provide such assistance
§ 146-1.11 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-1.11
142:385
§ 146-1.12. Unsafe building notice and order.
as may be reasonable and necessary to enable the inspector to gain
access to all areas of the property and, upon request of the Madison
Housing Officer or his or her designated agent, to accompany the
inspector during his inspection of the exterior and common areas and
of all units the occupants of which are not present at the time of the
inspection.
F. Upon reasonable request of the Madison Housing Officer or his or her
designated agent, the owner of any hotel or multiple dwelling in which
any major structural deficiency constituting a violation of this chapter
has been found to exist and the correction of which would require the
issuance of a building permit by the construction official having
jurisdiction, shall provide to the Madison Housing Officer or his or her
designated agent, at the sole cost and expense of such owner, an
analysis and report, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or
registered architect, which specifies the work necessary to correct such
violation and the manner in which it should be accomplished and
certification by a licensed professional engineer or registered architect
that such violation has been properly corrected and that any hazard
that may have been created by such violation has been eliminated.
G. If, in the course of inspecting any hotel or multiple dwelling, any
inspector performing inspections for the Madison Housing Officer shall
find a condition which is or appears to be in violation of the Uniform
Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:18, the inspector shall give prompt notice of that
condition to the Madison Housing Officer, who shall promptly notify the
Madison Fire Department.
H. If a building has been inspected by the Department of Community
Affairs of the State of New Jersey within the previous six months, then
upon the owner presenting written proof of such inspection, the
Housing Officer shall accept that inspection in lieu of a current
inspection by the Housing Officer or his or her designated agent and
shall not conduct another cyclical inspection of the building until five
years shall have elapsed since the date of that state inspection.
A. Upon notice from the Housing Officer or his or her designated agent
that violations of the provisions of this chapter exist and that such
violations result in risk to the safety and welfare of the occupants, an
order shall be issued to the owner forbidding occupation of any
dwelling units then vacated or to be vacated during the life of the order.
B. The notice shall be given to the owner or lessee of the property involved
or to the agents of either of them, and may be contained in an order to
declare building unsafe issued by the Housing Officer or his or her
designated agent, stating the reasons for the issuance of the order and
the conditions under which occupancy may take place.
§ 146-1.11 MADISON CODE § 146-1.13
142:386
§ 146-1.13. Severability.
If any provisions of this chapter shall be held invalid or ineffective in whole
or in part or inapplicable to any person or situation, it is the purpose and
intent of this chapter that all other provisions thereof shall nevertheless be
separately and fully effective and that the application of any such provision
to other persons or situations shall not be affected.
§ 146-2. ARTICLE II — Definitions
§ 146-2.1. Tense, gender and number.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; words used in the
singular include the plural and the plural the singular.
§ 146-2.2. Definitions.
A. The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
ACT — See "law or Act" of this section.
ADJOINING GRADE ELEVATION — The average elevation of the final
grade adjoining all exterior walls of a building, calculated from grade
elevations taken at intervals of 10 feet around the perimeter of the
building.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the egress facilities of any
such building or structure, or any enlargement thereof, whether by
extension on any side or by any increase in height, or the moving of
such building or structure from one location or position to another.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute, Inc.
APPROVED — Approved by the Madison Housing Officer or his or her
designated agent.
ARCHITECT — A person registered to practice the profession of
architecture under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
ASHRAE — The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the
roof rafters.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and
partly above grade and has at least 1/2 its ceiling height above grade.
BASIN — A plumbing fixture located in a bathroom or in close proximity
thereto and used exclusively for sanitation operations.
§ 146-1.13 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-2.2
142:387
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which also may contain water closets, lavatories
or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BOCA — The Building Officials and Code Administrators International.
BUILDING — A structure built, erected and framed of component
structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and
support of individuals, animals or property of any kind which is
enclosed within exterior walls on all sides.
BUREAU — The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Bureau
of Housing Inspection. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(d).]
CEILING HEIGHT — Vertical distance between the finished floor and
the finished ceiling.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade, and has more than 1/2 its ceiling height below grade.
CENTRAL HEATING — The provision of heat throughout a building by
means of one or more heating units or furnaces centrally located in a
building, rather than by means of individual heating units or furnaces
located in some or all of the units of dwelling space in said building.
CHIMNEY — A vertical enclosure containing one or more flues used
to remove hot gases from burning fuel, refuse or from industrial
processes.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, New Jersey, or his duly authorized representative.
COMMON AREA — All areas accessible to and which may be utilized by
either occupants of a building or the general public, or both, including
but not limited to vestibules, hallways, stairways, landings and common
space and occupiable room or space, as hereinafter defined, which is
not part of any dwelling unit. This definition shall also mean and include
any area accessible to the owner or manager or any person employed in
the maintenance of the building which is not part of any dwelling unit.
CONCURRENT LOADS — Two or more elements of dead or live load
that, for purposes of design, are considered to act simultaneously.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a
master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units,
together with an undivided interest in common elements appurtenant
to each such unit. [See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-3 and 55:13A-3(q).]
CONSTRUCTION — Any or all work or operations necessary or
incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, installing or
equipping of buildings or any alterations and operations incidental
thereto. The term "construction" shall include land clearing, grading,
excavating and filling. It shall also mean the finished product of any
such work or operations.
§ 146-2.2 MADISON CODE § 146-2.2
142:388
CONSTRUCTION CLASS (GROUP) — The category in which a building
or space is classified based on the fire-resistance ratings of its
construction elements as set forth in the current edition of the BOCA
National Building Code.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association which entitles
the holder of a share or membership interest thereof to possess and
occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other structure
owned or leased by said corporation or association or to lease or
purchase a dwelling constructed or to be constructed by said
corporation or association. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(r).]
CORRIDOR — An enclosed passage providing a means of access from
rooms or spaces to an exit.
COURT — An open, uncovered, and unoccupied space on the same lot
with a building.
CRAWL SPACE — An unoccupiable area in a building not more than 48
inches in height.
DEAD-END — A portion of a corridor in which the travel to an exit is in
one direction only.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or razing of all or part of a building,
including operations incidental thereto.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey.
DESIGN WINTER CONDITIONS — The design temperature at the
nearest locality reported in the latest edition of the Handbook of the
American Engineers Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air-
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE).
DETERIORATION — Decay, damage, loss of material or ability to
function as intended caused by exposure to the elements.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All the piping within public or private premises,
which conveys sewage, rainwater or other liquid wastes to a legal point
of disposal, but shall not include the mains of public sewer system or
private or public sewage treatment or disposal plant.
DUCT (VENTILATION) — A pipe, tube, shaft, conduit or an enclosed
space within a wall or structure, used for conveying air.
DUMBWAITER — A hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a
car that moves in guides in a substantially vertical direction, the floor
area of which does not exceed nine square feet, whose total inside
height, whether or not provided with fixed or movable shelves does not
exceed four feet, the capacity of which does not exceed 500 pounds and
that is used exclusively for carrying materials.
DWELLING SPACE — (See § 146-2.2, definition of "unit of dwelling
space.")
§ 146-2.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-2.2
142:389
DWELLING UNIT — A room or rooms, or suite or apartment that is
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes
by one or more persons. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(h).]
EGRESS or MEANS OF EGRESS — A path by which ambulatory
persons can travel safely and without assistance from a unit of dwelling
space, dwelling unit or rooming unit along a continuous and
unobstructed line to an exterior open area.
ELECTRICALLY SUPERVISED — As applied to a control circuit, that, in
the event of interruption of the current supply or in the event of a break
in the circuit, a specific signal will be given.
ELEVATOR — A hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a car
or platform that moves in guides in a substantially vertical direction and
that serves two or more floors of a building.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 who is
gainfully employed and who is self-supporting or who is married to a
spouse who is gainfully employed and who supports the said minor or
who is a student living away from home and in regular attendance in an
institution of higher learning.
ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice the profession of
engineering under the law of the State of New Jersey.
EXIT — A means of egress from the interior of a building to an open
exterior space, including any or all of the following: door openings,
enclosed vertical exits, grade passageways, horizontal exits, exterior
stairs or fire escapes, but not including access stairs, aisles, corridor
doors or corridors.
EXTERMINATION — The process of controlling and eliminating of
insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places;
by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their
food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and lawful pest-elimination methods.
FIRE RESISTANCE RATING — The time in hours or fractions thereof
that materials or their assemblies will withstand fire exposure as
determined by a fire test made in conformity with recognized
standards.
FIRE-SEPARATION WALL — A fire-resistance-rated assembly of
materials having protected openings which is designed to restrict the
spread of fire.
FIRE WALL — A fire-resistance-rated wall, having no unprotected
openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously
from the foundation to or through the roof.
FLOOR AREA — The projected horizontal area enclosed inside of walls,
partitions or other enclosing construction.
FLUE — An enclosed passageway in a chimney to carry products of
combustion to the outer air.
§ 146-2.2 MADISON CODE § 146-2.2
142:390
FOOTING — A foundation element consisting of an enlargement of a
foundation pier or foundation wall, wherein the soil materials along the
sides of and underlying the element may be visually inspected prior to
and during its construction.
FOUNDATION (BUILDING) — A construction that transfers building
loads to the support soil.
FOUNDATION WALL — A wall extending below grade.
FRESH AIR — Outdoor air.
GARBAGE — Rubbish and refuse as defined in this section.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GRADE PASSAGEWAY — A horizontal extension of a vertical exit or a
passage leading from a yard or court to an open exterior space.
GUEST — Any person who occupies a unit of dwelling space either as
a temporary occupant or transient in an establishment holding itself
out as serving transients or on a temporary or permanent basis in an
establishment providing housekeeping or dining services on a regular
basis to occupants.
HABITABLE ROOM — A residential room or space, having an area
exceeding 59 square feet, in which the ordinary functions of domestic
life are carried on and which includes bedrooms, living rooms, studies,
recreation rooms, kitchens, dining rooms and other similar spaces but
does not include closets, halls, stairs, laundry rooms or bathrooms.
HAZARD — A condition which because of faulty construction or
maintenance of the premises creates significant and recognizable
danger or risk to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises.
HEIGHT (BUILDING) — The vertical distance from the curb level to the
highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs or to a point at
the average height of the gable in the case of roofs having a pitch of
more than one foot in 4 1/2 feet, except that where the curb level has
not been legally established or where every part of the building is set
back more than 25 feet from a street line, the height shall be measured
from the adjoining grade elevation.
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related
structure, accessory building and land appurtenant thereto, and any
part thereof, which contains ten or more dwelling units or has sleeping
facilities for 25 or more persons and is kept, used, maintained,
advertised as or held out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling
accommodations are available to guests. "Hotel" also means any facility
that is commonly regarded as a hotel, motor hotel, motel or established
guesthouse in the community in which it is located. "Hotel" does not
include those facilities that are excluded by statute. [See N.J.S.A.
55:13A-3(j).]
§ 146-2.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-2.2
142:391
INFESTATION — The presence within a hotel or multiple dwelling of
any insects, rodents or other pests. Infestation shall include breeding
areas on the exterior of the premises so located that products thereof
may spread to the interior of any building subject to these regulations.
JANITORIAL SERVICES — Cleaning and maintaining of common areas,
including the making of minor repairs, attendance to the furnishing
of heat and hot water where the owner is responsible for operation
and maintenance thereof, the removal of garbage, refuse and rubbish
from the premises, and the removal of snow, ice, dirt, and other matter
creating obstructions or hazards from pedestrian paths, sidewalks and
gutters.
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for cooking or the
preparation of food.
LEADER — A vertical drainage pipe for conveying stormwater from roof
or gutter drains to a building house storm drain, building house drain
(combined) or other means of disposal. The leader shall include the
horizontal pipe to a single roof drain or gutter drain.
LIVE LOAD — All occupants, materials, equipment, constructions or
other elements of weight supported in, on or by a building that will
or are likely to be moved or relocated during the expected life of the
building.
MECHANICAL VENTILATION — The process of introducing outdoor air
into or removing vitiated air from a building by mechanical means. A
mechanical ventilating system may include air-heating, air-cooling or
air-conditioning components.
MINOR — Any person who is under the age of 18. (See § 146-2.2,
definitions of "emancipated minor" and "unemancipated minor".)
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure and any land
appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof, in which three or more
dwelling units are occupied or intended to be occupied by three or
more persons living independently of each other. "Multiple dwelling"
also means any group of ten or more buildings on a single parcel of
land or on contiguous parcels under common ownership, in each of
which two dwelling units are occupied or intended to be occupied by
two persons or households living independently of each other, and any
land appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof. "Multiple dwelling"
does not include those buildings and structures that are excluded by
statute. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(k).]
MUNICIPALITY — In addition to its legal meaning, two or more
municipalities acting in concert through any public agency, joint
committee, contractual arrangement or in any other manner authorized
by law.
MUTUAL HOUSING CORPORATION — A not-for-profit corporation
incorporated under the laws of the State of New Jersey on a mutual or
cooperative basis within the scope of the Lanham War Housing Act, 42
§ 146-2.2 MADISON CODE § 146-2.2
142:392
U.S.C. § 1501 et seq., which acquired a national defense housing project
pursuant to said Act. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(p).]
NATURAL VENTILATION — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
NEW JERSEY UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq. and the subcodes adopted
pursuant thereto.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose or activity for which a building or space is
used or is designed or intended to be used.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including guests, in actual
physical possession or occupancy of a unit of dwelling space on a
regular basis. For purposes of assigning specific duties or
responsibilities, the term "occupant," unless the text indicates
otherwise, shall mean the tenant, lessee, head of the family or
household or other adult person or emancipated minor assuming basic
responsibility for the continued renting or occupancy of the dwelling
space.
OCCUPIABLE ROOM — A room or space, other than a habitable room,
designed for human occupancy or use, in which persons may remain for
a period of time for rest, amusement, dining, shopping, storing goods
or other similar purposes or in which persons may be engaged at work.
OWNER — Any person who owns, purports to own, or exercises control
of any hotel, multiple dwelling or retreat lodging facility. [See N.J.S.A.
55:13A-3(l).]
PARTITION — A vertical unit or assembly of materials that separates
one space from another within any story of a building.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association or other entity. [See
N.J.S.A. 1:1-2 and 55:13A-3(m).]
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping,
fixtures, appliances, equipment and appurtenances in connection with
any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the
venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within
or adjacent to any building; also the practice and materials used in the
installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid
waste, or sewerage and water-supply systems of any premises and
their connection with any point or public disposal or other acceptable
terminal.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Installed receptacles, devices or appliances
that are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or
liquid-borne wastes.
§ 146-2.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-2.2
142:393
POTABLE WATER — Water free from impurities present in amounts
sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its
bacteriological and chemical quality shall conform to the requirements
of the Department of Health.
PREMISES — Land, improvements thereon or any part thereof.
PROJECT — A group of buildings subject to the Act that:
PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT — Any equipment, device, system or
apparatus required or permitted to be constructed or installed in any
hotel or multiple dwelling for the protection of occupants, intended
occupants or the general public. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(i).]
REFUSE — All putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
REGULATIONS — The rules contained in this chapter.
REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials
for the purpose of its maintenance, but not including additional work
that would affect safety or affect required exit facilities or a vital
element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring, ventilating or
heating installation, or any work that would be in violation of a
provision of this code or any other law governing building construction.
REQUIRED — Required by the provisions of these regulations.
RETREAT LODGING FACILITY — A building or structure, including
but not limited to any related structure, accessory building and land
appurtenant thereto and any part thereof, owned by a nonprofit
corporation or association which has tax-exempt charitable status
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code and which has sleeping
facilities used exclusively on a transient basis by persons participating
in programs of a religious, cultural or educational nature, conducted
under the sole auspices of one or more corporations or associations
having tax-exempt charitable status under the Federal Internal
Revenue Code, which are made available without any mandatory
charge to such participants. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(s).]
ROOF — The topmost slab or deck of a building, either flat or sloping
with its supporting members, not including vertical supports.
Are or are represented to be under common or substantially
common ownership;
(1)
(2) Are on a single lot or contiguous lots; and
Are named, designated or advertised as a common entity. Lots shall
be considered to be contiguous even if they are separated by a
public right-of-way. [See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(o).]
(3)
§ 146-2.2 MADISON CODE § 146-2.2
142:394
ROOMING UNIT — A unit of dwelling space located within a multiple
dwelling or a hotel, forming a single habitable unit used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
SANITARY SYSTEM — Either the public system for disposal of sewage
from the premises or, in the absence of such system, any private system
available to the premises for the disposal of sewage.
SELF-CLOSING — As applied to an opening protective, means a door,
window, damper or other device and its assembly that is normally kept
in a closed position and that is equipped with an approved device to
ensure immediate closing after having been opened for use.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and may include liquids containing chemicals in
solution.
SHAFT — A vertical, inclined or offset passage, duct or hoistway,
penetrating through two or more floors of a building or through a floor
and roof, for the transmission of light, air, materials or persons or the
passage of pipes or other mechanical facilities.
SINK — A plumbing fixture located in a kitchen area and used
exclusively for food preparation operations.
STORY — That portion of a building that is between a floor level and the
next higher level or roof above.
STREET — A thoroughfare dedicated or devoted to public use by legal
mapping or other lawful means.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including among others buildings, stadiums, tents,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio
towers, tanks, trestles, open sheds, coal pockets, shelters, fences and
display signs.
TRANSIENT — As applied to occupancy, means occupancy for not more
than 90 days by a person having a principal residence elsewhere.
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 who is
not an emancipated minor as defined herein.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE — See "dwelling unit" of this section. [See
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(h).]
USE (USED) — The purpose for which a building, structure or space
is occupied or utilized, unless otherwise indicated by the text. "Use
(used)" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or is intended,
arranged, or designed to be used."
§ 146-2.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-2.2
142:395
§ 146-3. ARTICLE III — Duties of Owners and Occupants
§ 146-3.1. Concurrent responsibilities.
USABLE FLOOR AREA — That part of the floor area within a unit
of dwelling space that can be considered usable for general living
purposes, excluding areas devoted to built-in equipment, such as
wardrobes, cabinets, closets, kitchen units and equipment or fixtures
which are not readily available for use as floor area.
VENTILATION — The supply and removal of air to and from any space
by natural or mechanical means. (See also § 146-2.2, definitions of
"mechanical ventilation" and "natural ventilation.")
WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPING — The pipes in a building or premises
that convey water from the water service pipe to the plumbing fixtures
and other water outlets.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — The pipe from the water (street) main or
other source of water supply to the building served.
WATER (STREET) MAIN — A water supply pipe for public or community
use controlled by public authority.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The water service pipe, the water
distribution piping and all of the necessary connecting pipes, fittings,
control valves and appurtenances used for conveying water in the
plumbing system.
B. "Shall," as used in this chapter, is always to be construed as mandatory.
A. Owners, including agents of owners, managing agents and
superintendents, shall have the general duties outlined herein for the
maintenance of the premises, and no such person shall be relieved from
any such responsibility hereunder by reason of the fact that an
occupant or other person shall have similar responsibilities or shall
have failed to report any violation, nor shall any such person be relieved
of any responsibility by the terms or provisions of any lease, contract or
agreement.
B. Occupants and, to the extent provided herein, members of their families
or other persons living on the premises shall have the general duties
outlined herein for occupants for the maintenance of the premises, and
no such person shall be relieved from any such responsibility by reason
of the fact that any owner or operator shall have similar
responsibilities, nor shall any person be relieved of any responsibility by
the terms or provisions of any contract, lease or agreement.
C. In any premises subject to either the Horizontal Property Act (N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq.) or the Condominium Act (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.), the
council of co-owners or condominium association, as the case may be,
shall have the duties of an owner as set forth in these regulations.
However, any such council or association shall only be required to abate
§ 146-2.2 MADISON CODE § 146-3.1
142:396
§ 146-3.2. Discontinuation of services.
§ 146-4. ARTICLE IV — Duties of Occupants
§ 146-4.1. Responsibility of occupants.
those violations which pertain either to the common areas or common
elements or which it has the right, pursuant to contract or otherwise,
to require the owner of the individual dwelling unit to abate. Owners
of individual dwelling units shall be responsible for the abatement of
violations pertaining only to each such unit, provided, however, that
the responsibilities of the dwelling unit owner and of the council or
association may be concurrent.
A. No person shall intentionally cause any service, facility, equipment or
utility which is required to be supplied under this chapter to be
removed, shut off or discontinued or knowingly allow such condition to
continue when the condition affects any occupied unit of dwelling
space. This section shall not be applicable to such temporary
interruption as may be necessary when actual repairs or alterations are
in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
services is caused by any public utility or public agency or is approved
by the Madison Housing Officer or his or her designated agent.
B. In the event of any discontinuation of services, repairs shall be
performed expeditiously to minimize inconvenience to occupants and,
to the greatest extent possible, temporary or alternate service shall be
provided until permanent service can be restored.
A. An occupant shall, in addition to complying with all provisions of this
chapter applicable to him, be responsible for violations of this chapter
to the extent that he has the power to prevent the occurrence of a
violation or assist in abating the violation. An occupant has the power to
prevent the occurrence of a violation if:
(1) It is caused by his own willful act or the willful act of a member of
his family or household or of his guest; or
(2) It is the result of his gross negligence, neglect or abuse or the gross
negligence, neglect or abuse of a member of his family or
household or his guest.
B. The occupant, any member of his family or household or his guest shall,
with respect to the public parts of the premises, be liable if a violation is
caused by his own willful act, gross negligence, neglect or abuse.
C. Every occupant of each unit of dwelling space shall give the owner
thereof or his agent or employees access to any part of the unit of
dwelling space upon reasonable notification, which under ordinary
circumstances shall be one day for multiple dwellings, except
immediately for hotels, for the purpose of making such inspection and
§ 146-3.1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-4.1
142:397
§ 146-4.2. Reporting of violations.
Upon discovery by an occupant of any conditions on the premises, failure
of service or defect in any equipment, which constitutes a violation hereof,
the occupant shall report the same promptly to the owner or to the
superintendent having charge of the premises.
§ 146-4.3. Prohibited acts.
No occupant or other person shall:
§ 146-4.4. Unsafe and unsanitary conditions.
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the law and this chapter. In case of safety or structural emergencies,
immediate access shall be given.
D. All items stored by occupants in any area provided for common storage
by occupants of more than one unit of dwelling space shall. bear the
name and dwelling unit number of the occupant storing said item or
items. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to label each item
and maintain it labeled. Materials stored in such areas shall be secured
against becoming sources of infestation and shall not be placed so as to
create a hazard.
A. Create or maintain any condition constituting a violation of the Uniform
Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:18;
B. Take down, obscure, alter, destroy or in any way deface any notice,
certificate or sign required by this chapter to be displayed; or
C. Destroy or damage protective equipment.
A. Occupants shall place all garbage within the receptacles provided for
garbage disposal. Where janitorial service is not required, they shall
place all containers with sufficient frequency to avoid an unsanitary
accumulation in the exterior area or areas set aside for the same.
Garbage, rubbish and other refuse shall not be thrown out of windows
or down dumbwaiters, nor shall garbage and refuse be set out on
stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways.
B. Occupants of each unit of dwelling space shall be responsible to the
extent of their own use and activities for keeping the interior thereof
safe and sanitary. Occupants shall prevent any accumulation of garbage
or waste matter which may become a source of infestation.
C. Every occupant shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in a
clean and sanitary condition, shall not deposit any material in any
fixture or sewer system which would cause stoppage of or damage to
properly maintained fixture or sewer systems and shall be responsible
for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation of
such fixtures.
§ 146-4.1 MADISON CODE § 146-4.4
142:398
§ 146-4.5. Willful damage.
Every occupant shall be liable for willfully or maliciously causing damage
to any part of the premises which results in a violation of this chapter.
Any adult occupants shall be responsible and liable for any violation of
this section caused by minors under their care or custody occupying the
same unit of dwelling space if the violations were created or permitted
to continue with the knowledge or acquiescence or consent of said adult
member.
§ 146-4.6. Heating by occupant.
§ 146-4.7. Occupancy violations.
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any unit of dwelling
space in violation of the occupancy standards established under Article XXI.
No occupant shall cook in any unit or dwelling space except where all
the required cooking facilities are installed as required under § 146-19. No
occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a unit of dwelling space that
does not have provision for bathroom and toilet room facilities as required
by Article XX
D. Occupants shall not damage, remove or destroy screens needed for the
building.
E. Every occupant of any unit of dwelling space shall be responsible for
removing conditions resulting from the occupants own activities or
which may result in infestation conditions which are subject to and
under his exclusive control.
F. No occupant shall cause excessive grease, soot or other foreign matter
to accumulate on side walls, ceilings or other exposed room surfaces by
improper use of heating or cooking equipment. Cooking equipment
shall be kept clean, free of garbage, food particles and grease.
A. Where any occupant undertakes by contract or as a condition of his
lease to supply his own heat through a furnace or boiler which also
heats any unit of dwelling space occupied by other persons, said
occupant shall be responsible in the same manner as the owner for
supplying heat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Installation and maintenance: Where any occupant undertakes to install
heating equipment, it shall conform to the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
C. The occupant shall be responsible for maintaining such equipment
installed by him in good repair and operating condition during all times
that the heating equipment remains under his control.
§ 146-4.4 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-4.8
142:399
§ 146-4.8. Storage.
No occupant shall utilize any area outside of his dwelling space for storage
purposes except in an area designated for such use in accordance with
§ 146-4.1(d).
§ 146-5. ARTICLE V — General Maintenance
§ 146-5.1. Elimination of hazards.
The owner of any hotel or multiple dwelling shall be responsible at all
times for keeping all parts of the premises occupied by himself or other
persons, to the extent of his responsibilities described herein, clean and free
of infestation and hazards to the health or safety of occupants and other
persons in or near the premises.
§ 146-5.2. Nuisances.
The owner of any hotel or multiple dwelling shall be responsible for
avoiding, eliminating or abating any noises, lights, odors, radiations or
vibrations arising out of the use or occupancy of the premises which shall
constitute a nuisance that is harmful or potentially harmful to the health
and well-being of persons of ordinary sensitivity occupying or using the
premises.
§ 146-5.3. Maintenance of dwelling units.
Every unit of dwelling space shall be so maintained as to be fit for human
use and habitation and to prevent progressive deterioration of the unit to
the detriment of the health, safety and well-being of its occupants.
§ 146-5.4. Maintenance of exterior.
A. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and any hazards to the
safety or health of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing
the premises, and any of the foregoing conditions shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the
owner or operator to keep the premises free of such conditions which
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(2) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be
kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
which by reason of location above ground level constitute a danger
of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
§ 146-4.8 MADISON CODE § 146-5.4
142:400
§ 146-5.5. Outdoor pools. [Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 146-6. ARTICLE VI — Structural Maintenance
§ 146-6.1. Bearing of loads.
Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject so that loads are transmitted to the soil without undue differential
(4) Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, litter, icy
conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets and other animals
on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and
other parts of the premises. Holes and excavations shall be filled
and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions
removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
(5) Accumulations of water, vegetation or other matter which might
serve as a source of food or as a harboring or breeding place for
infestation.
(6) Walks, courts and other paved areas shall be kept clean and free of
litter, dirt, mud or other conditions hazardous to pedestrians.
B. All parts of the premises shall be so graded and, where necessary,
provided with runoff drains and other means to carry off and dispose of
surface waters in such a manner as to eliminate any recurrent or
excessive accumulations of stormwater on the premises, without
causing excessive accumulations of water on adjoining properties:
(1) Parts of the premises regularly used by occupants shall drain
within one hour of the termination of any storm creating surface
waters.
(2) Other parts of the premises not covered under Subsection B(1)
shall drain within six hours of the cessation of any such storm.
A. Outdoor swimming pools, decorative pools, reflecting pools and
artificial fish ponds which contain 24 inches or more of water shall be
protected by a fence, wall, building, enclosure or solid wall of durable
material of which the pool itself may be constructed so as to afford no
external handholds or footholds and of materials which are
impenetrable by toddlers, and shall be at least four feet in height and
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching closure mechanism not
more than six inches below the top of the gate and provided with
hardware for permanent locking.
B. A swimming pool shall not be opened for use or occupied in whole or in
part by any person until a valid bonding and grounding certificate is
provided to the Borough Construction Official.
§ 146-5.4 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-6.1
142:401
settlement, unsafe, deformation or movement of the building or any
structural part thereof.
§ 146-6.2. Foundations.
Foundations of all structures shall be kept, maintained and repaired to
eliminate all exposed holes, cracks and other defects so that the foundation
shall be at all times capable of resisting the penetration of liquids into the
building and be weather-tight and serve to protect the building against
infestation. They shall also be maintained to prevent or correct erosion
around footings.
§ 146-6.3. Exterior surfaces.
§ 146-6.4. Leakage, drafts and infestation.
All exterior walls, roofs, windows, window frames, doors, door frames,
skylights, foundations and other parts of the structure shall be maintained
as to keep water from entering the structure, to prevent excessive drafts or
heat loss during cold or inclement weather and to provide a banner against
infestation. Damaged or badly worn material shall be repaired or replaced,
and places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion shall be
treated or restored to prevent weathering or seepage.
§ 146-6.5. Leaders and drainpipes.
Leaders and drainpipes shall be securely fastened to the building and
maintained in good condition, free of leaks, kept clean and free of
obstructions and shall direct stormwaters into draining systems and away
from the foundation walls of the structure.
§ 146-6.6. (Reserved)
A. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, fence or other
improvement on the premises shall be kept in good repair and all
exposed surfaces thereof subject to deterioration shall be protected
against weathering or deterioration by a protective coating appropriate
for the particular material involved as needed.
B. All exterior windows and window frames shall be painted with at least
one coat of suitable exterior paint or other preservative as needed
except where constructed of an approved atmospheric corrosionresistant
metal or other equivalent material.
C. The exterior surfaces shall be maintained to eliminate conditions
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, such as broken
glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick or excessive peeling of
paint.
D. The exterior of the building shall be free of loose material that may
create a hazard by falling on persons utilizing the premises.
§ 146-6.1 MADISON CODE § 146-6.7
142:402
§ 146-6.7. Railings.
§ 146-7. ARTICLE VII — Maintenance of Interior
A. Handrails. All interior stairways having three or more risers and all
exterior steps having a drop of at least 24 inches to ground level or
having at least four risers shall have handrails which are to be securely
fastened to walls or guard rails and, unless continuous, shall be
returned to the enclosure walls or posts at the end of the stairs.
(1) All stairways 44 inches or more in width shall have continuous
handrails on both sides; stairs less than 44 inches wide may have a
handrail on one side only. In assembly occupancies, when the
stairway width exceeds 88 inches, the stairways shall be provided
with intermediate handrails dividing the stairway in approximately
equal widths with a maximum lateral spacing of 66 inches.
(2) The height of the handrail shall not be less than 30 inches and shall
not project more than 34 inches above the nosing of treads.
(3) Handrails shall provide a finger clearance of 1 1/2 inches and shall
not project more than 3 1/2 inches into the required stair width.
B. Guard rails shall be provided on exterior corridors, balconies, landings
or porches having more than a three-foot drop to the adjoining level and
on the exposed side of any interior or exterior stairway. The height of
the guard rail shall not be less than 30 inches.
(1) Exception: In an instance of a rail protecting a level 35 feet or less
above exterior grade where a special case can be made that the
existing rail is sufficient to protect the safety of persons, the
department may permit a rail less than 30 inches in height.
(2) Guards shall be constructed so that the area in the plane of the
guard, from the top of the tread to the top of the guard, is
subdivided or filled in one of the following methods:
(a) A sufficient number of intermediate longitudinal rails
constructed so that the clear distance between rails (measured
at right angles to the rail) does not exceed 16 inches
(measured vertically) from the tread nosing;
(b) Balusters spaced not more than eight inches apart;
(c) Panels of wire mesh, or expanded metal, or ornamental grilles
which provide protection equivalent to that provided by the
intermediate rails or balusters specified in Subsection B(2)(aa)
and (b);
(d) Walls; or
(e) Any combination of the foregoing.
§ 146-6.7 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-7.1
142:403
§ 146-7.1. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces.
§ 146-7.2. Interior surfaces.
A. Basements, cellars and crawl spaces are to be free of moisture resulting
from liquid penetration from the exterior and shall be provided with
ventilation as required herein to prevent accumulations of moisture and
dampness.
B. Floors of basements and cellars shall have a permanent surface that is
water-resistant and capable of being kept broom-clean so as not to
create a safety hazard. Subcellars and crawl spaces which are neither
usable nor occupiable need not be permanently surfaced.
A. All floors, walls, ceilings and other surfaces shall be kept in good repair,
that is, free from cracks, breaks, split or splintering boards or
woodwork, loose plaster, flaking or peeling paint or other materials.
Loose or defective sections shall be removed and replaced so that the
joint between the repair and the sound material is made flush and
smooth.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces shall be kept clean,
free from visible foreign matter, sanitary and well-maintained at all
times. If necessary to accomplish the foregoing, these surfaces shall be
kept painted, whitewashed, papered, covered or treated with sealing
materials or other protective coatings as needed.
C. Interior walls, ceilings and other exposed surfaces in units of dwelling
space shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking, loose or peeling paint,
plaster or paper and capable of being maintained free of visible foreign
matter and of vermin and in a sanitary condition. If and when necessary
to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, such interior surfaces
shall be spackled, painted, papered or otherwise provided with a
protective coating appropriate for the surface material, and this shall
be done at least once every three years unless it is clearly unnecessary.
Painting or other provision of a protective coating shall be the
responsibility of the occupant and not of the owner when required more
frequently than once every three years as a result of the acts or
omissions of the occupant, a member of his family or household or his
guest.
D. Owners shall maintain records indicating the date on which any
dwelling unit or part thereof was painted or otherwise provided with a
protective coating for six years. Said records shall also indicate the
name and address of the person who did the work, the nature of the
work done and the cost. Said records shall be made available upon
request to the Madison Housing Officer or his or her designated agent.
E. Except where housekeeping services are provided, normal
housekeeping as required for the maintenance of cleanliness and
sanitation within individual units of dwelling space of multiple
§ 146-7.1 MADISON CODE § 146-7.2
142:404
§ 146-7.3. Stairways and common areas.
§ 146-7.4. Doors.
All doors shall be so maintained that they can be readily opened and closed.
§ 146-8. ARTICLE VIII — Waste Disposal
§ 146-8.1. Receptacles.
§ 146-8.2. Materials requiring separate disposal.
dwellings shall be the responsibility of the occupants and shall not,
unless a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of persons other than
the occupants of the dwelling unit is thereby created, be the
responsibility of the owner.
A. Stairways shall be maintained to support a live load of 100 pounds per
square foot and walking surfaces shall be maintained free of hazards,
such as loose steps, loose or uneven treads, torn carpeting, raised strips
and nonuniform risers.
B. Hallways, fire escapes, stairs, landings and passages and other common
areas shall be kept open for unrestricted passage.
C. There shall be a railing to provide support and protect persons from
falling off the stairways or landings. Such railings shall meet the
requirement of § 146-6.7.
A. Except where an alternative method providing equivalent health and
safety methods is utilized, such as incineration or compaction, there
shall be provided for each multiple dwelling noncorrosive, impervious
and noncombustible receptacles sufficient in size and number to
contain waste accumulated in each separate building, pending
collection, either in conformance with the municipal collection schedule
or, in the absence thereof, twice weekly. The receptacles shall be so
constructed as to hold their contents without leakage and shall be
provided with tight-fitting covers and handles.
B. Receptacles for the collection of garbage shall be located so as not to
constitute a hazard and located so as to be accessible to the collecting
agency.
C. Garbage collection receptacles shall be kept covered, shall be
maintained in good repair and shall be kept in the area designated for
storage of such receptacles. All such receptacles shall be cleaned and
disinfected at least once a week.
A. Disposal of materials not fitting into or appropriate for receptacles,
such as newspapers, wrapping paper and other inorganic wastes which
are likely to be blown or scattered about the streets, shall be secured to
prevent littering.
§ 146-7.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-8.2
142:405
§ 146-8.3. Dumbwaiters.
§ 146-9. ARTICLE IX — Screens and Infestations
§ 146-9.1. Screens.
§ 146-9.2. Elimination of infestation.
B. Other objects and material, which because of bulk or size do not fit into
receptacles, shall be placed out for collection only at such places as are
designated for that purpose and at such times as shall assure their
prompt removal by the collection service available to the building.
A. Dumbwaiters, where existing, shall be kept operable and available as
part of the garbage disposal system which would be rendered more
serviceable by their use.
B. Every existing device shall be maintained and inspected in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.1 et seq.
A. Screens suited to protect the interior of the building against
mosquitoes, flies and other undesirable insects shall be provided and
kept in good repair for each exterior door (except as otherwise provided
in Exception 2 below) and each openable window in habitable and
occupiable rooms and common areas. Screens shall be installed and
maintained by the owner on all such doors and windows at least from
May 1 to October 1 of each year. All screens required pursuant hereto
shall be affixed either to the window frame or to the upper sash and the
window frame. Fixed windows need not be provided with screens.
B. Exceptions shall be as follows:
(1) Exception 1: In transient nonresidential hotels in coastal areas
where it is demonstrated to the department that screens are not
necessary above the ground floor.
(2) Exception 2: Exterior doors which do not provide any portion of the
minimum ventilation area of at least 4% of the floor area of the
room or space ventilated.
(3) Exception 3: For dwelling units or common areas on the sixth floor
and above.
(4) Exception 4: On windows or exterior doors in areas and spaces
where a central mechanical ventilation system is provided which
conforms to applicable construction codes of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(5) Exception 5: In areas used for storage purposes only.
A. Every owner shall be responsible for the eradication of any insects, rats
or other pests when the infestation exists in two or more units of
§ 146-8.2 MADISON CODE § 146-9.2
142:406
§ 146-10. ARTICLE X — Managerial and Maintenance Personnel
§ 146-10.1. Duties of owner.
dwelling space or in common areas. All buildings subject to this chapter
shall be made rat-proof and shall be maintained in a condition free from
infestation. Such rat-proofing and pest extermination shall include but
is not limited to the following:
(1) Prevention of entrance by blocking off or stopping up at passages
by which rats may secure entry from the exterior with rat
impervious material.
(2) Prevention of interior infestation by elimination of sources of food
and access thereto.
(3) Prevention of any vertical travel of vermin through pipe chases or
other similar methods of travel.
B. All hotels and multiple dwellings shall be subject to periodic procedures
for the prevention and elimination of infestation by persons qualified to
conduct such procedures no less frequently than once annually and
more frequently where there is recurring evidence of infestation.
A. The owner shall have the positive responsibility of providing, either by
his own direct efforts or by hiring others qualified to so serve, a person
or persons qualified by training or experience to discharge the duties
and responsibilities outlined for owners under these regulations.
B. Any managing agent, in charge of the leasing or renting of space and
the general management and operation of the premises, shall be
competent to provide supervision of the management and operation of
the building in accordance with this chapter.
C. In a multiple dwelling of nine or more dwelling units, the owner shall
either perform the janitorial services himself, if he is a resident owner,
or provide a janitor or provide janitorial services to be performed, on a
twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, in a manner approved by the Madison
Housing Officer or his or her designated agent.
D. Unless either the owner or the janitor resides on the premises, the
owner of a multiple dwelling or his managing agent in control shall post
and maintain in such dwelling a legible sign, conspicuously displayed,
containing the janitor's name, address (including apartment number)
and telephone number. A new identification sign shall be posted and
maintained within five days following a change of janitor.
E. The person who performs janitorial services for a multiple dwelling of
nine or more dwelling units (other than where janitorial services are
performed on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis under Subsection C
above) shall reside in or within a distance of one block or 200 feet from
§ 146-9.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-10.1
142:407
§ 146-10.2. Duties of manager and superintendent.
the dwelling, whichever is greater, unless the owner resides in the
multiple dwelling.
F. Where necessary to assure compliance with this chapter and other
provisions of law affecting multiple dwellings and hotels, there shall be
a full-time person or employee responsible for providing janitorial
services as defined herein. The owner shall provide additional
personnel as may be required to assure proper maintenance and
compliance with this chapter.
G. All personnel responsible for enabling the owner to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be by reason of training or
experience competent to perform the duties entrusted to him, familiar
with the requirements contained herein and not unable or unwilling to
discharge said duties by reason of any physical or mental incapacity or
disability or personal habits inconsistent with such duties.
H. The following shall serve as a guide to adequacy of personnel for
maintenance of a typical multiple dwelling not having any unusual or
special labor-saving features:
Units of Dwelling Space
Full-Time Personnel or
Equivalent
70 to 100 1
101 to 150 2
151 to 225 3
226 to 325
(and each additional 100 units)
4, plus 1 for each 100 additional
units of dwelling space over 325
A. Without relieving the owner of any responsibility placed by these
regulations on the owner, any person undertaking for and on behalf of
the owner any responsibilities for the operation and maintenance of the
premises shall thereby assume, concurrently with the owner,
responsibilities for the premises and be subject to penalty for failure to
comply with any regulation or order relating to any item or matter
within the responsibilities so assumed.
B. Where the owner has vested any other person with active management
or control of the property and the owner either by his physical absence
or unavailability to the premises has left such person in charge thereof
or, by reason of any other arrangement with such person, the owner
does not actively engage in the day-to-day conduct or operation of the
premises, then such person assuming management shall be responsible
as the agent of the owner for compliance thereto.
C. Where there is present on the premises or available to the premises a
person whose duties and authority do not comprise overall control of
§ 146-10.1 MADISON CODE § 146-10.2
142:408
§ 146-10.3. Janitorial services required.
The person in regular attendance on the premises and responsible for
providing janitorial or maintenance duties as required by this article shall
provide the following services:
§ 146-11. ARTICLE XI — Elevators
§ 146-11.1. Standard of maintenance.
the management of the premises, but such person is designated by the
owner as the person responsible for the day-to-day physical upkeep
and maintenance of the premises, then such person shall be liable,
concurrently and jointly with the owner and any managing agent, for
such matters as shall constitute routine maintenance and upkeep of
the premises, for any other matters pertaining to the maintenance of
the premises entrusted to such person by the owner or management
and for apprising the owner or managing agent promptly of any other
and further matters, such as major repairs, structural improvements
and capital investments, which are beyond such person's authority and
competence to undertake and which, if not done, constitute violations of
this chapter or hazards to the health, safety or well-being of occupants.
A. Setting out and returning waste disposal receptacles and avoiding
leaving receptacles on days when there is no pickup;
B. Providing regular daily care for all common areas, including removal of
garbage, litter or other accumulations;
C. Attending to sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, parking areas and
driveways and, in case of snow or ice, to permit safe passage in and out
of the premises for vehicles and pedestrians;
D. Operating of the equipment designed to provide heat as required under
these regulations; and
E. Such other and further routine operational and maintenance service as
is required of the owner to comply with this chapter.
A. All elevators shall be so maintained as to meet the standards
established and set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.1 et seq. The elevator
doors, flooring, safety devices and operating mechanisms shall be
maintained in good working order and free of hazards.
B. The owner or the agent of the owner of a building containing one or
more elevators shall have and shall provide for inspection by the
Bureau's representative, a current certificate of compliance, issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(j), for each such elevator.
§ 146-10.2 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-11.2
142:409
§ 146-11.2. Preventive maintenance.
All elevators and elevator equipment and accessory devices shall be
provided with preventive maintenance and inspections as required by
N.J.A.C. 5:23- 12.1 et seq.
§ 146-11.3. Suspension of service.
Elevator service shall not be suspended except where unavoidable or where
necessary to provide servicing or repairs and then only for the minimum
period of time necessary to effectuate such servicing or repairs. Where the
owner has knowledge in advance of such suspension, he shall post a notice
of the same, advising all occupants of the time and duration of any such
suspension and the reason therefor.
§ 146-11.4. Mirrors.
In all hotels and multiple dwellings in which there are one or more selfservice
elevators, there shall be affixed and maintained in each elevator a
mirror that will enable persons, prior to entering into such elevator, to view
the inside thereof to determine whether any person is in such elevator.
§ 146-12. ARTICLE XII — Electrical Service and Lighting
§ 146-12.1. Electrical service.
A. There shall be maintained in good operational condition in every
multiple dwelling and hotel, electrical service which shall comply with
the electrical requirements in effect at the time the structure first
became a multiple dwelling or hotel.
B. The following electrical installations shall be provided and hereafter
properly maintained in all hotels and multiple dwellings:
(1) All entrances and exits shall be illuminated by exterior lights
sufficient to provide safe passage for persons of normal vision.
Exterior lighting fixtures shall be controlled by interior wall
switches, located for convenient and readily accessible use, except
if such lights are controlled by an automatic timer or photoelectric
control device.
(2) Every kitchen shall be provided with a minimum of two duplex
receptacle outlets.
(3) Each basement shall be wired for a minimum of one lighting fixture
for use as general illumination. All enclosed areas to which
occupants of the building have access shall be provided with at
least one lighting fixture. Stairwell and laundry area lighting
fixtures shall not be counted as part of the required basement
lighting fixtures.
§ 146-11.2 MADISON CODE § 146-12.1
142:410
§ 146-12.2. Exterior lighting.
(4) Laundry areas shall be provided with illumination. The laundry
circuit shall be an individual circuit. A wall-mounted groundingtype
duplex receptacle outlet shall be provided, located near the
laundry equipment.
(5) Heating equipment requiring electrical energy for operation or
control shall be provided with an individual circuit.
(6) Service and circuiting shall be adequate for the electrical load
being served. If the electrical load in a building is excessive, the
load shall be reduced or service shall be increased so as to be
adequate.
(7) Existing wiring and equipment shall be kept in good repair.
C. Over-current protection devices shall be provided. Under no
circumstances shall the capacity of over-current protection devices
exceed the rated capacity of all connected wiring as determined by the
National Electrical Code.
D. No extension lines shall be utilized except in conformity with the
following standards:
(1) No cords shall be used which are not listed by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc.
(2) Maximum length shall not exceed eight feet and minimum wire size
shall not be less than No. 18 (AWG).
(3) No extension cord shall be used that is rated for a lower current
carrying capacity than is required by the appliance(s) to which it is
connected.
(4) No extension cord shall pass under any rug or carpet or across any
path of travel or be used in any other location where it would create
a hazardous condition.
(5) No frayed, worn or otherwise damaged extension cord shall be
used.
E. There shall be available in each habitable room sufficient electrical
outlets to enable occupants to utilize the room for function for which it
is designed without use of loose cords or extension lines prohibited in
Subsection D(4) above.
A. Every garage or other accessory structure utilized by occupants after
dark shall be equipped with artificial lighting, which shall be
maintained and operated so as to render all parts of the garage that are
unlocked and accessible visible to occupants and also to illuminate all
areas commonly used by occupants sufficiently to enable persons of
§ 146-12.1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-12.2
142:411
§ 146-12.3. Artificial lighting.
normal vision to traverse from such areas safely to the point of egress
from the garage.
B. In garages or structures not kept locked, lighting as required herein
shall be kept on continually from 1/2 hour before sunset to 1/2 hour
after sunrise unless the lighting is connected to a dusk to dawn
photoelectric control device.
C. In garages or structures which are locked at all entrances, lighting may
be provided which is operated manually by individual occupants in lieu
of continual night-lighting, and in such case the lighting fixtures shall
be operable from a switch located near the point of ingress into the
interior of the space to be lighted.
D. Illumination of common areas shall be situated so as not to shine into
adjacent dwelling units.
E. Exterior parking areas, pedestrian walkways or other portions of the
premises subject to regular and recurrent use by occupants at night
shall be illuminated continually from 1/2 hour before sunset to one-half
hour after sunrise, unless the lighting is connected to a dusk-to-dawn
photoelectric device to enable safe passage of persons of normal vision.
A. All interior common areas on the premises utilized by occupants and
likely to be used by persons frequenting the premises shall be equipped
with lighting so that, during periods of darkness, all such parts and
areas shall be sufficiently illuminated to enable persons of normal
vision to traverse such areas safely and to perform therein the functions
for which the parts or areas are designed.
B. Light switches in exitways, including corridors, hallways, landings,
stairways and vestibules, shall be of a type that may not be operated by
occupants or persons frequenting the premises.
C. Lighting fixtures, wall plates and other electrical facilities in bathrooms
and toilet rooms shall be of the type or so located and maintained that
there will be no danger of short circuiting from splashing of water from
any facility therein. No such fixtures shall be located so as to be
reached from a bathtub or shower enclosure.
D. Every habitable or occupiable room shall have light available at all
times, with an illumination of at least six footcandles. Such light shall be
measured 30 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
E. Every bathroom and toilet room shall have light available at all times,
with an illumination of at least three footcandles. Such light shall be
measured 30 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
F. The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, it shall not be the
responsibility of a multiple-dwelling owner to provide lamps or lighting
§ 146-12.2 MADISON CODE § 146-12.3
142:412
§ 146-12.4. Electrical hazards near swimming pools.
No overhead electrical conductors shall be within 15 feet of any swimming
pool. All metal fences, enclosures or railings that might become electrically
charged as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from
any other cause near or adjacent to a swimming pool shall be grounded in
accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
§ 146-12.5. (Reserved)
§ 146-13. ARTICLE XIII — Heating
§ 146-13.1. Standard of performance.
Every unit of dwelling space shall contain facilities to provide heat sufficient
to maintain a minimum inside temperature 68° Fahrenheit in all habitable
rooms, measured at least one foot away from any surface at the coldest
portion of the space subject to regular use by occupants of any such room
when the outside temperature is at design winter conditions. This provision
shall not apply to units of dwelling space which are neither occupied nor
intended to be occupied between October 1 and the next succeeding May 1.
§ 146-13.2. Corrective measures.
Where the Madison Housing Officer or his or her designated agent
determines that the facilities are of inadequate size or capacity to
accomplish the foregoing, the owner may be ordered to either increase the
capacity of the heating system, provide additional insulation or take such
other or further steps as will enable the heating system of the unit to satisfy
this requirement; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed
as authorizing loss of habitable space to an extent that would create a
violation of this chapter.
§ 146-13.3. Standards of maintenance.
fixtures in dwelling units other than kitchen and bathroom ceiling or
wall fixtures or to supply replacement bulbs.
A. The heating equipment, facilities and system and all parts thereof shall
be kept in good operating condition, free of defects, corrosion and
deterioration at all times.
B. Heating equipment shall be installed and maintained in such a manner
as to avoid leakage of or concentration of liquids, gases and solid
matters which may constitute hazards or violations of this chapter.
C. Heating equipment shall not be operated in such a manner as to impair
its ability to perform as required hereunder or create a hazard
anywhere in the system due to excessive temperature.
§ 146-12.3 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-13.3
142:413
§ 146-13.4. Minimum temperature.
§ 146-13.5. Space heaters.
D. The heating system, including such parts as heating risers, ducts and
hot-water lines, shall be covered with an insulating material or guard to
protect occupants and other persons on the premises from receiving
burns due to chance contact.
E. Any pressure-relief valve on any type of heating unit shall be connected
to a pipe that discharges either vertically toward the floor to a
maximum distance of 20 inches from that floor surface or in a manner
conforming to the plumbing subcode of the Uniform Construction Code.
A. From October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1, every unit of
dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be maintained at
a temperature of at least 68° Fahrenheit between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. and at least 65° Fahrenheit between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The heating system shall be capable of maintaining
the minimum required temperature in all habitable rooms without the
necessity of heating adjoining rooms more than 5° higher than said
minimum required temperature. The design of the heating system shall
conform to the ASHRAE Guide and Data Book. The heating standard
herein set forth may be modified by the Commissioner by emergency
rule.
B. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be responsible
for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior temperature
arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows or doors open
to the exterior of the building.
C. The owner shall be obligated to supply required fuel or energy and
maintain the heating system in good operating condition so that it can
supply heat as required herein, notwithstanding any contractual
provision seeking to delegate or shift responsibility to the occupant or
third person, except that the owner shall not be required to supply fuel
or energy for heating purposes to any unit where the occupant thereof
agrees in writing to supply heat to his own unit of dwelling space and
said unit is served by its own exclusive heating equipment for which the
source of heat can be separately computed and billed.
A. Space heaters shall be so installed, located and maintained so as to
exhaust the products of combustion to the outside air (unless the
appliance is labeled as having been tested and approved for unvented
operation, in compliance with the State Uniform Construction Code), to
prevent a fire hazard by being sufficiently removed or insulated from
surrounding material, to be permanently affixed so that the heater
cannot be moved by occupants and not to constitute a hazard to persons
using the premises in close proximity to the heater by reason of chance
contact or by reason of lack of fresh air supply.
§ 146-13.3 MADISON CODE § 146-13.5
142:414
§ 146-13.6. Annual inspection.
§ 146-14. ARTICLE XIV — Water Supply
§ 146-14.1. Sufficiency of source and system.
Every multiple dwelling and hotel shall be connected to a source of and
system for delivery of potable water sufficient to meet the requirements for
hot and cold water at all connected fixtures.
§ 146-14.2. Connection of fixtures.
Every kitchen sink, bathroom or toilet room, sink, basin, tub or shower shall
be connected to both hot- and cold-water lines and be provided with both
hot and cold water.
§ 146-14.3. Hot water.
B. Space heaters shall be installed in such a manner that all habitable
rooms will be heated to the required temperature, with no room more
than 5° Fahrenheit higher in temperature than the other rooms. If the
temperature varies over 5° Fahrenheit, other heaters must be installed
to give uniform heating of all habitable rooms.
C. Electric and gas space heaters shall be permitted, provided that they
meet standards established by the Underwriters' Laboratories.
A. The heating system, as herein defined, shall be inspected annually.
Such inspection shall be for the following purposes:
(1) To ensure that the system is being maintained in accordance with
the standards applicable to the system as of the time of installation;
(2) To locate and remove hazards or conditions that may, if not
corrected, foreseeably develop into hazards or become violations of
these regulations;
(3) To confirm the ability of the system to fulfill the heating
requirements provided hereunder.
A. Each building shall be served by a hot-water heater and hot-water
distribution system capable of operating even when the heating system
itself is not in operation and of providing all units of dwelling space and
facilities therein requiring hot water with water at the outlets at a
minimum temperature of 120° Fahrenheit and a maximum temperature
of 160° Fahrenheit at all times in accordance with anticipated need
resulting from the number of fixtures and use of the building.
B. The use of sidearm water heaters shall be prohibited.
§ 146-13.5 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-14.4
142:415
§ 146-14.4. Flow of water.
All plumbing fixtures and equipment for the supply and drainage of running
water shall be maintained so that the rate of flow shall be of sufficient
volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function properly. The
pipes conveying the water shall be of sufficient size to provide the water
required without undue pressure reduction and without undue noise under
all normal conditions of use.
§ 146-15. ARTICLE XV — Natural Light, Ventilation and
Replacement Glazing
§ 146-15.1. Natural light.
§ 146-15.2. Natural ventilation.
§ 146-15.3. Mechanical ventilation.
Where the required natural ventilation is not provided, there shall be
ventilation by mechanical means, conforming to the following requirements:
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight or
transparent or translucent panel facing the exterior of the premises
directly or through an open porch into the room, equal in area to at
least 8% of the floor area of such room.
B. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure or other opaque
barriers face a window surface and are less than three feet distant from
such window surface and where the projected plane of any such wall,
surface or barrier shall obscure more than 1/2 of the window surface,
then such shall not be included in the calculation as contributing to
meet the minimum requirements hereof.
A. Every habitable room, bathroom, toilet room or enclosed kitchenette
shall have a means of natural ventilation unless there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation and exchange of air.
Natural ventilation as required hereunder shall be directly to the
exterior through an opening of at least three square feet or through a
porch having access and exposure to fresh air from the exterior. The
total of operable window or skylight area in each such room shall be
equal to at least 50% of the minimum window or skylight area required
for natural light under § 146-15.1.
B. Every such window or skylight shall be equipped with the necessary
hardware or other means so that it can be readily opened and closed by
occupants from the interior of the dwelling space.
A. Kitchens and kitchenettes shall be ventilated by mechanical means so
as to exhaust at least two cubic feet of air per minute per square foot of
floor area directly to the outdoors or by means of a properly installed
§ 146-14.4 MADISON CODE § 146-15.3
142:416
§ 146-15.4. Replacement glazing.
All replacement glazing shall conform to the applicable construction codes
of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code for glazing requirements for
specific hazardous locations.
§ 146-16. ARTICLE XVI — Storage and Closet Facilities
§ 146-16.1. Storage of occupants' property.
§ 146-16.2. No-smoking signs.
Common areas available for or utilized for storage purposes and public
garages shall contain one sign at least one square foot in area, clearly
legible and prominently displayed at or near the entrance to the space,
prohibiting smoking in the area.
§ 146-16.3. Limitations on storage space.
and maintained electrically powered nonducted range hood equipped
with an activated charcoal filter for the elimination of cooking odors;
B. For commercial kitchens, see N.J.A.C. 5:18-4.7(g);
C. Bathrooms and toilet rooms containing only one water closet or urinal
shall be mechanically vented by an exhaust system that exhausts at
least 50 cubic feet of air per minute. Means shall be provided for air
ingress by louvers in the door, by undercutting the door or by transfer
ducts, grilles or other openings.
D. Bathrooms and toilet rooms containing more than one water closet or
urinal shall be mechanically vented by an independent exhaust system
that exhausts at least 40 cubic feet of air per minute per water closet or
urinal.
A. Any storage area available to or used by occupants in common areas
shall have each space within the area separately designated for each
unit of dwelling space, and a list identifying each such space shall be
retained by the person in charge of the premises; or, if the space is used
in common by occupants of more than one unit of dwelling space, then
all items so stored shall bear the identification of the occupant storing
the item or items.
B. The owner shall not permit unmarked items to be stored in a common
storage area and shall have a procedure for notifying each tenant, in
writing, before removal and disposal of the same.
C. Materials stored in such areas shall be secured against becoming
sources of infestation and shall be protected against fire hazards
caused by ignition from electrical or heating devices or equipment of
similar possible sources of fire.
§ 146-15.3 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-16.3
142:417
§ 146-16.4. Refrigerators and similar equipment.
The owner shall first remove the doors of any refrigerators or other such
equipment with exterior closing devices likely to be hazardous to children,
if stored on the premises.
§ 146-17. ARTICLE XVII — Mailboxes and Identification Signs
§ 146-17.1. Mailboxes and directories.
§ 146-17.2. Identification signs.
§ 146-18. ARTICLE XVIII — Building Security
§ 146-18.1. Hotels.
The following provisions apply to hotels:
A. Storage in common areas shall not cover more than 80% of the overall
floor area and not more than 60% of the cubic content of the storage
area and shall be arranged so that there will be maintained, at all times,
aisles at least three feet in width.
B. Storage shall not be permitted in attic spaces in garden apartments
unless such spaces are designed for such purposes.
A. The owner shall provide and maintain mail receptacles for all
occupants, conforming to all federal postal laws and regulations.
B. In multiple dwellings, there shall be identification by name and unit of
dwelling space for each designated occupant, maintained by the person
in charge of the premises or posted at or near the main entrance of the
premises or in the lobby, lounge or mailroom area. Nothing herein shall
be construed as requiring a directory for transient guests, provided that
there is a responsible person on the premises designated by the owner,
known to postal authorities, who shall on behalf of the owner receive
and distribute or make available for pickup mail for transient guests.
A. Every unit of dwelling space in hotels and multiple dwellings shall have
some permanent and legible identification by letter, number or other
symbol at or near the front entrance thereof.
B. Floor signs designating the number of the floor shall be posted
prominently and maintained permanently near to and visible from the
entrance to the elevators and stairwells serving each floor.
C. The street number of the premises shall be posted prominently at the
front entrance of the premises and be visible day and night from the
public right-of-way adjoining the main front entrances of the premises.
A. Entrance doors to dwelling unit, shall be equipped with a medium-duty
dead-latching lockset (series 160, FF-H-106a, minimum, with a
§ 146-16.3 MADISON CODE § 146-18.1
142:418
§ 146-18.2. Multiple dwellings.
The following provisions apply to multiple dwellings:
minimum 1 1/16 inch by 1/2 inch with one-half-inch-minimum throw
latch bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger) or with a dead bolt
separate from the latch set.
B. Such entrance doors shall also be equipped with either a viewing device
installed on the designated main entrance door to the dwelling unit
located so as to enable a person on the inside of the entrance door to
view a person immediately outside or with a chain door guard so
installed as to permit partial opening of the door.
C. All openable windows, sliding doors, basement windows and windows
opening onto exterior stairways, fire escapes, porches, terraces,
balconies or other areas affording easy access to the premises shall be
equipped with a locking device of some kind.
D. Grilles lockable from the inside only may be placed on the inside or
outside of windows only if the windows do not serve to provide access to
exits.
A. Every building entrance door or other exterior door permitting access
to two or more units of dwelling space shall be equipped with heavyduty
dead-latching locksets (series 161, FF-H-106a, minimum, with a
minimum 7/8 inch by 5/8 inch with one-half-inch-minimum throw latch
bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger). Outside cylinders of main
entrance door locks shall be operated by the tenant's key, which shall
not be keyed to also open the tenant's dwelling unit entrance door.
B. All exit and exitway doors shall be freely openable from the inside at all
times.
C. All exterior entrance doors to common basement, cellar or storage
areas shall be self-closing and lockable.
D. All entrance doors to dwelling units shall be equipped with a mediumduty
dead-latching lockset (Series 160, FF-H-106a, minimum, with a
minimum 1 1/16 inch by 1/2 inch with one-half-inch-minimum throw
latch bolt with automatic deadlocking plunger) or with a dead-bolt lock
separate from the latch set.
E. All entrance doors to each dwelling unit shall be equipped with a chain
door guard so as to permit partial opening of the door and a viewing
device installed on the designated main entrance door to the dwelling
unit, located so to enable a person on the inside of the entrance door to
view a person immediately outside.
F. All openable windows, sliding doors, basement windows and windows
opening onto exterior stairways, fire escapes, porches, terraces,
§ 146-18.1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-18.2
142:419
§ 146-19. ARTICLE XIX — Cooking Facilities
§ 146-19.1. Required facilities.
No cooking shall be permitted in any unit of dwelling space unless there is
provision for the following minimum cooking and sanitary facilities:
balconies or other areas affording easy access to the premises shall be
equipped with a locking device of some kind.
G. Grilles lockable from the inside only may be placed on the inside or
outside of windows only if the windows do not serve to provide access to
exits.
H. Every exterior entrance door leading to interior common areas which
provide access to two or more interior dwelling unit entrance doors
shall be a self-closing and self-locking door, shall be kept closed at all
times except when in actual use and shall be equipped with a viewing
device if it would not otherwise be possible to be a person seeking to
enter without opening the door. In addition, the main entrance door
shall be either attended at all times by a doorman or equipped with an
electrically operated buzzer and latch-release system, individual
exterior doorbells connected to each dwelling unit or an approved
alternative security and entrance system. However, no building shall be
equipped with an electrically operated latch-release system if such
building is not also equipped with an intercommunication system
allowing effective communication between a person in any dwelling
unit and a person standing outside of the main entrance door.
I. When the main entrance to a building contains a vestibule with doors at
both ends, only the inside set of doors must conform to the security
requirements.
J. Buildings with fewer than six dwelling units shall not be required to
have bells in every dwelling unit, provided that there is at least one
exterior door-bell connected so as to ring at least one bell in the
common areas which will be audible in all dwelling units.
K. Exposed hinges on building entrance doors and entrance doors to
dwelling units are either to be removed and replaced with hinges which
have nonremovable hinge pins or altered so that the door would be
protected against being lifted from its hinges by pulling the hinge pin.
(An acceptable alteration method to an existing door would be to
remove two screws, opposite each other, from both leaves of the hinge,
insert screw, steel pin or equivalent into jamb leaf, protruding 1/2 inch,
drill out the opposite screw hole in the door. Do this in the top and
bottom hinge of the door. When closed, the hinge pins may be removed,
but the door will remain firmly in place.)
A. A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and drainboard of
appropriate materials, connected to and having available at all times a
§ 146-18.2 MADISON CODE § 146-19.1
142:420
§ 146-20. ARTICLE XX — Sanitary Facilities
§ 146-20.1. Required facilities.
supply of hot and cold water under sufficient pressure as required
under § 146-14. The kitchen sink shall be connected to a sanitary
disposal or sewer system.
B. Cooking and preparation of food shall be undertaken only in areas
designated therefor.
C. Means of natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation sufficient to
remove promptly cooking odors to the exterior of the premises without
first circulating them within the interior habitable space of the unit.
D. Place for storage of food free from infestation.
E. Facilities for refrigeration in good operating condition for protection of
food from spoilage permitting maintenance of temperatures for storage
above 32° and below 50° without regard to outside temperature.
F. A cooking facility which, if electrical, is connected with safety to an
electrical system of sufficient capacity or, if gas, connected by
permanent fixtures and tubing to avoid leakage of gas. The use of
gasoline stoves or other similar fuel-burning appliances using highly
flammable liquids and the use of portable kerosene stoves or other
similar fuel-burning portable appliances for cooking is prohibited;
G. Cabinets or drawers or other storage areas for utensils, dishes and
other cooking and eating equipment;
H. Two floor or wall electrical outlets for electrical appliances.
A. Every unit of dwelling space shall contain the following minimum
sanitary facilities:
(1) A toilet equipped with a flushing mechanism.
(2) A bathtub or shower or other complete bathing facility.
(3) A wash basin in the toilet room or within close proximity thereto.
(4) In dwelling units having more than one room available or used for
sleeping purposes, each such room shall have accessible to it
sanitary facilities directly from the room itself or through any
common portion of the dwelling unit without requiring passage
through the bedroom.
B. A complete second set of sanitary facilities shall be required for any
unit of dwelling space with permissible occupancy of eight or more
persons.
§ 146-19.1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-20.1
142:421
§ 146-20.2. Rooming units.
§ 146-20.3. Dormitories.
Rules on dormitories are outlined in the following table:
C. Each toilet and bathing facility shall be located in a separate room or
rooms completely enclosed sides and top and shall provide privacy to
the occupant thereof. Any such room shall be provided with:
(1) One or more doors, each of which can be locked from the interior.
(2) Floor, walls and ceiling surfaces made of or protected by durable
materials capable of being exposed regularly to moisture without
damage or deterioration.
D. Every bathroom and toilet room shall be of sufficient dimension to
provide one-and-one-half-foot clearance in front of each fixture,
including (but not limited to) toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower.
E. Every toilet, including the toilet seat, wash basin, shower, bath and
other plumbing or sanitary facility forming part of any toilet room or
bathroom, shall be maintained in good operating condition at all times
and shall be kept clean and free of material that might clog the same or
impair its operation and shall drain into a sanitary sewer or other
approved sanitary disposal system.
A. Occupants of rooming units shall either have the sanitary facilities
required hereunder within the rooming unit or accessible to the
rooming unit dwelling directly or by passage through a common
hallway or passageway into which such rooming unit opens. Any such
facility shall be located either on the same level or no more than one
level below or above the rooming unit accessible through a stairway.
B. There shall be available at least one of each kind of sanitary facility
located as provided herein for each group of rooming units with a
permissible capacity of six persons and an additional set of each kind of
sanitary facility for each additional multiple group of rooming units
with a permissible capacity of eight persons or fraction thereof. For
dwellings or structures utilized exclusively by male occupants, urinals
flushed by running water may be substituted for no more than 1/2 of the
required number of toilet facilities.
C. Any additional toilets over and above the initial toilet shall be located or
partitioned separately from any other toilet required hereunder, and
any additional bathing facility required hereunder shall be located
separate from any other required bathing facility. There shall be no
more than one of the required toilet facilities in the same room as any
required bathing facility.
A. Toilet facilities.86
§ 146-20.1 MADISON CODE § 146-20.3
142:422
§ 146-21. ARTICLE XXI — Occupancy Standards
§ 146-21.1. Basements and cellars.
Basements and cellars may be used for dwelling space, provided that:
§ 146-21.2. Unemancipated minors.
No unemancipated minor shall occupy any unit of dwelling space not having
as part thereof for the exclusive use of its occupants the sanitary facilities
required under Article XX.
§ 146-21.3. Floor area.
B. Drinking fountains.
1 drinking fountain for each 75 persons
A. The entire area constituting the dwelling unit must comply with all
requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to habitable rooms or
areas and to all requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:18 applicable to
dwelling units in basements or stories below grade; and
B. The floors, ceiling and walls of each unit of dwelling space must be free
of moisture.
A. In all dwelling units other than rooming units, there shall be a minimum
usable floor area for the initial occupant of 150 square feet and 100
square feet additional space for each additional occupant; provided,
however, that children under the age of two shall not be considered
additional occupants.
B. In rooming units used or intended to be used solely for transient
occupancy, there shall be a minimum usable floor area of 50 square feet
for each occupant; provided, however, that children under the age of six
shall not be considered additional occupants.
C. In every rooming unit used or intended to be used for nontransient
occupancy, there shall be a usable floor area of at least 80 square feet in
every room occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes
by one occupant and a usable floor area of at least 60 square feet per
occupant in every room occupied or intended to be occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant; provided, however, that
children under the age of two shall not be considered to be additional
occupants.
D. In every dwelling unit other than a rooming unit: every room occupied
or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
have a minimum usable floor area of 70 square feet and every room
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
86.Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 146-20.3 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-21.3
142:423
§ 146-21.4. Prohibited sleeping areas.
Kitchens, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
§ 146-21.5. Required ceiling height.
No room or space or portion of a room or space shall be considered
habitable unless that room or space or portion of a room or space has a
clear ceiling height of at least seven feet, zero inches.
§ 146-22. ARTICLE XXII — Special Provisions for Hotels and
Multiple Dwellings with Rooming Units
§ 146-22.1. Registry and rate-posting.
Every hotel and multiple dwelling containing rooming units shall:
§ 146-22.2. Linen, towels and housekeeping services.
The owner or operator of every hotel or dwelling space for which
housekeeping services are provided shall:
one occupant shall have a usable floor area of at least 50 square feet
for each such occupant; provided, however, that children under the age
of two shall not be considered to be additional occupants.
A. Maintain at all times a registry identifying the name of each occupant of
each rooming unit, together with the principal residence address of
each such occupant and the date upon which his occupancy of such
rooming unit commenced, which registry shall be signed by the person
renting the rooming unit.
B. Not have posted on any advertising sign or placed before the public in
any advertising matter or information pertaining to such hotel or
multiple dwelling any rates for accommodation in such hotel or multiple
dwelling unless there are available therein, when vacant,
accommodations for immediate occupancy at the advertised rate.
C. Have posted in a conspicuous place or manner in each rooming unit a
statement of the range of rates charged by the hotel or multiple
dwelling, including seasonal rates, and a legible printed copy of P.L.
1967, c. 95 (N.J.S.A. 29:4-5 et seq.).
A. Supply a fresh change of bed linen and towels, all of which shall be in
good condition, at least once a week or when there is a change of
occupancy of the unit;
B. Provide housekeeping and interior maintenance on a daily basis, if a
hotel, or weekly basis if a rooming house, but under any circumstances
each such unit shall be completely inspected and cleaned where the
occupancy thereof is changed.
§ 146-21.3 MADISON CODE § 146-23
142:424
§ 146-23. ARTICLE XXIII — Parking Areas and Driveways
§ 146-23.1. Design requirements.
§ 146-23.2. Maintenance requirements.
Driveways and parking areas shall be maintained free of potholes or other
unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
§ 146-23.3. Parking in approach drives.
No parking will be permitted in approach drives to parking areas where
such parking will obstruct ingress of fire-fighting equipment.
§ 146-23.4. Parking for handicapped residents.
A. Driveways shall have two traffic lanes for their entire length, in addition
to any parking space, except that a single lane may be used for short
straight service driveways where two-way traffic is not anticipated.
B. Buildings, walls, fences, planting and other sight obstructions shall be
so located and designed that a driver backing out of a garage, carport
or parking space can see approaching traffic speed and volume.
A. Any owner of a multiple dwelling with five or more dwelling units which
provides parking to the occupants thereof and in which a handicapped
person resides shall provide parking spaces for occupants who are
handicapped located at the closest possible proximity to the principal
accesses of the multiple dwelling.
B. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces provided for the
occupants of the multiple dwelling, but not less than one parking space,
shall be set aside as parking for the handicapped.
(1) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the International Symbol of Access along
with the following words: "This space reserved for physically
handicapped drivers."
(2) Each reserved space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for a
person in a wheelchair or on braces or crutches to get in and out of
either side of an automobile onto a level, paved surface suitable for
wheeling and walking and shall be located so that a person in a
wheelchair or using braces or crutches is not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
(3) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit a
handicapped person access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
C. For purposes of this section, "handicapped" means a physical
impairment which confines a person to a wheelchair; causes a person to
walk with difficulty or insecurity; affects the sight or hearing to the
§ 146-23 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 146-23.4
142:425
§ 146-24. ARTICLE XXIV — Vacant Buildings
§ 146-24.1. Prevention of access.
Chapter 147
PUBLIC RECORDS AND DOCUMENTS, FEES FOR
§ 147-1. Fees for copies of particular records and documents.
Fees shall be charged as indicated for copies of the following records and
documents:
extent that a person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed
to danger; causes faulty coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility,
coordination and perceptiveness to the extent that facilities are needed
to provide for the safety of that person.
A. In buildings where all dwelling units have been unoccupied for a period
of 60 days or more, it shall be the duty of the owner to close all
windows, doors and other openings with plywood or by other suitable
means so that access into the buildings is prevented.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not apply to:
(1) Any building which is unoccupied because of a current alteration
being performed under application and plan approved by the
construction official having jurisdiction.
(2) Any building which is unoccupied because of being used exclusively
as a seasonal resort building.
(3) Dormitories which are not normally in use during a portion of the
calendar year.
A. Maps.
(1) Zoning Map, 17 inches by 21 inches: $5 per copy.
(2) Borough Map, two feet by three feet: $5 per copy or cost to the
Borough.
(3) Tax Maps, two feet by three feet: $5 per copy.
(4) Tax Maps, 11 inches by 17 inches: $3 per copy.
(5) Maps, other categories, two feet by three feet: $5 per copy.
(6) Maps larger than two feet by three feet: $1.50 per square foot or
cost to the Borough.
(7) Contour maps (as available): $30 each.
§ 146-23.4 MADISON CODE § 147-1
142:426
B. Tax records.
(1) Duplicate tax bills: $5 each. [Amended 5-30-2007 by Ord. No.
33-2007]
(2) Tax information: $10.
C. Police records.
(1) Copies of motor vehicle accident reports obtained during regular
business hours in person: $0.05 per page for letter-size copies and
$0.07 per page for legal-size copies, unless otherwise specified by
law. [Amended 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 36-2010; 11-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 59-2010]
(2) Copies of motor vehicle accident reports other than in person: $5
for the first three pages and $1 per page thereafter.
(3) All other records in printed form which are available pursuant to
law: $0.05 per page for letter-size copies and $0.07 per page for
legal-size copies, unless otherwise specified by law. [Amended
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 36-2010; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
59-2010]
(4) Incident verification letter and letters of good conduct: $10.
[Amended 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 13-2009]
(5) Copies of audio tapes of phone and radio transmissions associated
with Court discovery: $50 per tape. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 37-2003]
(6) Copies of video tapes associated with Court discovery: $50.
[Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(7) Fingerprinting for firearms, real estate, etc.: $20 per card. [Added
3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 13-2009; 5-23-2011 by Ord. No.
19-2011]
D. General records.
(1) All records in printed form which are available pursuant to law:
$0.05 per page for letter-size copies and $0.07 per page for legalsize
copies, unless otherwise specified by law. [Amended
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 36-2010; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
59-2010]
(2) Certification of any record: $0.50 each, in addition to cost of copies
as set forth herein.
(3) Press proofs of ordinances (if available): $0.05 per page for lettersize
copies and $0.07 per page for legal-size copies. [Amended
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 36-2010; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
59-2010]
§ 147-1 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 147-1
142:427
§ 147-2. Records not subject to examination or copying.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, where it shall appear that
the record or records which are sought to be examined and of which
copies are requested shall pertain to an investigation in progress by the
Borough of Madison or by any board, department or official appointed by
or existing under its authority; or where the publication of such records by
such department or official is expressly forbidden by statute, proclamation
or regulation; or is otherwise exempt from the requirement that copies
thereof be furnished upon request; or such publication would be inimical to
public interest, the request for the same may be refused or denied.
§ 147-3. Fees for preparation of public information. [Added
10-11-1977 by Ord. No. 42-77; amended 7-22-2002 Ord. No.
27-2002]
E. Brochures not listed in any ordinance. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 37-2003]
(1) Master Plan: $40.
(2) Environmental Resource Inventory: $50 each.
(3) Master Plan Reexamination Report: $10 each.
F. Code of the Borough of Madison.
(1) Current hardcover copy: $395 each or cost to the Borough.
(2) Current softcover copy: $376 each or cost to the Borough.
(3) Supplementation as prepared by General Code Publishers Corp.:
$0.50 per page.
G. Land Use Ordinance of the Borough of Madison.
(1) Current hardcover copy: $195 each or cost to the Borough.
(2) Current softcover copy: $50 each or current cost. [Amended
8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
(3) Supplementation as prepared by General Code Publishers Corp.:
$0.50 per page.
A. Anyone who requests a copy of a government record, as defined by law,
which requires the performance of work by any department or paid
consultant of the Borough, other than merely providing a reasonable
number of copies of presently available records for which there is no
specific charge set forth herein, shall be required to pay for said
services as set forth hereinbelow. Included within the types of work for
which charges shall be made are the compilation of presently available
technical information requiring substantial amounts of time and the
§ 147-1 MADISON CODE § 147-3
142:428
§ 147-4. Fees for mailing tax sale notices to property owner; fee for
tax sale redemption calculation. [Added 11-26-2001 by Ord. No.
42-2001]
§ 147-5. Fees for construction and nonconstruction bid documents.
[Added 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008; amended 10-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 30-2011; 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014]
A fee shall be charged for each bid package issued by the Borough of
Madison as follows:
preparation of calculations, reports, memoranda and other documents
of a technical nature.
B. The cost of said services shall be paid to the Borough of Madison at the
following rates:
(1) For all services performed by employees of the Borough $60 per
hour supervisor/nonsupervisor, $40 per hour special service
charge, plus expenses. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
37-2003]
(2) For all services performed by the Borough's paid professional
consultants, the rate paid by the Borough for said services.
(3) Copy fee for audio tape(s):
(a) Thirty dollars per tape, simple tape-to-tape reproduction.
Mailing cost is additional. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
37-2003]
(b) Reformatted tape or conversion to other media: $75 or cost to
the Borough. Transportation and handling cost is additional
and must be paid when ordering said copy.
(4) Copy fee for video tapes: $25 per tape. Mailing cost is additional.
A. The fee for mailing a tax sale notice in lieu of publication to the property
owner by regular mail or by certified mail pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26
shall be $25 for each set of notices for a particular property.
B. There shall be no fee for calculation by the Tax Collector of the amount
required to redeem a tax sale certificate for the first two requests per
calendar year, but for any subsequent calculation requested in the same
calendar year, there shall be a fee of $50 per calculation request,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54. [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No.
23-2010]
A. For nonconstruction bid documents: $0.05 per letter-size page and
$0.07 per legal-size page
B. For construction bid documents: actual cost to prepare documents.
§ 147-3 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS § 147-5
142:429
Chapter 152
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
§ 152-1. Processing fee established.
A processing fee of $200 is hereby established for right-of-way use
applications under N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq.
Chapter 155
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Street excavations — See Ch. 166, Art. III.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 226.
§ 147-5 MADISON CODE § 152-1
152:430
ARTICLE I
Connections
[Adopted 8-8-1966 by Ord. No. 838 (Art 71, Ch. A, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 155-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 62-2007]
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears in the
context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five
days at 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater; ASTM Standards, Part 23, Water; Atmospheric Analysis (1972);
EPA Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes (1971).
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any limitation upon the discharge of
pollutants adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — Means a measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds in water, both organic and inorganic
(in milligrams per liter, mg/l) in a waste sample under specific conditions
of an oxidizing agent, temperature and time as determined by analytical
procedures set forth in the Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and
Wastes (USEPA, Office of Technology Transfer, Washington, D.C., March
1983).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — See "samples, types of."
DISCHARGE — The action of pumping, leaching, releasing, spilling, leaking,
pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping and also means the causing of or
permitting of any of the aforesaid.
DISPOSAL — The storage, treatment, utilization or processing and final
disposition of septage.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption by the public, such as restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer,
hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care institution.
These establishments use one or more of the following preparation
activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching,
roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot,
nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY — A federal, state, interstate agency, county or
municipal government or school district whose jurisdiction is partially or
entirely within the state.
§ 155-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-1
152:431
GRAB SAMPLE — See "samples, types of."
HAZARDOUS POLLUTANT —
IMMEDIATE ACCESS — Access without delay but in no event beyond
10 minutes from the time the request for access is made by authorized
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting personnel to any employee of the user.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — Any discharge into the Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting's domestic treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USER — The term "industrial user" means a source of
discharge of industrial waste.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, as defined in the 1972 Edition of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, as distinct from sanitary sewage. Industrial wastes
includes the leachate from landfills or other contaminated areas.
INHIBITORY POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which when entering a domestic
treatment works in sufficient quantity will interfere with the treatment
works' physical, chemical, and/or biological processes.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
A. Any toxic pollutant;
Any hazardous substance as defined by the New Jersey Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11; or
B.
Any substance regulated as a pesticide under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. § 136 et seq.; or
C.
Any substance the use or manufacture of which is prohibited under the
Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.; or
D.
Any substance identified as a known carcinogen by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer; or
E.
Any hazardous waste designated pursuant to the New Jersey Solid
Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., or the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
F.
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NJPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, more commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
B.
§ 155-1 MADISON CODE § 155-1
152:432
JOINT MEETING — The legal entity which owns or operates the Molitor
Water Pollution Control Facility.
LOCAL LIMITS — Any restriction on quantities, quality, or concentrations of
pollutants discharged into a local agency's treatment works, developed to
prevent upset, interference, or pass-through of pollutants to the treatment
works, and to protect worker health and safety, and protect/improve the
quality of the sludge generated by the treatment works.
MCJM — Abbreviation for Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
MG/L — Abbreviation for milligrams per liter.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — "National pretreatment
standard," "pretreatment standard," or "standard" means any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which
applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.5.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or
NJPDES means the New Jersey system for the issuance of permits pursuant
to the Water Pollution Control Act.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
OIL AND GREASE — Includes the nonpetroleum-based pollutants of animal
and vegetable origin and petroleum-based pollutants, which are analyzed
by a USEPA and/or New Jersey State certified laboratory-approved method
for oil and grease referenced in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, including
subsequent amendments, and the petroleum-based pollutants analyzed by
a USEPA and/or New Jersey State certified laboratory-approved method for
petroleum hydrocarbons cited in Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
and Wastes, USEPA, as amended.
OIL, GREASE AND SAND INTERCEPTOR OR TRAP — A device designed
and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious hazardous or
undesirable matter from sanitary waste while permitting sanitary sewerage
or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States or waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the
Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
§ 155-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-1
152:433
is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NJPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS or PETROLEUM-BASED OIL AND
GREASE — The petroleum-based pollutants analyzed by an EPA and/or
New Jersey State-certified laboratory approved method for petroleum
hydrocarbons cited in Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,
USEPA, as amended.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of the hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution.
POLLUTION — The condition of water resulting from the introduction
therein of substances of any kind and in quantities rendering it detrimental
or immediately or potentially dangerous to public health or unfit for public
or commercial use.
POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system
used in the storage and treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by
a state, municipality or political subdivision. This definition includes sewers,
pipes, or other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing
treatment.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d). Appropriate
pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where
wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility
with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Means all applicable federal rules
implementing Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, as well as any
nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or
regulations, the more stringent thereof shall apply.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-
§ 155-1 MADISON CODE § 155-1
152:434
product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water. This
definition includes the terms "commercial wastewater" and "industrial
wastewater" as used in 40 CFR Part 503.
PUBLIC SEWER — See "sewers, types of."
RADIOACTIVE WASTE — Any waste which contains radioactive material
in concentrations which exceed those listed in 10 CFR Part 20, Appendix
B, Table II, Column 2, or exceed the Criteria for Identifying and Applying
Characteristics of Hazardous Waste and for Listing Hazardous Waste in 40
CFR Part 261, whichever is applicable.
SAMPLES, TYPES OF —
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried wastes resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks,
dishwashers, or any other source of water-carried waste of human origin or
containing putrescible material. The term specifically excludes industrial,
hazardous or toxic wastes and materials.
SANITARY SEWER — See "sewers, types of."
SEPTAGE — The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank,
cesspool, or similar domestic sewage treatment system, or a holding tank
when the system is cleaned or maintained.
SEWAGE — Any wastes, including wastes from humans, households,
commercial establishments and industries that are discharged to or
otherwise enter a sewage treatment works.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries or is intended to carry wastewater
or drainage water.
SEWER SYSTEM — All trunks, sub-trunks, sewers, interceptors, laterals,
branches, and all other sewer appurtenances, whether privately owned or
owned by the Borough of Madison, Borough of Chatham or the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting, the sewage from which is delivered to the sewage
treatment plant.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any facility or extension thereof designed to
provide for the collection, treatment or discharge of sewage. Also, see
"sewers, types of."
GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a time period of
less than 15 minutes.
A.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of several discrete
samples combined in a known proportion. For wastewater monitoring,
a composite sample is a sample composed of several discrete samples
collected at equal time intervals or proportionally to the flow rate of the
discharge.
B.
§ 155-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-1
152:435
SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT — An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating of sewage other than that used on and for a
property under one ownership as an individual sanitary disposal system.
SEWERS, TYPES OF — An underground pipe or drain used to carry off
water and waste matter as follows:
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — The term "significant industrial user"
means any user, including, but not limited to, any significant industrial user
as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(t) where:
BRANCH SEWER — A sewer which receives wastewater from a
relatively small area and discharges into a main sewer.
A.
OUTFALL SEWER — A sewer which receives wastewater from a
collecting system or treatment plant and carries it to a point of final
discharge.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer owned or controlled by the Joint Meeting, a
public utility, or other governmental agency.
C.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial building, industrial plants and institutions.
D.
The user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR
403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;
A.
The user's average volume of process wastewater exceeds 25,000
gallons per day;
B.
The amount of BOD, COD or suspended solids in the industrial process
wastewater discharge exceeds the mass equivalent of 25,000 gallons
per day of the domestic waste;
C.
The volume of industrial process wastewater in the discharge exceeds
5% or more of the average daily dry weather flow of the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting;
D.
The user's discharge of process wastewater contributes 5% or more of
the daily mass loading of any of the pollutants listed in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-4,
Appendix A Tables II through V;
E.
The user is designated as a "significant industrial user" by NJDEP on
the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting's operation;
F.
The user is designated as a "significant industrial user" by the NJDEP
on the basis that the user has been in violation of any federal, state, or
local pretreatment standard or requirement, including, but not limited
to, significant noncompliance as defined in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii); or
G.
The NJDEP determines it would be consistent with the intent of federal
or state law or regulation to require a permit for the user.
H.
§ 155-1 MADISON CODE § 155-1
152:436
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIER — "Significant noncomplier," "significant
noncompliance" or "SNC" means any person who commits any of the
violations described below, unless the NJDEP uses, on a case-by-case basis,
a more stringent frequency or factor of exceedance to determine a
significant noncomplier and the NJDEP states the specific reasons therefor,
which may include the potential for harm to human health or the
environment.
Violations which cause a person to become or remain an SNC under the
state definition of "significant noncomplier" include:
A serious violation for the same pollutant, at the same discharge
point source, in any two months of any consecutive six-month
period;
(1)
Exceedance of an effluent limitation expressed as a monthly
average for the same pollutant, at the same discharge point source,
by any amount in any four months of any consecutive six-month
period;
(2)
If there is not an effluent limitation for a particular pollutant
expressed as a monthly average, exceedance of the monthly
average of the daily maximums for the effluent limitation for the
same pollutant, at the same discharge point source, by any amount
in any four months of any consecutive six-month period;
(3)
Any exceedance of an effluent limitation for pH by any amount,
excluding the excursions specifically excepted by a permit issued
by the NJDEP with continuous pH monitoring, at the same
discharge point source in any four months of any consecutive sixmonth
period; or
(4)
Failure to submit a completed discharge monitoring report in any
two months of any consecutive six-month period.
(5)
A.
Under the federal definition set forth at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), an
"industrial user" is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets
one or more of the following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, SS, fats, oil, and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.
(2)
B.
§ 155-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-1
152:437
SLUDGE — The solid residue and associated liquid resulting from the
physical, chemical or biological treatment of domestic or industrial
wastewaters.
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that:
SUSPENDED SOLID (SS) — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that
is removable by laboratory filtering and prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable
residue.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average) that the NJDEP determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations which the NJDEP
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the pretreatment program.
(8)
A. Runs off the land's surface;
B. Is transmitted to the subsurface; or
Is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage
facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
C.
§ 155-1 MADISON CODE § 155-1
152:438
SYSTEM — All trunks, interceptors, conduits, pipe lines, mains, pumping
and ventilation stations, appurtenances, treatment or disposal systems,
plants and works, outfalls, and all other structures and conveyances and
real and tangible personal property acquired, constructed or operated by
the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting for the purposes of the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or systems, whether publicly or
privately owned or operated, used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or
reclamation of domestic or industrial waste of a liquid nature including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, cooling
towers, and ponds, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and
alterations thereof; and any other works including sites for the treatment
process or for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
Additionally, "treatment works" means any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of
pollutants, or industrial waste in the sanitary sewer systems.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEPA — Abbreviation for the Environmental Protection Agency, an agency
of the United States government.
USER — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society, which discharges wastewater into a treatment
works.
WASTEWATER — A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "wastewater treatment plant" or
"waste treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant."
§ 155-2. Required sewer connections.
A. Where any building is located upon any street in the Borough of
Madison in which a sanitary sewer has heretofore been constructed and
is in operation, said building shall be connected with said sanitary
sewer within 90 days after this chapter shall take effect.
B. Where any sanitary sewer shall hereafter be constructed in any street
in the Borough of Madison, the buildings located upon such street shall
be connected with said sanitary sewer within 90 days after the
§ 155-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-2
152:439
§ 155-3. Existing buildings altered for human occupancy.
When any existing building or any street in the Borough of Madison wherein
a sanitary sewer exists and is in operation is altered for use and occupancy
by human beings, either temporarily or permanently, said building or
structure shall be connected with the sanitary sewer during the course
of alteration thereof, and no use or occupancy of such building shall be
permitted until such sewer connection has been made, inspected and
approved.
§ 155-4. Connection fees; connection expenses; responsibility for
maintenance, repair and replacement of laterals. [Amended
7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 31-2009]
completion of said sewer. Such completion shall be certified to the
Council of the Borough of Madison by the Borough Engineer.
C. When any building shall hereafter be constructed on any street in the
Borough of Madison in which a sanitary sewer exists and is in operation
at the time of such construction, said building shall be connected with
said sanitary sewer during the course of construction, and no use or
occupancy of such building shall be permitted until said sewer
connection has been made, inspected and approved.
A. Sewer connection fees. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 37-2013;
9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 46-2014; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 48-2015;
5-23-2016 by Ord. No. 44-2016; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 14-201787;
4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 23-201888; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 13-201989]
(1) There shall be a basic connection fee established in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11. The fee for the remainder of 2019 shall
be:
(a) For single family dwelling units, $6,127, and for multiple
dwelling units, $6,127 per unit.
(b) In the case of any building or portion thereof to be used for
industrial, commercial, educational or other than dwelling
purposes, the Borough Engineer shall determine by accepted
standards the number of units to be connected or added to an
existing connection; where a unit equals an annual average
daily flow of 262 gallons or fraction thereof: $6,127 per unit.
(2) This fee shall, pursuant to statute, be recalculated at the end of
each budget year and may be reset by ordinance of the Borough
Council after public hearing, on a yearly basis. The sewer
connection fee is based upon the usage of a single dwelling unit or
87.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2017.
88.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2018.
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2019.
§ 155-2 MADISON CODE § 155-4
152:440
§ 155-5. Connection specifications.
Every connection required by this chapter shall be made with bell and
spigot soil pipe of cast iron, caulked and leaded, extending from inside the
building foundation to the sewer. All such connections shall be made and
installed in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the Board of Health
of Madison90 and shall be inspected and approved in accordance with the
Health Regulations of the Borough of Madison and State of New Jersey prior
to any use thereof.
§ 155-6. Connections or installations by Borough upon default of
owner.
If the owner of any property in the Borough shall fail to make any
connection or installation required by this chapter within the time required
herein, the Borough may proceed to make such connection or installation,
or cause the same to be made, and charge and assess the cost thereof
against such property, pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:63-54 et
seq.91
equivalent discharge. The sewer connection fee shall be payable in
full to the Borough of Madison at the time a building sewer permit
is issued for connection to the public sanitary sewer by the Borough
of Madison.
B. Sewer connection expenses; responsibility for maintenance, repair and
replacement of laterals. [Amended 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 39-2017]
(1) Subject to applicable law, whenever any of the work herein
provided for is done, it shall be at the sole expense of the owner or
owners of the structure or structures served by the sanitary lateral.
(2) Such owner or owners of the building(s) served by the sewer lateral
shall also be responsible for the maintenance, repair and
replacement of any lateral installed upon premises owned by him
or them, or any other work done in connection therewith, from the
structure all the way to the sewer main connection. Any
maintenance, repair and/or replacement of a lateral shall be
completed under the observation and with the prior approval of the
Borough Engineer or his/her designee.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Plumbing.
91.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 to 40:63-64 was repealed by L.1991, c. 53, § 1
(§ 40A:26A-22), effective 1-1-1992.
§ 155-4 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-6
152:441

ARTICLE II
Discharge of Wastes
[Adopted 9-8-1947 by Ord. No. 492 (Art. 71, Ch. B, of the 1970
Revised Ordinances)]
§ 155-7. Discharge of certain wastes restricted.
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall discharge or otherwise
introduce or permit the discharge or introduction into the sanitary sewer
system of the Borough of Madison, or any lateral tributary thereto, of any
waste other than domestic sewage from toilets, baths, showers, washbowls
and sinks, unless an application for the discharge of such wastes has been
filed with the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting and approved by the same,
in accordance with the terms of a certain agreement existing between the
Borough of Madison and the Borough of Chatham, New Jersey, entitled,
"Joint Contract for New Disposal Plant Between the Borough of Madison
and the Borough of Chatham, New Jersey, dated January 2, 1929," as the
same has been amended and supplemented.92
§ 155-8. Prohibited wastes and sewer use. [Amended 9-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 62-2007]
A. General prohibitions. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause or allow
to be deposited or discharged into the MCJM wastewater facilities and
wastewater treatment works or public sewer any substance,
wastewater or pollutant which may cause pass-through or interference
or that will:
(1) Not be susceptible to treatment or will interfere with the process or
efficiency of the treatment system, or will exhibit inhibitory toxicity
in the treatment system;
(2) Violate state or federal statutes, rules or regulations or
pretreatment standards as the same may be promulgated from time
to time;
(3) Cause the MCJM facilities to violate state or federal statutes, rules
or regulations or pretreatment standards as the same may be
promulgated from time to time; the MCJM NJPDES permit;
applicable receiving water standards; MCJM's permit regulating
sludge which is produced during the treatment process; or any
other permit issued to the MCJM.
B. Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge, deposit, cause or allow
to be deposited or discharged into the MCJM wastewater facilities,
wastewater treatment works or public sewer, any substance,
wastewater or pollutant which contains the following:
92.Editor's Note: For the bylaws of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, see Ch. A236.
§ 155-7 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-8
152:443
(1) Stormwaters, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, swimming
pool water, subsurface drainage, foundation, floor drain or
basement sump drainage, pond water, noncontact cooling water or
unpolluted industrial wastes.
(2) Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease or oils, either emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter of solvent soluble
materials or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° and 140° F. (0° and 60° C.).
(3) The discharge of petroleum hydrocarbons in excess of 100
milligrams per liter monthly average or 150 milligrams per liter
daily maximum as set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-21.2(a).
(4) Any residues from petroleum storage, refining or processing; waste
fuels, lubricants, solvents, or paints.
(5) Any wastewater containing any liquids, solids or gases which, by
reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient either
alone or by interaction with other substances to create an
explosive, flammable or combustible atmosphere in any part of the
MCJM wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(6) Any solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or interference with the
proper operation of the MCJM wastewater facilities or wastewater
treatment works, such as, but not limited to, mud, straw, metal,
rags, glass, tar, plastics, wood and shavings, ashes, cinders, sand,
feathers, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails,
paper or plastic containers, etc.
(7) Any ground or unground garbage, either from a commercial
garbage disposal units or any other source, except residential
garbage disposal systems.
(8) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (biochemical
oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, etc.) released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the MCJM wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works.
(9) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the MCJM
wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works resulting in
interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature at said wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment
works exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) unless alternate temperature limits
are approved.
§ 155-8 MADISON CODE § 155-8
152:444
(10) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(11) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the MCJM wastewater facilities, wastewater
treatment works or public sewer in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(12) Any waste having a pH lower 5 or higher than 9 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the MCJM.
(13) Any radioactive waste or isotope of such half-life or concentration
as to be in excess of that permitted by appropriate regulatory
agencies having control over their use or in such quantity as to
cause damage or hazard to structures, equipment, personnel of the
Borough of Madison, Borough of Chatham or MCJM, the
wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works.
(14) Any waste containing phenols, noxious or malodorous solids,
liquids or gases, which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life,
or are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its
maintenance and repair.
(15) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or other substances
which may, in sufficient quantity, cause injury, damage or hazard to
personnel, structures or equipment, or interference with the MCJM
wastewater facilities, wastewater treatment works, public sewer
system or any portion of the liquid or solids treatment or handling
processes, or that may pass-through the treatment facilities in such
condition that it may not achieve state, federal or other existing
requirements for the effluent or for the receiving waters. Except as
permitted under § 155-8.2, Local limits, the following chemicals are
specifically prohibited: alcohols, aldehydes, arsenic and arsenicals,
bromine, chlorinated hydrocarbons, compounds with chlorine
demands in excess of 100 parts per million, chromium or chromium
compounds, copper and copper salts, creosol, cyanide or cyanide
compounds, fluorine, iodine, mercury or mercury compounds,
nickel and nickel compounds, pesticides, silver and silver
compounds, sulfonamide, toxic dyes (organic or mineral), zinc and
zinc compounds or other heavy metals; all strong oxidizing agents
such as peroxide, chromates, dichromate, permanganates, etc.;
compounds producing hydrogen sulfide or any other toxic
inflammable or explosive gases, either upon acidification,
alkalization, reduction or oxidation; strong reducing agents such as
nitrates, sulfites, sulfides; strong acids or strong alkalis, except to
the extent set forth herein.
(16) Any material which exerts or causes:
§ 155-8 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-8
152:445
§ 155-8.1. Categorical standards. [Added 6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
17-89; amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 62-2007]
No person shall discharge, deposit, cause or allow to be deposited or
discharged into the wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works of
the MCJM or public sewer any waste which violates applicable categorical
standards. As pretreatment standards for toxic or other industrial wastes
are promulgated by the USEPA for a given category of industrial user, all
industrial users shall conform to the USEPA timetable for complying with
applicable discharge limitations. Notwithstanding anything set forth herein,
an industrial user shall comply with all local limits and any more stringent
standards which are established by the MCJM or other regulatory agencies.
Changes and additions may be implemented as necessary from time to
time by resolution of the MCJM or ordinance of the Borough. Categorical
standards can be modified only through the federal regulatory mechanisms
available pursuant to 40 CFR 403.7.
§ 155-8.2. Local limits. [Added 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 62-2007]
(Reserved)
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but
not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
(b) Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye
solutions and vegetable tanning solutions, which cannot be
removed by the wastewater treatment works. In no case shall a
discolored discharge be permitted if, in the opinion of the
MCJM, said discharge is likely to interfere with the operation
of the wastewater treatment system or to cause a violation of
the facility's NJPDES permit, applicable water quality criteria,
or sludge disposal regulations.
(c) Unusual BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in such quantities
as to constitute an unacceptable load or interference on the
MCJM wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works.
(d) Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting a "slug" of such volume or strength so as to cause
a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency.
(17) Septage or wastes from septic tanks, cesspools or other such
sources of sanitary sewage.
(18) Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limits.
§ 155-8 MADISON CODE § 155-8.3
152:446
§ 155-8.3. Compliance determination. [Added 9-24-2007 by Ord. No.
62-2007]
A. Compliance determinations with respect to any conformance with
ordinances or permit conditions or limitations may be made on the basis
of instantaneous grab samples, sequential grab samples, or composite
samples. Sequential grab samples or composite samples may be taken
over a twenty-four-hour period, or any other time span, as deemed
necessary by the NJDEP, to meet the requirements of a specific
situation.
B. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of these general sewer
use requirements, authorized representatives of the MCJM, NJDEP,
USEPA or other governmental authorities having jurisdiction may, upon
presentation of credentials, enter upon the premises of any user as
follows:
(1) During business hours, on notice to authorized personnel of the
user, but without the necessity of a warrant, for the purposes of
inspecting, copying or photographing any records required to be
kept.
(2) At any time without a warrant or prior notice for the purpose of
installing or inspecting any monitoring equipment or method,
inspecting the process wastewater pretreatment facility, and/or
measuring, sampling and/or testing any discharge of wastewater
either from process wastewater pretreatment facilities or the point
of discharge to the MCJM wastewater facilities or wastewater
treatment works. The user shall instruct security personnel to
provide immediate access to such representatives upon
presentation of valid credentials at any hour and under any and all
circumstances. The user's security personnel will be entitled to
accompany the entering representatives.
(3) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the MCJM
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
born by the user.
(4) Immediate access shall be granted to authorized representatives of
the MCJM, NJDEP, USEPA or other governmental authorities
having jurisdiction upon presentation of valid credentials.
Unreasonable delays in allowing access to the user's premises shall
be a violation of this section.
C. Each user shall reimburse the MCJM for the actual costs incurred by
the MCJM for such monitoring, sampling, investigation, engineering
evaluation, administrative costs, legal or other services which are
necessary or appropriate, in addition to those services which are
minimally required and which are properly allocable to the user's
§ 155-8.3 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-8.3
152:447
§ 155-8.4. Emergency suspensions.
§ 155-8.5. Affirmative defenses to general prohibitions. [Added
9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 62-2007]
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 155-8, if it
can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause
pass-through or cause interference and that either:
operation. Payment for such expenses shall be made by the user within
10 days after the submission of an invoice by the MCJM.
A. Upon advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health
Officer, the Superintendent of the MCJM may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. Upon
advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health Officer,
the Superintendent of the MCJM may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, which presents or may
present an endangerment to the environment, or for noncompliance
with pretreatment standards and requirements.
B. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, and upon
advance notice to the Borough Administrator and the Health Officer,
the Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment
to any individuals. The Superintendent of the MCJM and/or the NJDEP
may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent and/or the
NJDEP that the period of endangerment has passed.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the MCJM
was regularly in compliance with its NJPDES permit and, in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
§ 155-8.3 MADISON CODE § 155-8.6
152:448
§ 155-8.6. Notification of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the Superintendent of the MCJM, and obtain prior
written approval, at least 10 days in advance of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater, or result in the user meeting the
definition of "significant indirect user" established at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2,
or of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in
their discharge. The MCJM reserves the right to deny or condition new or
increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants,
where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements or where such contributions would cause the MCJM to
violate its NJPDES permit.
§ 155-8.7. Notification of slug discharges. [Added 9-24-2007 by Ord.
No. 62-2007]
§ 155-8.8. Notification of significant indirect user status.
The MCJM shall notify the NJDEP at least annually which facilities within
the sewer service area meet the definition of "significant indirect user" as
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2. The MCJM may use a variety of sources to
identify SIUs, including but not limited to user surveys, existing MCJM files,
A. The Superintendent may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition.
B. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
A. An industrial user shall immediately notify the MCJM of any incident of
accidental or slug discharge. The notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume.
B. An industrial user shall take immediate action to contain and minimize
the accidental or slug discharge so as to prevent interference with the
treatment process, damage to the treatment system, and pass-through
to the receiving stream or contamination of the sludge.
C. Within five days following accidental and/or slug discharge, the
industrial user shall submit to the NJDEP and MCJM a detailed written
report describing the date, time and cause of the discharge, the
quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action
taken at the time of the discharge, and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to treatment system, fish kills, or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may
be imposed by any permit or other applicable law.
§ 155-8.6 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-8.8
152:449
water use and billing records, utility company records, sewer connection
permits, business license records, Chamber of Commerce rosters, the local
telephone directory, property tax records, industrial directories,
newspapers, advertisements, world wide web, and drive-bys. Once a
potential discharger has been identified, the MCJM may, if it is uncertain
of the operations of that facility, send the user a questionnaire in order
to better evaluate the user's potential of being classified as an SIU.
Alternatively, the MCJM may conduct inspections of some or all such
facilities.
§ 155-8.9. Indemnification.
The industrial user shall indemnify and save harmless the MCJM for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned the MCJM by reason of permit
violation, the discharge of process wastewater or any prohibited substance,
including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 155-9. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps. [Added
6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76; amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No.
62-2007]
A. Any cost incurred by the MCJM in removing, correcting, preventing or
terminating any adverse effects upon the MCJM wastewater facilities or
wastewater treatment works;
B. Any increase in the cost of sludge processing or disposal;
C. Any fines or penalties assessed against the MCJM for such violations of
its permits;
D. The reasonable costs of any investigative inspection or monitoring
survey which leads to the establishment of a violation of a NJPDES
significant indirect user permit and the reasonable costs of preparing
and litigating any action successfully concluded against the user for
such violation; and
E. Any other actual or compensatory damages to the MCJM resulting from
the discharge.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients
for all food establishments and when in the opinion of the Plumbing
Code Official or Health Officer, except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing
Code Official and designed in accordance with Standard PDI-G 101,
entitled "Testing and Rating Procedure for Type 1 Hydro Mechanical
Grease Interceptors with Appendix of Installation and Maintenance,"
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
§ 155-8.8 MADISON CODE § 155-9
152:450
§ 155-10. Violations and penalties.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. The user shall be responsible for the
maintenance of said interceptor(s) or traps and for the removal and
disposal of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal. All interceptors or traps shall be in
conformance with applicable plumbing code requirements.
D. Where installed, all grease and oil interceptors or traps shall be
inspected every six months by the Health Department and provisions of
§ 155-9 shall be enforced by the Health Department. Failure to maintain
grease interceptors or traps in a satisfactory manner will result in
notification of said condition by the inspecting officer. The owner shall
have five days to correct routine maintenance violations and 10 days to
effect mechanical repairs, from the date of written notice, or shall be
subject to the violations and penalties more fully set forth in § 155-10 of
this article.
E. Application fees, inspection fees, and use fees for grease, oil and sand
interceptors or traps shall be paid to the Borough in accordance with
the applicable rate schedule.
F. The provisions of this § 155-9 shall be graced and shall not become
effective until one year after the date of enactment of the ordinance
herein.93
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following in the discretion of the
Judge: a fine of not to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days. In the event that a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section,
such fine shall be no less than $100. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord.
No. 9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
B. In the case of a continuing violation, each 24 hours of such continuance
shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
93.Editor's Note: September 24, 2008.
§ 155-9 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-10
152:451

ARTICLE III
Connection Ban
[Adopted 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 35-88]
§ 155-11. Purpose and intent.
The express purpose and intent of this Article is to enact a sewer connection
ban consistent with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:14A-12.21 and any other
applicable regulations and statutes, and the provisions of this article shall
be interpreted in a manner consistent with said regulations.
§ 155-12. Cessation of sewer system connections; building project
conditions.
Notwithstanding the contrary provisions of any other ordinance of the
Borough of Madison, as of the effective date of this article, the following
requirements shall apply:
§ 155-13. Notification requirements.
Within 10 days of the effective date of this article and at intervals of no
more than every six months thereafter, notice of the sewer connection ban
provided for by this article shall be given as follows:
A. The Borough shall cease the further approval of any connections to the
sewer system within the Borough of Madison, which sewer system is
connected to the treatment facility operated by the Madison-Chatham
Joint Meeting.
B. The approval by the Madison Planning Board, Madison Board of
Adjustment, Building Inspector and any other municipal officer or
entity, by way of preliminary or final subdivision approval, preliminary
or final site plan approval, issuance of a building permit or any other
form of approval, for any building project which will require or modify a
sewer connection shall be expressly conditioned upon the terms and
requirements of this article.
A. A copy of this article shall be sent by mail to the Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. Notice shall be given to Borough residents, landowners and other
persons who may be affected by the sewer ban by public
announcements, notices to the local newspapers and such other means
as may be reasonably expected to provide notice to such persons.
C. A copy of this article shall be given to all persons applying for building
permits, filing development applications or otherwise seeking approval
for any building projects which will require or modify a sewer
connection.
§ 155-11 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-13
152:453
§ 155-14. Exceptions.
Sewer connection ban exceptions may be granted by the Borough Council,
subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Protection
(hereinafter referred to as the "Department") in accordance with the
applicable regulations, as follows:
D. The Borough Administrator is directed to oversee and delegate
responsibility for the provision of the notices provided for by this
section.
A. All applicants shall be presumed to have knowledge of the sewer
connection ban after its effective date.
B. No exemption shall be granted to any party who subsequently proceeds
with a proposed project and thereby increases or creates the hardship
which is the basis for the requested exemption.
C. An applicant for an exemption shall submit a plan for water
conservation plumbing, and the implementation of such a plan, as
approved by the Department, shall be a condition of the exemption.
D. An applicant for an exemption must prove to the satisfaction of the
Borough and the Department that it meets the criteria set forth in this
section.
E. If the Borough, prior to November 3, 1986, has issued a building permit
or preliminary or final subdivision approval and construction of
improvements has taken place, the remaining construction covered by
such permit or approval may be eligible for an exemption. The applicant
must show that in good faith reliance upon the permit or approval,
substantial expenditures have been made by the applicant for physical
improvements to the property prior to the effective date of the ban as
follows:
(1) The payment of taxes, the purchase price, expenditure for
preparation of engineering and architectural plans and for legal
fees and other costs not expended for physical improvements to the
land shall be ineligible for consideration in determination of
substantial expenditures.
(2) All claims for eligible expenditures shall be accompanied by
certified true copies of contracts, receipts or invoices. An
unverified list of expenses will fail to establish substantial
expenditures.
(3) For the purposes of this provision, the term "substantial
expenditures" shall mean those eligible costs in excess of:
(a) Twenty-five percent of the cost of those projects whose total
cost is less than $100,000.
§ 155-13 MADISON CODE § 155-14
152:454
(b) Twenty-five thousand dollars, plus 10% of the costs in excess of
$100,000 for those projects whose total cost is less than
$10,000,000 but more than $100,001.
(c) One million fifteen thousand dollars, plus 5% of the project
costs in excess of $10,000,000 for those projects whose total
cost exceeds this amount.
(4) In addition, the applicant shall submit an estimate of the total cost
with a certification that the estimate is true and accurate.
F. If an existing building or group of buildings constructed prior to the
effective date of the sewer connection ban with individual subsurface
disposal system(s) is certified by the local health authorities and proven
to be presently creating a health hazard due to overflow, contamination
of the waters of the state or other malfunction and the system cannot be
reasonably rehabilitated, an exemption may be granted.
G. If the application for the exemption is a request to allow the connection
of a proposed project which is publicly owned or operated, including
but not limited to a long-term health-care facility which has received a
certification of need from the New Jersey Department of Health, a
school, hospital, fire or police station or senior citizen housing, an
exemption may be granted, if there exists a sufficient public need for
the proposed project and there are no other reasonable alternatives
available, including alternative sites.
H. If the proposed project will replace a building, structure or unit with an
existing sewer connection, the proposed project is exempt only if the
building, structure or unit with the existing connection was in use at the
time the sewer connection ban was implemented and if the proposed
project will create wastewater flows equal to or less than the flow of the
former building, structure or unit and the proposed project will be at
the same location as the existing building, structure or unit.
I. An exemption may be granted if the proposed connection is for a
groundwater remedial action that was approved by the Department
prior to the effective date of the sewer connection ban.
J. An exemption may be granted if the proposed project will have a total
design flow, using Department criteria in N.J.A.C. 7:9-1 et seq. of less
than 400 gallons per day and will be constructed and/or operated on a
tax lot that was in existence prior to the effective date of the ban, but
the Department may decide that no exemptions will be granted in this
category and that all connections are banned unless they meet one of
the other categories outlined in this section.
K. An exemption may be granted for the construction of publicly assisted
housing owned or operated by nonprofit organizations incorporated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:141-1 et seq. for the purpose of providing
housing that is designated to be occupied exclusively by low-income
§ 155-14 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-14
152:455
§ 155-15. Exemption application procedures.
Applications for a sewer connection ban exemption shall be governed by the
following procedures:
senior citizens and which provides for occupancy by the handicapped.
For the purpose of this provision, "publicly assisted" shall mean that.
(1) The project is to be built with funds provided pursuant to § 202 of
the Federal Housing Act, 12 U.S.C.A. 1701q; and
(2) The monthly rents are to be subsidized by funds provided pursuant
to § 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, 42 U.S.C.A. 1437.
A. The applicant will be provided with the following
(1) Copies of N.J.A.C. 7:14A-12.22 through 12.26.
(2) An exemption request form.
(3) A request for endorsement form.
B. The applicant for a sewer connection ban exemption shall submit:
[Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90]
(1) A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $150 to the
Borough.
(2) An application, together with the appropriate documentation, to
the Borough and the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
C. An applicant for an exemption shall submit a plan for water
conservation plumbing, and the implementation of such a plan, as
approved by the Department, shall be a condition of the exemption.
D. If the Borough or the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting denies the
request for an exemption, that decision shall be final.
E. If the Borough and the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting find that the
applicant meets the criteria in this article and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-12.22,
the request and all documentation shall be forwarded to the
Department for final approval or denial in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:14A-12.23.
F. An exemption granted for a specific property is not transferable to any
other property and is only transferable to another person for the same
property upon written application to and approval by the Department if
the original circumstances which justified granting the exemption have
not changed.
G. The granting of an exemption does not relieve the applicant of the
following responsibilities:
§ 155-14 MADISON CODE § 155-15
152:456
§ 155-16. Effective date.
This article shall be effective as of July 1, 1988, and it shall remain in
effect until modified or rescinded in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations.
(1) Compliance with all other state and local requirements, including
compliance with No. 201, Facilities Plan, and No. 208, Water
Quality Management Plan; and
(2) Obtaining the requisite treatment works approval from the
Department or from the Borough or Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting in the case of a project granted an exemption under
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-12.22(b)5.
§ 155-15 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-16
152:457

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Use Charges
[Adopted 10-24-1988 by Ord. No. 49-88]
§ 155-17. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide procedures and
requirements pursuant to which all sewage collection and treatment costs
of the Borough of Madison, including operating and capital costs of the
collection system operated by the Borough and the Borough's share of
the cost of the treatment facility operated by the Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting, shall be funded by a combination of ad valorem taxes and sewer
use charges applicable to tax-exempt properties which use sewer services
provided by the Borough, with the amount of the sewer use charges and the
amount of funds to be provided by ad valorem taxes to be established in a
manner which equitably allocates costs among all users of sewer services in
approximate proportion to usage.
§ 155-18. Sewer use charge established; rate; exception.
§ 155-18.1. Surcharge for illegal connections. [Added 6-12-1989 by
Ord. No. 17-8995]
A. The owner of each parcel of land with improvements which are
connected with and served by the sanitary sewer system operated by
the Borough of Madison and which does not contribute toward the cost
of providing such sewer services through the payment of ad valorem
taxes shall be subject to a sewer use charge. Said charge shall also be
applied to any real property subject to a payment-in-lieu-of-taxes
(PILOT) financial agreement with the Borough of Madison pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No.
10-2012]
B. The sewer use charge shall be billed at a rate of $0.0520 per cubic foot
of water consumed, which rate has been calculated and established
based on equitable allocation of costs of providing sewer services to all
users of sewer services on the basis of water consumption, subject to
certain accounting allowances and adjustments. [Amended 4-10-1989
by Ord. No. 10-89; 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 77-2007; 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 16-2009; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 59-200994]
C. The sewer use charge shall not apply to any property owned by the
Borough of Madison.
A. Regardless of whether a property is subject to the sewer use charge
provided for under § 155-18, a surcharge fee shall be imposed for a
sewer service to any property upon which a connection has been made
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2010.
95.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that these provisions shall remain inoperative
until 7-1-1989.
§ 155-17 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 155-18.1
152:459
§ 155-19. Billing procedure.
§ 155-20. Unpaid charges to become liens.
Unpaid sewer use charges shall be a lien upon the real property to which
they relate. If any sewer service bill shall remain in arrears for six months
or more from the due date thereof, the officer or employee charged with
the duty of collection thereof may file with the Tax Collector a statement
showing the arrearages, and, from the time of such filing, said amount shall
become a lien upon the real property to which sewer service was furnished
and in connection with which the charges were incurred, to the same extent
as taxes are a lien upon real property in the Borough, and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as liens for taxes.
§ 155-21. Severability.
Each section of this article and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section, or a part thereof,
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
to the sanitary sewer system which allows the discharge into the sewer
system of surface water or rainwater from yards, areas, courts, cellar
drains or roof drains contrary to the prohibition in § 155-8C.
B. This surcharge fee shall be calculated at a rate of $0.025 per cubic foot
of water consumed during the quarter of the year in which the illegal
connection is identified and in any subsequent quarter until the illegal
connection has been eliminated. The sewer service surcharge fee shall
be included as a separate charge on the quarterly water bill sent to the
property owners, and the owner shall be responsible for payment in
accordance with the procedures and requirements in Chapter 190 of
the Borough Code. Notwithstanding this billing procedure, the sewer
service surcharge fee shall be deemed to constitute a charge for sewer
use for accounting purposes and for purposes of § 155-20, which
provides for unpaid charges to be a lien upon the real property.
A. The owner of each parcel of land containing a building or structure
connected to and served by the sewer system and which is subject to
the sewer use charge provided for in § 155-18 shall be billed for the
sewer service provided by the Borough on a quarterly basis. [Amended
6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 17-89]
B. Sewer service bills shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date
thereof.
§ 155-18.1 MADISON CODE § 155-21
152:460
Chapter 157
SERVICE CHARGE FOR RETURNED CHECKS
§ 157-1. Service charge amount.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, a service charge of $20 shall be added
to any account owing to the Borough of Madison when payment is tendered
by check or other written instrument which is returned for insufficient
funds.
§ 157-2. Tax or special assessment accounts.
Whenever an account owing to the Borough of Madison is for a tax or
special assessment, the service charge authorized by § 157-1 shall be
included on any list of delinquent accounts which is prepared for the
enforcement of the lien.
§ 157-3. Collection of service charge.
Any service charge authorized by § 157-1 shall be collected in the same
manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the
check or other written instrument was tendered. In addition, the governing
body may require future payments to be tendered in cash or by certified or
cashier's check.
Chapter 158
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 158-1. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, shall
have the following respective meanings, which definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison.
BOROUGH TREASURER — The Borough Treasurer of the Borough of
Madison.
CART — Any rolling or nonrolling basket or container commonly used in
markets, supermarkets or self-service stores.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Madison and its
duly authorized agent or representative.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes any park, square, culvert, stream, stream
bed, field, woodland, lawn, parking area or lot, building, structure, entity
§ 155-21 SERVICE CHARGE FOR RETURNED CHECKS § 158-1
157:461
or any other place or location owned by or under the control or supervision
of the Borough of Madison, the Board of Education or any other local
governmental agency or unit.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, highway, thoroughfare, driveway,
lane, alley, path, stairway, concourse, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk, parking
area or lot open to the public or used by the public within the Borough of
Madison.
§ 158-2. Abandonment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or abandon, or suffer or permit
to be discarded or abandoned, any cart, whether owned by him or in his
possession, custody or control, upon any street or upon any public property.
§ 158-3. Identification plates.
Any cart provided or made available by any person for use by any other
person or persons shall have securely attached thereto a plainly visible,
durable, plastic or metal identification tag or plate at least two inches by
four inches in size. The name and address of the cart owner and the location
of the premises where said cart was provided or made available to other
persons for use shall be legibly printed on said identification tag or plate.
Noncompliance with this section shall not be considered a violation of this
chapter unless said cart shall be discarded or abandoned upon any street or
public property within the borough.
§ 158-4. Inspections.
The Chief of Police is authorized to enter, at reasonable hours of a business
day, upon premises where carts are provided and available for use for the
purpose of inspecting carts for proper identification and otherwise affecting
compliance with this chapter.
§ 158-5. Removal and disposition. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No.
8-92]
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to remove or cause to be removed or
impound any cart found abandoned or discarded or left in any
prohibited areas described herein and deliver it to any borough owned
or leased storage facilities available for such purpose. Within five days
after the removal of the cart to the storage facilities, the Chief of Police
shall, by ordinary mail, notify the owner thereof at the address
indicated on the identification tag or plate that the impounded cart may
be redeemed for the sum of $20 within seven days from the date of said
notice of redemption.
B. Where any such property remains unclaimed or unredeemed for a
period of five days beyond the date fixed for redemption or where a cart
impounded has no identification tag or plate and is not claimed or
redeemed within said five-day period after impounding, the Chief of
§ 158-1 MADISON CODE § 158-5
158:462
§ 158-6. Disposition of redemption moneys.
Within 30 days after such property is redeemed, the Chief of Police shall
pay over to the Borough Treasurer the amount received for said redemption
and at the same time shall deliver to said Treasurer a detailed statement
concerning said redemption, including the identity of the property and the
name and address of and the amount received from the redemptor.
§ 158-7. Disposition of proceeds of public sale.
Within 30 days after a public sale or disposition other than redemption of
such property, the Chief of Police shall pay over to the Borough Treasurer
the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the property and at the
same time shall deliver to said Treasurer a detailed statement, including the
identity of the property; the name and address of and the amount paid by
the purchaser; and the costs and expenses of such sale. The Treasurer shall
deduct from the money realized from such public sale or other disposition
of said property the cost and expenses incurred by the borough, plus the
sum of $15 for each cart sold or otherwise disposed of to cover the removal
and storage expenses, and shall thereafter pay over the balance, after said
deduction, to the owner or person entitled to such property as hereinabove
provided.
§ 158-8. Exception.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property which may
come into possession or custody of the Police Department pursuant to any
other ordinance, law or regulation.
§ 158-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
35-2000]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fees for redemption of such property and in
addition to any costs and expenses of public sale chargeable to the owner
or person entitled to possession of such property described previously.
Chapter 161
Police shall give at least five days' public notice in a newspaper
circulating in the Borough of Madison, fixing a place, date, time and the
terms for a public sale to the highest bidder of such property. The Chief
of Police shall conduct such public sale within a reasonable period of
time after impoundment. Where any such property shall remain unsold
at public sale, the Chief of Police may dismantle, destroy or otherwise
sell or dispose of such property. Any public sale or other disposition
of property pursuant to this chapter shall be without liability to the
borough, to the owner of such property or to any other person lawfully
entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 158-5 SHOPPING CARTS § 158-9
158:463
SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 161-1. Establishment.
The Senior Citizen Advisory Committee is hereby established to be known
as "the Senior Citizen Advisory Committee of the Borough of Madison"
(hereafter referred to as "the Committee"). The Committee shall consist of
12 members.
§ 161-2. Purpose and responsibilities.
Purpose and responsibilities:
§ 161-3. Membership.
§ 161-4. Voting powers, quorum and limitation of powers.
A. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding the
needs of senior citizens and assist in fulfilling those needs, in the areas
of recreation transportation, housing, medical care, Meals on Wheels,
and related issues affecting seniors.
B. The Committee will provide information to the Mayor and Council on
these special needs.
C. The Committee will submit a report to the Mayor and Council at the end
of each calendar year, concerning ongoing activities. In addition, the
Committee shall regularly circulate to the Mayor and Council copies of
its meeting minutes. All records, reports and data shall be available to
the Council for inspection at any time.
D. The Committee will hold a minimum of four public meetings annually
which shall be open to the public pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Act96 and shall take place at the Madison Senior Center unless
otherwise noted.
A. Membership shall consist of 12 members. All members of the
Committee shall serve without compensation. The Committee shall be
comprised of the following persons, appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of Council:
(1) One liaison member of the Council (ex officio).
(2) Eleven regular members who are residents of the Borough.
(3) Director of the Senior Center.
B. The Committee shall have the right to appoint nonvoting advisory
members with special abilities and expertise beneficial to the
Committee's objectives.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 158-9 MADISON CODE § 161-4
158:464
§ 161-5. Borough departmental assistance.
§ 161-6. Terms of office.
§ 161-7. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a
nomination at least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public
meeting of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall be made
by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the members present at
the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required,
with the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
§ 161-8. Reporting responsibilities.
The Committee shall submit an annual report to Mayor and Council.
A. A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum.
B. The Committee is specifically prohibited from exercising any power of
condemnation or eminent domain, from pledging the credit of the
municipality and from creating any debt against the municipality.
A. General. Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the
Mayor and Council, in so far as may be practicable, the employees and
professional staff of the Borough of Madison, including the Borough
Attorney, shall be available to assist the Committee in the performance
of its duties.
B. Procedure. All requests for employee or professional staff assistance
shall be made through the Borough Administrator. Any project that
requires substantial assistance from the Borough staff and
professionals shall be reviewed by the full Committee and said
assistance shall be approved by the Council prior to commencement of
the project.
A. The Council liaison shall serve annually.
B. The 11 resident members shall serve for a term of one year.
C. The Mayor shall, initially, designate one of the members as
Chairperson, and the Committee shall select a Secretary to record
minutes. Thereafter, in subsequent years, the Committee shall annually
select a Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall call the
initial meeting of the Committee within 30 days of the adoption of this
chapter. Thereafter, the Committee shall establish its meeting schedule,
which shall be duly published.
§ 161-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 161-9
158:465
§ 161-9. Conflict of interest.
Chapter 163
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 30.
A. Disclosure of interest. No Committee member shall have or shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, personal or financial, in any
project which the Committee is promoting or in any contract or
proposed contract for materials or services or in any lease, mortgage,
sale or contract of any nature whatsoever relating to any such project
or to the Committee without forthwith making written disclosure to the
Committee of the nature and extent of the interest. Such disclosure
shall be entered in writing upon the minutes of the Committee.
B. Voting. No Committee member having an interest as described herein
shall vote on matters directly relating to such interest.
§ 161-9 MADISON CODE § 161-9
158:466
ARTICLE I
Borough Property
[Adopted 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 26-93; amended in its entirety
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 46-2013]
§ 163-1. Policy.
A totally smoke-free workplace policy is hereby adopted, and the following
sections shall be applied in accordance with and in addition to this policy.
§ 163-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH BUILDINGS — Includes all property owned or leased by the
Borough of Madison, including, but not limited to, the Hartley Dodge
Memorial Building, Public Safety Complex, Department of Public Works,
Water and Light Plant and Civic Center. Any Borough buildings acquired
hereafter shall be included in this definition.
BOROUGH PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes all public
parks, playgrounds, ball fields, swimming pools, plazas publicly owned or
leased by the Borough of Madison, and all property owned or leased by the
Borough of Madison upon which the public is invited or upon which the
public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities,
including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to,
sidewalks, any parking areas, driveways or drive aisles.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 163-3. Smoking prohibited on all Borough property.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all Borough buildings, including private
offices and within 30 feet of the exterior of all Borough buildings.
B. The Borough Administrator shall designate areas outside the Borough
buildings where smoking will be permitted. This exception shall not
apply to Borough buildings located within Borough parks and
recreational areas, and smoking shall be prohibited outside of all
Borough buildings located within Borough parks and recreational
areas.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in all Borough parks and recreational
facilities.
§ 163-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 163-3
158:467
Chapter 166
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and hedges near roadways — See Ch.
73, Art. I.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 79.
Littering — See Ch. 120.
Regulation of traffic and parking — See Ch.
185.
§ 163-3 MADISON CODE § 163-3
158:468
ARTICLE I
Obstructions, Encroachments and Nuisances
[Adopted 10-1-1898 by Ord. No. 28; amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
§ 166-1. Obstructions prohibited except with Borough permission;
conditions.
A. No person shall narrow, encroach upon, stop or obstruct in any manner
any street or streets, sidewalk, public alley or other public place within
the Borough, except while necessarily engaged in the loading and
unloading of merchandise, without permission of the Council first had
and obtained, which permission shall be for not longer than is actually
necessary and upon such reasonable regulations and restrictions as the
Council by resolution may impose. Should the Street Committee of the
Council consider any obstruction allowed by the Council or the
provisions of this article to be continued longer than necessary or in
violation of the imposed restrictions and regulations, notice thereof
shall be given to the person or persons offending, requiring the removal
of such obstructions within a time to be named in such notice. Such
privilege shall cease at the expiration of the time period named in said
notice unless further time is allowed by the Council, and the offender
shall become liable to the penalties herein prescribed. If any person
shall fail or refuse to remove any obstruction after notice so to do, then
the Borough may cause the removal of the same at the expense of the
party so offending.
B. Among those acts which shall constitute a violation of this section of the
Code are: [Added 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 9-78]
(1) The parking of any motor vehicle in such a manner as to impede
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(2) The placing of garbage, refuse, junk, building materials or other
materials so as to impede motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
(3) The plowing or placement of snow in such a manner as to impede
motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
(4) Any other act constituting an obstruction as specifically set forth in
this chapter of the Code.
(5) Any other act constituting a narrowing, encroaching upon,
stopping or obstruction of traffic, vehicular or pedestrian, in any
manner upon any street, sidewalk, public alley or public place
within the Borough.
C. Also prohibited by this section is the obscuring, blocking access to or
covering of any fire hydrant in any manner whatsoever. [Added
4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 9-78]
§ 166-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-2
158:469
§ 166-2. Sale of articles removed by Borough; disposition of
proceeds.
Any article or thing which may be removed in accordance with the
provisions of § 166-1 shall be advertised and sold at the end of 30 days
after such removal, unless the same shall be sooner reclaimed and the
penalty and costs paid by the owner thereof. The proceeds of the sale
shall be paid into the Borough treasury; the Treasurer shall be furnished
with a statement of the article or thing sold and the amount for which the
same was sold; and the balance, if any, after deducting the penalties and
costs, shall be paid to any person or persons furnishing satisfactory proof of
ownership.97
§ 166-3. Removal of encroachments by property owners; removal by
Borough in cases of noncompliance.
The owner of any building, fence or other encroachment or obstruction now
standing in any street, highway, public lane, alley or other public ground
within the Borough of Madison shall remove the same within 30 days from
and after the time when he shall be required to do so by a notice in writing
issued by the Borough pursuant to a resolution of Council, and if such owner
shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of such notice, it shall
be lawful for the Borough to cause such encroachment or obstruction to be
removed or taken down.98
§ 166-4. Awnings.
The owner or occupant of any dwelling house, store or other building is
hereby authorized and permitted to construct from his respective building
thereon, wrought iron brackets or frames for the support of awnings. Said
brackets or frames shall be firmly secured to the building, shall be not
less than eight feet in height above the sidewalk and shall not project over
the sidewalk beyond the curbstone, nor more than 10 feet in any case
whatever. The material used shall hang loosely down from the awning over
the sidewalk.
§ 166-5. Horses and other livestock on sidewalks.
No person shall ride, lead or drive any horse, mule, cattle, sheep, goat or
other beast through any park or over or along any of the sidewalks of the
Borough, except in crossing the same to go into a yard or lot.
97.Editor's Note: Original Section 3, as amended 11-11-1912 by Ord. No. 152, which
immediately followed this section and pertained to the moving of buildings, was deleted
and repealed at time of adoption of Code, 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. Current provisions on the moving of buildings may be found in Ch. 79,
Buildings, Moving of.
98.Editor's Note: Original Section 5, as amended 11-11-1912 by Ord. No. 152, which
immediately followed this section and pertained to the maintenance of hitching posts, was
deleted and repealed at time of adoption of Code; 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 166-2 MADISON CODE § 166-6
158:470
§ 166-6. Obstruction of crosswalks prohibited.
No person shall place or stop his or her horse, cart or other vehicle upon or
across any crosswalk or in any other manner obstruct such crosswalks.99
§ 166-7. Removal of dangerous trees.
Whenever any tree in or along the street shall become dangerous by decay
or otherwise, it shall be deemed and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
and the owner or owners of lands in front of which such trees may stand
shall remove such tree or such part thereof as may be decayed. In case such
owners or owner shall neglect or refuse for the space of five days after the
service of notice from the Borough to comply with the requirements thereof,
the Borough may remove the same at the expense of the owner or owners.
§ 166-8. Overhanging branches.
Whenever the branches of the trees along any street shall hang so low that
they obstruct the streetlights or the free use of the sidewalks or roadway,
the owner or owners of the land in front of which such trees may stand
shall so trim the trees as to remove such obstruction. In case such owner
or owners shall neglect or refuse for the space of five days after the service
of notice from the Borough to comply with the requirements hereof, the
Borough may remove the same at the expense of the owner or owners.
§ 166-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $200 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both. Such penalty shall be in addition to any costs or
expenses which may otherwise be chargeable under the provisions of this
article.
99.Editor's Note: Original Section 9, which immediately followed this section and pertained
to the deposit of dirt, waste materials and wastewaters on streets and sidewalks, was
deleted and repealed at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For
current provisions on this subject, see Ch. 120, Littering; Handbills; Brush and Trash.
§ 166-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-9
158:471

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Sidewalk Area
[Adopted 4-12-48 by Ord. No. 509 (Art. 77 of the 1970 Revised
Ordinances)]
§ 166-10. Removal of snow, ice, grass, weeds and impediments
required; time limit.
Every owner or tenant of any lands abutting upon the public highways of
the Borough of Madison shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks and gutters of such highways within 24 hours after the same
shall fall or form thereon, shall remove all grass, weeds and impediments
therefrom within three days after notice to remove the same and shall
remove all grass, weeds and impediments from the portion of any street or
highway abutting on such lands.
§ 166-11. Removal by Borough; collection of costs.
Whenever any owner or tenant of any lands abutting upon the public
highways of the Borough of Madison shall fail to remove all snow and ice
from the abutting sidewalks and gutters of such highways within 24 hours
after the same shall fall or be formed thereon; or shall fail to remove all
grass, weeds and impediments therefrom within three days after notice to
remove the same; or shall fail to remove all grass, weeds and impediments
from the portion of any street or highway abutting on such lands, as
provided in § 166-10 hereof, the same may be removed by the Borough of
Madison and the cost thereof shall be certified to the Council of the Borough
of Madison by the Executive Secretary of such Borough. The Council shall
examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost
to be charged against such real estate so abutting upon such sidewalk or
gutter thereof. The amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and
tax upon such real estate, shall be added to and be part of the taxes next
to be levied and assessed thereon and shall be enforced and collected with
interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 166-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; 12-27-1984 by Ord. No. 49-84; 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 27-87;
6-10-1991 by Ord. No. 18-91; 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94; 8-23-2004
by Ord. No. 42-2004]
Any person who violates § 166-10 shall, upon conviction, be liable for a
penalty of $38 for the first offense and a penalty of $48 for the second
offense. For further offenses, a court appearance is required, and a penalty
will be assessed in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court; the
penalty for further offenses shall consist of a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
For purposes of this section, each and every violation which continues for a
period of more than 24 hours shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 166-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-12
158:473

ARTICLE III
Openings and Excavations; Encumbrances
[Adopted 6-13-1966 by Ord. No. 826 (Art. 81 of the 1970 Revised
Ordinances)]
§ 166-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET, ROAD OR HIGHWAY — Includes the full right-of-way width of
any such street, road or highway as the same is shown on the Borough of
Madison Tax Map.
§ 166-14. Acts prohibited without a permit.
It shall be unlawful, at any time after this article shall take effect, for any
person, firm or corporation, without having obtained a permit therefor, to:
§ 166-15. Applications for street openings in county roads.
Application for street openings in county roads shall be made directly to
the County of Morris, and compliance with the regulations shall be a matter
between the applicant and the County of Morris.
A. Make any opening or excavation in or tear up the surface of any road or
street in the Borough of Madison.
B. Tear up, remove, alter, construct or repair any pavement, sidewalk,
curb, gutter, manhole, catch basin, drain bridge, inlet, storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other structure, installation or fixture in, upon, over,
under or along any such road or street, or otherwise disturb the same in
any manner.
C. Build, erect or maintain any bridge, scaffold, barricade or barrier or
other form of obstruction in, over, upon or across any such road, street
or sidewalk.
D. Store or place any building materials, machinery or equipment in or on
any road, street or sidewalk.
E. Install any water mains, sewer mains, laterals, pipes, conduits or
underground cables or water service connections in any such road or
street or remove the same therefrom.
F. Place, suspend or maintain any wire or cables across any such road,
street or sidewalk.
G. Install, place or bury any pipe, tube or channel from any roof drain,
leader drain, cellar drain or sump pump in, under and across any road
or sidewalk.
§ 166-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-16
158:475
§ 166-16. Applications for openings in New Jersey Route 24.
Applications for street openings in Route 24 shall be made on New Jersey
State Highway Department forms, and the applicant shall comply with all
New Jersey State Highway Department regulations. The required deposit
will be made out to the order of the Borough of Madison and shall be
deposited with the Borough Clerk at the time when the Borough of Madison
permit is taken out. Work on a State Highway Department street opening
shall not begin until said Department approves the application. It shall be
the applicant's responsibility to allow sufficient time to secure this approval,
and failure to do so shall not be considered to justify a waiver on plea of
hardship.
§ 166-17. Street opening permit requirements and conditions.
[Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 6-92; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
37-2003; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 54-2015]
A. Applications for street opening permits shall be made on forms to be
obtained at the office of the Borough Engineer, in the Madison
Municipal Building, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
Monday through Friday in each week (except on holidays, when such
office is closed).
B. Every application shall generally describe the location and extent of the
contemplated work for which the permit is requested and shall state the
date upon which the work will be commenced and the date upon which
it will be completed. The date upon which the work is to be commenced
shall be not less than 24 hours after the date of the application. Every
permit shall expire six months after the date of the issuance thereof,
unless extended as hereinafter provided.
C. If the application for a street permit is approved by the Borough
Engineer, the permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk upon
payment to said Clerk of a fee of $500 (for new roads), $300 (for
pavements less than five years old) and $100 (all others) and
compliance by the applicant with all requirements. The Borough
Engineer, however, may waive the fee for a utility company that
performs all the work, including the surface course for the trench,
where bonds already cover the performance of work.
D. On application, for good cause shown, the Borough Engineer can
recommend an extension of any permit beyond its expiration date, and
the Clerk shall endorse the extended expiration date on the permit.
E. Copies of permits, as granted, and extensions thereof, shall be
submitted by the Borough Clerk to the Borough Engineer, the Chief of
Police and the Supervisor of Public Works. The Chief of Police shall
notify the Fire Department of every pending project for which a permit
has been granted.
§ 166-16 MADISON CODE § 166-17
158:476
F. If any contemplated project will completely obstruct any thoroughfare
or make a length of more than 200 feet of any thoroughfare inaccessible
for vehicular traffic for a period in excess of 24 hours, then a period of
not less than 72 hours shall elapse after the issuance of the permit
before the operation may be started. Unless otherwise approved by the
Borough Engineer, where an excavation is to extend the full width of the
road, only 1/2 of the excavation shall be made at one time and shall be
properly backfilled in accordance with § 166-19 herein before the other
1/2 is excavated.100 Any full or partial road closure is subject to review
and approval by Madison Police Department Traffic Safety Division.
G. Permission to make a curb or street opening or to tear up the surface of
the road does not carry with it any right to make drainage, sewer, water,
oil, steam, electric or telephone connections. Separate permits to make
such connections must be obtained from the Borough Engineer or
utility official having jurisdiction over these matters.
H. Insurance.
(1) A certificate of insurance must be supplied in the minimum
coverage as listed below. State and county insurance requirements
apply within those jurisdictions. Public personal injury liability and
property damage liability, including contingent liability and
contractual liability, shall be as follows:
(a) One person in any one occurrence: $1,000,000.
(b) Two or more persons in any one occurrence: $1,000,000.
(c) Aggregate property damage limit: $1,000,000.
(d) Property damage in any accident: $1,000,000.
(e) Automobile liability insurance:
[1] One person in any one accident: $1,000,000.
[2] Two or more persons in any one accident: $1,000,000.
[3] Property damage in any one accident: $1,000,000.
(f) Property damage insurance shall be extended to cover damage
to underground wires, pipes, ducts, conduits, structures, etc.,
and further to cover explosive damage and damage due to
collapse.
(2) The policies shall remain in force until all work has been
completed.
(3) All policies shall be endorsed to provide the Engineer with 10 days'
written notice in advance of any changes or cancellations which
modify the coverage provided. In the event that the contractor shall
100. Editor's Note: For backfill specifications, see § 166-21.
§ 166-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-17
158:477
§ 166-18. Notice of interruption of gas or water service. [Amended
11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 54-2015]
Whenever the work done under any permit requires that water or gas
services will be interrupted, the persons in charge of supplying such
services, or their authorized agents, shall notify affected users of the
periods of time when the services will not be available. Such notice shall be
given at least 24 hours prior to the interruption of service.
§ 166-19. Emergency street openings. [Amended 11-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 54-2015]
§ 166-20. Deposit to ensure proper repair of street; repair by
Borough. [Amended 2-13-1968 by Ord. No. 1-68; 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 13-86; 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 6-92; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No.
54-2015]
carry blanket liability insurance coverage, compliance with the
foregoing requirements shall be met hereunder, provided that the
limits of said blanket liability insurance policy shall comply with the
amount outlined above.
(4) All policies, whether blanket policies or not, shall name the
Borough as a coinsured.
(5) The policies and/or endorsements herein required must be
submitted to the Engineer (in duplicate) at least five days prior to
the beginning any work.
A. Street openings may be made without the necessity of a written
application, as provided for in § 166-17 hereof, in emergencies, such as
broken or frozen water mains or other happenings which would
endanger public life, health and safety, provided that notice thereof
shall be immediately given to the Madison Police, Municipal Engineer
and Superintendent of Public Works. Written application for a permit
shall nevertheless be made to the Borough as soon as may be
convenient, but in any event within 48 hours of the emergency.
B. In the event of authorized emergency street openings by a public utility
within five years of the moratorium period in § 166-23, the repaving by
the utility must follow the specifications in § 166-22 and be approved by
the Borough Engineer as to the scope of the repaving required. [Added
6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 36-2018]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall be granted a permit to open any
street until and unless there shall first be deposited with the Borough
Clerk an amount estimated to be sufficient to pay the expenses of
repairing and replacing such public road, including the restoration of
pavement or other surfaces or installations within the street area.
B. Amount of deposit.
§ 166-17 MADISON CODE § 166-20
158:478
§ 166-21. Backfill specifications. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No.
6-92; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 54-2015]
Unless otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer or required in the
NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (most
recent edition), the following minimum specifications shall govern the
backfill to be placed in excavated trenches:
(1) The amount of such deposit shall be estimated by the Borough
Engineer in accordance with the following schedule of costs;
provided, however, that the minimum amount to be deposited with
the Borough shall be $50:
(a) Repairs within the street pavement, the deposit is $250.
(b) Repairs outside of the street pavement, the deposit is $100.
(c) Repairs within and outside of the street pavement, the total
deposit is $350.
(d) For projects greater than 50 square yards of disturbance, a
bond or restoration guarantee in the amount of $20 per square
yard and such other amounts estimated by the Municipal
Engineer.
(e) For public utility applicants, a corporate surety bond or
restoration guarantee covering annual service activities for the
entire calendar year in the minimum amount of $40,000, which
shall be supplemented if aggregate work exceeds 1,000 square
yards of disturbance at the direction of the Borough Engineer.
(2) The cost as determined by the Borough Engineer or his designee
for Borough forces to restore the opening as set forth in § 166-22
will be deducted from the deposit.
C. In the event that the permittee shall fail to properly backfill any
excavation or shall fail to repair and replace any pavement, road
surface, sidewalk or other construction as required by this article,
thereby creating a dangerous or hazardous condition, the Borough of
Madison may promptly make the necessary repairs, and the cost
thereof shall be deducted from the amount of the permittee's deposit. If
the municipal cost of restoration exceeds the deposit amount, the
applicant shall be subject to claims for reimbursement of direct costs
from the Borough of Madison.
A. All roads shall be backfilled with quarry-processed stone or a substitute
acceptable to the Borough Engineer and shall be tamped in twelve-inch
layers with a mechanical tamper.
B. All openings shall be backfilled as specified herein. No backfill shall be
placed unless the Engineer or his representative is present.
§ 166-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-21
158:479
§ 166-22. Maintenance and repair of street openings following
backfilling. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 6-92; 11-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 54-2015]
Upon completion of the opening and backfill, the requirements of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (most
recent edition) and the following minimum specifications shall govern the
maintenance and repair of street openings by the permittee.
C. Backfill shall be placed in trenches as above specified by the person,
firm or corporation making the opening. The trench shall be paved with
a temporary patch of bituminous material (cold patch) if the bituminous
stabilized base course is not available in cold weather.
D. All material not suitable for backfill and all excess backfill material shall
be removed from the site by the person, firm or corporation responsible
for the opening and shall not be dumped on any Borough of Madison
property, except as otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer or his
designee.
A. Road openings shall be backfilled to within eight inches of the existing
pavement surface. The remainder of the openings shall be filled with
four inches of the quarry-processed stone and four inches of bituminous
stabilized base course or cold patch during winter months. Each course
shall be tamped or rolled with the equivalent capacity of a ten-ton roller.
The above trench shall be maintained and kept to the existing shoulder
grade by the addition of bituminous material as required.
B. Pavement openings shall be filled and paved as specified hereinabove.
The temporary bituminous concrete surface and the quarry-processed
stone shall be removed to a depth of eight inches and the existing
pavement shall be cut back to a sharp line one foot from each side of the
opening. After surfaces of the existing pavement are tack-coated with
an asphalt oil, the entire area shall then be covered with six inches of
bituminous stabilized base hot mix asphalt (HMA) course and two
inches of bituminous surface course hot mix asphalt (HMA) as directed
by the Borough Engineer. Each course shall be rolled with the
equivalent capacity of a ten-ton roller and the surface course shall be
rolled to present an even-riding surface.
C. Driveway openings shall be replaced in kind, and the appropriate
specifications for shoulder openings or road openings shall govern the
replacement of the same.
D. In the event of authorized nonemergency street openings by a public
utility within five years of the moratorium period in § 166-23, the
repaving by the utility must be curb to curb and follow the
specifications in § 166-22. [Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 36-2018]
§ 166-21 MADISON CODE § 166-23
158:480
§ 166-23. Time period within which reopenings are not permitted.
[Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 36-2018]
Following the construction of a new pavement surface on a Borough road,
no street openings for public utilities will be permitted for a period of
five years thereafter. The Madison governing body may waive and/or allow
nonemergency work by a public utility during the five-year moratorium
period in § 166-22 to further the public interest. In the event of authorized
nonemergency work within the five-year moratorium period, the repaving
by the utility must be curb to curb and follow the specifications in § 166-22.
§ 166-24. Curb opening permits; deposit. [Amended 3-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 6-92]
Curb opening permits shall only be issued to provide ingress to and egress
from driveways or parking places. Said curb openings shall be made only
to the extent that it is necessary to permit ingress to and egress from
driveways and parking areas. All curb openings shall meet Borough
specifications under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
The deposit for curb openings, as set forth in § 166-20B(1)(b), is $100.
§ 166-25. Sidewalk opening permits; specifications; inspections.
§ 166-26. Barriers and warning signs required.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, firm or corporation opening
any thoroughfare, or otherwise endangering or obstructing the normal flow
of traffic or normal flow of surface water thereon, to fully protect both
vehicular and pedestrian traffic from possible accident or injury by the
placing of suitable barriers, crosswalks, notices, warnings and/or caution
A. Sidewalk opening permits shall only be issued for the repair, removal
and replacement of sidewalks. All new sidewalks shall be composed of a
Class B New Jersey Department of Transportation mix of air-entrained
concrete with a four-inch minimum thickness. At driveway crossings,
the minimum thickness of sidewalks shall be six inches, composed of
air-entrained concrete, Class B New Jersey Department of
Transportation mix. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 6-92]
B. Upon submission of the sidewalk permit application, the Borough
Engineer may reduce the permit application fee to the nominal amount
of $50 for residential applicants falling under the Municipal Partial
Reimbursement Program, § 166 34, and reduce or waive performance
deposit requirements where residential applicants can demonstrate no
adverse impact to adjoining public curbs, pavements or public
structures resulting from the proposed sidewalk improvement. [Added
2-13-1968 by Ord. No. 1-68; amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
31-2015]
C. After inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, the deposit fees
shall be returned. [Added 2-13-1968 by Ord. No. 1-68]
§ 166-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-26
158:481
signs by day and flares and flashing lights at night in accordance with
the provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes and the
amendments and supplements thereto. The Police Department will
determine the adequacy of such protection.
§ 166-27. Discharge of water or waste.
No person, firm or corporation shall divert or discharge water or waste into,
upon or across any road, street or sidewalk in the Borough of Madison so
that a nuisance is created or a hazardous condition caused to exist through
the presence of said water or waste or through the formation of ice resulting
therefrom, or so that the pavement or road surface is caused to be damaged
thereby.101
§ 166-28. Plans and specifications of proposed work; inspections.
If necessary and desirable in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the
permittee shall submit plans and specifications in duplicate, which plans
shall indicate the extent of the proposed work within the Borough of
Madison. The Borough may assign an inspector to ensure that the
specifications herein set forth are complied with. Such inspection shall
be made at the expense of the person, firm or corporation obtaining said
permit, at the prevailing rate of wages paid by the Borough for inspection
of public projects.
§ 166-29. Enforcement; authority of Police Department.
The Borough Engineer is hereby designated as the enforcement officer to
enforce the provisions of this article and is the agent acting for the Borough
of Madison in connection herewith. However, this provision shall not be
construed as depriving members of the Police Department of the power to
prosecute violators hereof.
§ 166-30. (Reserved)102
§ 166-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70]
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
101. Editor's Note: For additional provisions pertaining to the discharge of water onto streets
and sidewalks, see Ch. 120, Littering; Handbills; Brush and Trash, § 120-9; and Ch. 218,
Nuisances.
102. Editor’s Note: Former § 166-30, Applicability of provisions to public utility companies, was
repealed 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 36-2018.
§ 166-26 MADISON CODE § 166-31
158:482
ARTICLE IV
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 43-88]
§ 166-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — A paved walkway for pedestrian traffic located along the side
of a public street.
§ 166-33. Maintenance responsibility of abutting property owner.
Every owner of land abutting upon or containing a sidewalk shall be
responsible at the owner's sole cost and expense for maintaining and
repairing such sidewalks so as to prevent or eliminate broken, raised or
uneven pavement or other conditions creating a potential safety hazard for
pedestrians. The obligations of abutting owners under this section shall not
be dependent upon receipt of a notice pursuant to this article requiring the
construction or repair of sidewalks.
§ 166-34. Construction of sidewalks; municipal partial
reimbursement program.
A. No person shall construct or install sidewalks along a public street on
property not currently improved with sidewalks, except as authorized
or required by this section or by other ordinance or law.
B. Every owner of land abutting upon a public street which is not presently
improved with sidewalks shall be responsible at said owner's sole cost
and expense to construct sidewalks, if a determination is made by the
Borough Council that sidewalks are necessary at that location and
notice of said determination has been served upon the abutting owner
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
C. Any such abutting owner desiring or his or her own initiative to install
sidewalks may do so only after such a determination has been made,
which may be requested by submitting an application to the
Department of Public Works.
D. Upon final approval of the Borough Engineer, a residential property
owner may apply to the Borough for partial reimbursement of the cost
of replacement of an existing sidewalk or construction of a new
sidewalk on land abutting a public street. The reimbursement shall be
$25 per square yard. The reimbursement shall apply to sidewalk
installation only and shall not apply to ancillary work such as
landscaping, lawn sprinklers and electronic dog fences. The property
owner shall submit to the Borough Engineer all bills associated with the
project as well as evidence of payment to the contractor. The Borough
Council shall appropriate an amount annually for this program, and the
§ 166-32 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-34
158:483
§ 166-35. Determination of hazardous condition; notice to be
issued.
§ 166-36. Service of notice.
The notice provided for by § 166-35B may be served upon any owner
residing within the Borough by personal service or by leaving the same at
the owner's usual place of residence with a member of the household above
the age of 14 years. If the owner is not a resident of the Borough, then
the notice may be served by mailing it, postage prepaid, to the owner's
post office address. If the owner's current mailing address cannot be
ascertained, then the notice may be published for four weeks, once a week,
in the official newspaper of the Borough.
§ 166-37. Failure to comply.
If an owner does not comply with a notice served in accordance with this
article and due proof of service or publication is filed in the Borough Clerk's
Office, then the Borough Council may by resolution authorize the Public
Works Department to cause the required work to be done and paid for out
of municipal funds available for that purpose.
§ 166-38. Costs to be lien.
reimbursements will be paid up to the annual limit to those who file
first in time. [Added 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 40-2000; amended
8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003; 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 16-2015]
A. Any complaint, notice or other communication received by the Borough
concerning the possible existence of a public safety hazard due to the
absence or condition of sidewalks shall be forwarded to the
Engineering Administrator, who shall arrange for an investigation as to
whether a public safety hazard exists. The results of said investigation
and a recommended determination as to whether the construction or
repair of sidewalks should be required shall be reported to the Borough
Council.
B. If the Borough Council determines that there is a need to construct or
repair sidewalks, then the Council may by adoption of a resolution
authorize service of a notice on the abutting owners or owners
requiring the necessary specified work to be undertaken within a
specified period of time of not less than 30 days from the date of service
of such notice.
A. The cost of work undertaken pursuant to § 166-37 shall be certified by
the Director of Public Works. Said certification shall be filed with the
Borough Tax Collector, and a copy shall be forthwith forwarded to the
owner by registered mail, if the owner's address is known.
B. Upon the filing of the certification of costs with the Tax Collector, the
amount of the cost of such work shall be and become a lien upon the
§ 166-34 MADISON CODE § 166-38
158:484
§ 166-39. Removal of sidewalks.
§ 166-40. Permits required.
No person shall undertake any work involving the removal, repair,
reconstruction or construction of sidewalks without first obtaining all
permits required by Article III of this chapter.
§ 166-41. Construal of provisions.
abutting property in front of which said work was done to the same
extent that assessments for local improvements are liens in the
Borough under general law. Said costs shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for collection of such other assessments and shall bear
interest at the same rate.
C. The Borough may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction
to recover said amount against the owner of said land. In any such
action, a certified copy of the aforesaid certification shall be prima facie
evidence of a debt due from said owner to the Borough.
D. All moneys recovered or paid to the Borough under this section shall be
credited to the account out of which the cost of such work was paid.
A. No person shall remove any existing sidewalks abutting or adjacent to
any public street in the Borough, except for removal in connection with
the repair or replacement of sidewalks, unless said removal has been
authorized by resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Any person seeking such approval shall submit a request to the
Department of Public Works, which shall prepare a report and
recommendation for the Borough Council. Approval shall not be
recommended unless a determination is made that sidewalks are not
needed for pedestrian safety purposes, based upon consideration of
street characteristics, traffic volume, pedestrian volume, the existence
of sidewalks on nearby properties and other pertinent factors. Any such
approval shall be conditioned upon a requirement that the land be
properly graded and seeded following the sidewalk removal.
C. In the event that sidewalks are removed without the prior approval
required by this section, the owner of the abutting property may be
directed to construct new sidewalks in accordance with the
requirements and procedures set forth in this article.
A. The provisions of this Article shall be deemed to be supplemental to the
provisions of Chapter 195 and shall not impair or negate any provisions
of said Chapter 195 concerning requirements for the construction of
sidewalks in connection with subdivisions, site plans and other
development approvals.
§ 166-38 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-41
158:485
§ 166-42. Severability.
If any provision, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, and to this
end, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable.
B. The provisions of this article shall not impair or negate the authority of
the Borough to construct or reconstruct sidewalks in connection with
road reconstruction projects.
§ 166-41 MADISON CODE § 166-42
158:486
ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Dining Licenses
[Adopted 4-10-1995 by Ord. No. 15-95; amended 5-29-1996 by Ord.
No. 12-96; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 33-2015]
§ 166-43. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to allow portions of the public
sidewalks in front of eating establishments to be used for sidewalk dining
subject to issuance of a sidewalk dining license and strict compliance
with all conditions set forth herein. This limited authorization to use the
public sidewalks is intended to advance the public purposes of stimulating
economic activity and providing amenities in the business districts of the
Borough of Madison, and such authorization shall be solely in the nature
of a revocable license which shall not be deemed to vest licensees with
any property interest or other rights in the public sidewalks. The "sidewalk
area" for purposes of this chapter shall be defined as the right of way in
front of the dining establishment between the building and the street.
§ 166-44. License required.
No person shall engage in or allow sidewalk dining on any public sidewalk
without having first obtained a sidewalk dining license.
§ 166-45. Application for license.
An application, sworn to by the applicant, for a sidewalk dining license
shall be filed annually with the Borough Clerk on forms supplied by the
Clerk. The forms shall require the following information and such additional
information as deemed necessary:
A. The name of the applicant and the address.
B. The name and address of the eating establishment where sidewalk
dining is to be maintained.
C. A description of the dimensions of the area and the number of tables to
be used for sidewalk dining.
D. Written consent of the owner of the premises, if other than the
applicant.
E. An applicant wishing to serve alcohol on the sidewalk dining area must
execute a revocable agreement with the Borough to have conditional
use of the side walk as a right of way. Any licensed premises must
secure and provide copies to the Borough of all necessary permits from
the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control to extend their
licensed premises in accordance with applicable New Jersey law.
F. A certificate of insurance providing at least $1,000,000 of
comprehensive general liability extending premises coverage to all
§ 166-43 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-45
158:487
§ 166-46. Application review.
§ 166-47. Fees.
The annual license fee for each and every premises on which sidewalk
dining is conducted shall be $100.
§ 166-48. License terms and conditions.
activities associated with sidewalk dining and listing the Borough of
Madison as an additional insured with respect to such activities.
G. A check payable to the Borough of Madison in the amount of the license
fee required by § 166-47.
H. Execution and filing with the Borough Clerk of an indemnification
agreement pursuant to which the licensee, in further consideration of
the issuance of the license, shall agree to forever defend, protect,
indemnify and save harmless the Borough, its officers, agents and
employees, from and against any and all claims, causes of action,
injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of or
which may arise out of the licensee's operation of it sidewalk dining
establishment.
I. Execution and filing with the Borough Clerk of a maintenance
agreement pursuant to which the licensee, in further consideration of
the issuance of the license, shall agree, at the Borough's option, either
to repair at its sole cost and expense any damage caused to the
sidewalk by the operation of its sidewalk dining operation, or to
reimburse the Borough in full for all costs and expenses incurred by it
in making any such repairs.
J. The Borough Clerk may require a bond to be filed by the licensee in an
amount to be fixed by the Borough.
A. The Borough Clerk shall review the application and investigation report
on each applicant. The Borough Clerk shall approve or deny the
application, taking into consideration the factors set forth in § 166-45.
B. Any applicant who is denied a license may request in writing a hearing
on the denial decision before the Borough Council.
A. A sidewalk dining license shall be valid only through November 15 of a
given year, and a new license must be obtained for each year.
B. A sidewalk dining license may not be transferred.
C. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises
prior to the use of the premises for sidewalk dining.
§ 166-45 MADISON CODE § 166-49
158:488
§ 166-49. Regulations.
The conduct of sidewalk dining pursuant to a license issued under this
article shall be subject to all of the following restrictions and requirements:
A. Public sidewalk dining may be conducted in the Central Business
Districts (CBD-1 and CBD-2), General Business Area (GBA) and Multi-
Use Commercial District (C), as designated on the Madison Zoning
Map.
B. The sidewalk dining area must not inhibit pedestrian traffic on public
sidewalks, and an area must be open and unobstructed for pedestrian
traffic between the closest edge of the cafe-type tables and the curbline,
which area shall have a minimum width of the greater of four feet or 1/2
of the sidewalk width.
C. Restaurateurs shall not place anything in an alleyway or walkway or set
up tables in such a manner as to block any alleyways or walkways or
any building entrance/egress. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or reduce
in any manner the clear width of any exit discharge passageway, as
determined by the clear width opening of the entrance/egress door(s).
The passageway shall be as straight as possible leading directly to the
street.
D. The only items permitted are tables, chairs, umbrellas and containers
for the disposal of recyclable cans/bottles and garbage.
E. Restaurateurs shall not place any table, sign, umbrella or other item in
such a manner as to block any municipal signs, receptacles for garbage,
public benches or other public amenity, including fire hydrants.
F. Restaurateurs must provide for the disposal of recyclable cans/bottles
and garbage. Public receptacles for garbage shall not be used. Sidewalk
areas shall be kept clean during hours of operation. Litter shall not be
permitted on adjoining sidewalks or property.
G. Restaurateurs are prohibited from serving drivers or passengers of
vehicles. All customers must be seated throughout their meal.
H. Restaurateurs are prohibited from using public utility hookups.
I. All sound systems are prohibited.
J. All food preparation shall be in the regular kitchen area of the
restaurant, not outside.
K. All outdoor food service is subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code.
L. The placement of outdoor tables shall be limited to the area
immediately in front of existing and/or properly approved restaurants,
cafes or eating establishments. No portion of any sidewalk dining
equipment, including chairs, tables and opened umbrellas, shall
§ 166-49 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-49
158:489
§ 166-50. Suspension and revocation of license.
Any license may be suspended or revoked for good cause by the Borough
Council, including but not limited to a misrepresentation of the information
supplied in the application, the conviction of a crime, a violation of any
ordinance, statute or government regulation or a violation of this article.
§ 166-51. Enforcement.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for licensing and the collection
of fees. This chapter shall otherwise be enforced by the Zoning Officer,
Madison Police Department and the Board of Health, as to the Sanitary
Code.
§ 166-52. Violations and penalties.
Any violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500 as determined by the Municipal Court. Each day
the violation shall continue after a notice and a reasonable opportunity to
correct or remedy the violation shall constitute a separate violation.
encroach upon the sidewalk area in a manner to block, impede or
cover adjacent store fronts, doors or windows in front of other business
establishments.
M. Sidewalk dining may commence March 1 and may continue through
November 15.
N. Permissible hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
O. Wine and beer are the only alcoholic beverages that may be consumed
at a sidewalk dining establishment on the condition that table service is
provided.
P. Everything must be removed and sidewalks must be washed daily by
10:30 p.m.
Q. The Borough retains the right to temporarily suspend a sidewalk dining
license to allow for construction activity, utility repairs, special events
or for other reason as deemed appropriate by the Borough Council, with
reasonable advance notice to be given to affected licensees.
R. Restaurateurs must comply with the provisions of the Smoke-Free Air
Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 to 64, including displaying the appropriate
designated site-specific conditions for smoking that are appropriate to
their particular circumstances and environments. Moreover, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63 and N.J.A.C. 8:6-2.3, smoking is
prohibited at a sidewalk dining establishment if smoking in the exterior
area results in migration, seepage, or recirculation of smoke to an
indoor public place or a workplace at which smoking is prohibited.
S. The licensee shall comply with all other Borough ordinances.
§ 166-49 MADISON CODE § 166-53
158:490
§ 166-53. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough Clerk, in the denial
or revocation of a sidewalk dining license, shall have the right to appeal
to the Borough Administrator. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Borough Clerk, within 30 days after the notice of the action complained of
has been served personally upon the licensee, or mailed, postage prepaid,
to the licensee at the address given by the licensee in making application
under § 166-44 herein, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds
for appeal. The Borough Clerk shall set a time and place of hearing for the
appeal, at which time the Borough Administrator shall conduct a hearing
and affirm, modify or reverse the action appealed from.
§ 166-54. Severability.
Each section of this article is an independent section, and the holding of any
section or part thereof to be unconstitutional or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other
section or part thereof.
§ 166-53 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-54
158:491
Chapter 168
(RESERVED)
Chapter 170
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 75. Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 170-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-10-1967 by Ord. No. 860]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POOL, PUBLIC — Any basin or structure for which water is primarily used,
including but not limited to a pool, spa or hot tub, for sports and recreation
by the public and for which a fee may or may not be charged, including
any swimming pool operated by a group, association or club, whether the
use thereof is restricted to members of said group, association or club or
otherwise.[Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any artificial or semiartificial container or
receptacle for the containment of water having an inside depth at any point
greater than 12 inches, located outdoors and used or intended to be used
for swimming or bathing by the owner or lessee of the property on which it
is situate, or by the family or guests of such owner or lessee as an accessory
use to a residence.
§ 170-2. Permit required. [Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall, within the Borough of Madison,
construct or maintain any private swimming pool, as defined in this
chapter, until such person, firm or corporation shall first have made
application for the same to and have been granted a permit therefor by
the Building Official of the Borough of Madison, as in the case of any
other building or structure.
B. It shall be unlawful to continue the use and occupancy of a public pool
until a copy of a valid bonding and grounding certificate has been
provided to the Borough Construction Official. The bonding and
grounding certificate shall be valid for a period of five years from the
date of issuance.103
103. Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to building permits, see Ch. 75, Building
Construction. Original Section 85.3 of the 1970 Revised Ordinances, which immediately
followed this section and prohibited pools in front yards, was deleted 6-14-1976 by Ord.
No. 15-76. See now Ch. 195, Zoning, §§ 195-16 and 195-35.
§ 166-54 MADISON CODE § 170-3
168:492
§ 170-3. Fences and gates. [Amended 7-10-1967 by Ord. No. 860]
Every private swimming pool within the Borough of Madison shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height,
which shall be so constructed as to not have openings, holes or gaps larger
than four inches in any dimension, except doors and gates. If a picket fence
is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed four
inches. Said fence or wall shall be so constructed a distance of at least
three feet from the outside edge of the swimming pool. A dwelling house
or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates and
doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing
and self-latching device for keeping the gates or door securely closed at all
times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which
forms part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Any existing private
swimming pools shall be provided with an enclosing fence or wall and gate
within 45 days of the date of final adoption of this chapter.104
§ 170-4. Artificial lights.
Artificial lights used or maintained in connection with any private swimming
pool above the surface of the water shall be directed away from adjacent
dwellings.
§ 170-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter may, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom said conviction was obtained. Each day
during which any violation of this chapter shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate violation hereof.
Chapter 173
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulation of vehicles and traffic
generally — See Ch. 185.
104. Editor's Note: Original Section 85.5 of the 1970 Revised Ordinances, which immediately
followed this section and provided that no swimming pool be constructed closer than 10
feet to any side or rear line of the premises, was deleted 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76. See
now Ch. 195, Zoning, §§ 195-16 and 195-35.
§ 170-3 TAXICABS § 173-1
173:493
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
CLERK — The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
COUNCIL — The Council or governing body of the Borough of Madison.
DRIVER — Includes any person who, while occupying any taxicab or livery,
drives, conducts and directs the actual mechanical operation thereof,
whereby passengers are transported therein for hire.
LIVERY — Includes any motor vehicle (other than a bus, taxicab or motor
vehicle used in the conduct of a funeral), which is owned or used for the
purpose of transporting passengers for hire and which is hired by specific
charter or for a particular contract, or by the day or other fixed period,
and for which use there is charged a fare or price agreed upon in advance
between the owner or operator and the passenger.
MADISON CENTER — Includes those portions of Waverly Place and Lincoln
Place set apart for the exclusive use of a designated number of taxicabs
and the property adjacent to the railroad station available for the use of
taxicabs.[Added 4-11-1960 by Ord. No. 708]
OPERATOR — Includes any person who owns, directs, conducts or is in
charge of the actual operations of any taxicab or livery business or of any
taxicab or livery, either as owner, manager, driver or otherwise.
OWNER — Includes any person who holds legal title to any taxicab or livery,
any conditional vendee or lessee or any other person having an interest in
said vehicle which shall entitle him to the immediate right of possession
thereof.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership or corporation, singular or
plural, unless the contrary is clearly expressed.
PUBLIC TAXICAB STAND — Includes a section of a public street or other
public place set apart for the exclusive use of a designated number of
taxicabs. Such section shall be distinctly marked by appropriate metal signs
as required by motor vehicle and traffic regulations of the State of New
Jersey. A taxicab stand may be further identified by appropriate markings
and lettering upon the surface of the street or public place.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle, other than a bus or livery, which is
operated or engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire.
§ 173-2. Owner's license required; exceptions.
Except as hereinafter set forth, no taxicab or livery shall be driven or
operated within the Borough or shall be used or engaged in the business
of transporting persons for hire until the owner thereof shall have first
obtained a license therefor from the Borough. The provisions of this section
§ 173-1 MADISON CODE § 173-2
173:494
shall not apply to out-of-town operators who may deliver passengers in
Madison or pass through the Borough.
§ 173-3. Operator's license required.
No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any
taxicab or livery in the Borough until such person shall have obtained a
license therefor from the Borough, as hereinafter set forth.
§ 173-4. Enforcement.
The examination, licensing, regulation and inspection of taxicabs and
liveries, the examination and licensing of applicants or owners' and drivers'
licenses and the enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter shall be
under the control of the Council, and said Council shall have the power to
approve, deny, suspend or revoke any taxicab or livery owner's or driver's
license for cause, as hereinafter provided.
§ 173-5. Application forms.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing on
forms to be provided by the Borough.
§ 173-6. Changes of address.
Any subsequent change of address of any owner or any change in the
name or address of any operator or driver shall be reported by the owner,
operator or driver to the Borough Clerk, in writing, within three days after
such change, and the Borough Clerk shall immediately report such changes
of address to the Council.
§ 173-7. Transfers; licensing of substitute vehicle.
A. No owner of any licensed taxicab or livery shall sell, lease, rent, assign,
hire, transfer or in any other manner dispose of such taxicab or livery or
any taxicab or livery business without notification to the Council of the
Borough; and no owner of any licensed taxicab or livery shall sell, lease,
rent, assign, hire, transfer or in any other manner dispose of any
taxicab license without first obtaining proper transfer of the license.
B. In the event that any licensed owner shall acquire a vehicle during any
license period which is intended to be used as a substitute for one
previously licensed, the owner thereof shall immediately notify the
Borough Clerk, in writing, of such substitution and apply for a transfer
of the license from the previously licensed vehicle to the one to be
substituted therefor. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and the
payment of the transfer fee, the Borough Clerk shall approve the
transfer of such license. [Amended 3-9-1953 by Ord. No. 579;
8-1992 by Ord. No. 21-92]
§ 173-2 TAXICABS § 173-7
173:495
§ 173-8. Rental of vehicles.
No owner of any taxicab or livery shall hire out or rent the same to any other
person for use as a taxicab or livery within the Borough for a stipulated sum
and for a definite period of time without the consent of the Council of the
Borough.
§ 173-9. Operation of taxicab or livery by unlicensed drivers.
No owner of any taxicab or livery shall permit the same to be driven as
such by any person other than a person licensed to drive the same by the
Borough.
§ 173-10. Inspections. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 45-90]
No taxicab or livery license shall be approved or issued until the said
taxicab or livery has been thoroughly inspected and is found to be in a
clean and sanitary condition and mechanically safe for the transportation of
passengers. Inspections may be made at any time and shall be made by the
Madison Police Department. The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of such
inspections. Inspections shall be made once in every year, six months prior
to the expiration of the vehicle's state registration.
§ 173-11. Refusal or revocation of license for unsafe or unsanitary
conditions.
If, upon inspection, a taxicab or livery is found to be unsafe for the
transportation of passengers, or unclean and unsanitary, the license for the
same shall be refused or, if already issued, may be revoked or suspended by
the Council.
§ 173-12. Efficient service and the meeting of all trains required.
[Added 4-11-1960 by Ord. No. 708]
Every owner, operator and driver of a taxicab or taxicabs shall undertake
to render prompt and efficient service to the public at all times. This
C. During the period subsequent to such notification and prior to the
approval or disapproval by the Council of the transfer of the license to
permit the operation of such substituted vehicle, the owner may
operate such substituted vehicle or cause the same to be operated,
subject to the other provisions of this chapter. [Added 3-9-1953 by
Ord. No. 579]
D. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be construed as authorizing
any person who is not presently licensed as an owner to operate or
permit the operation of any taxicab or livery owned by him, as herein
defined, prior to the granting to him of an owner's license; nor does it
authorize the operation by a licensed owner of any additional vehicle
for which no owner's license has been granted, pending approval by the
Council. [Added 3-9-1953 by Ord. No. 579]
§ 173-7 MADISON CODE § 173-12
173:496
shall include making available, at the Madison railroad station, a sufficient
number of taxicabs to meet the needs of the public and to meet all trains,
including the train arriving at Madison from Hoboken at 2:19 a.m. Failure
to meet trains or to render prompt and efficient service shall be sufficient
grounds for the Council, after hearing, to suspend or revoke any license, or
said Council may, in its discretion, refuse to renew any license.
§ 173-13. Weekly hours of operation. [Added 5-13-1963 by Ord. No.
767]
Whereas it is the opinion of the Council of the Borough of Madison that the
failure to operate taxicabs for which licenses have been granted is contrary
to the best interest of the public, every taxicab owner or operator to whom
a taxicab license is granted shall operate said taxicab or cause the same to
be operated for the transportation of passengers during a total of at least
40 hours in each week. Failure to operate such taxicab during a period of
40 hours in any week, without good cause, shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of such license or the refusal to renew the same.
§ 173-14. Insurance requirements. [Amended 12-29-1970 by Ord.
No. 28-70]
§ 173-15. License fees for taxicabs and liveries.
A. No taxicab or livery shall be licensed until a policy of insurance shall
have been filed with the Borough Clerk in accordance with the
following prescribed schedules of coverage:
(1) Personal injury liability: $100,000 per person; $300,000 per
incident.
(2) Property damage liability: $50,000.
B. Said policy of insurance shall also be approved by the Borough
Attorney. In the event of any transfer of ownership or purchase of new
equipment (vehicles), it shall be the duty of owner to effect the proper
transfer of insurance coverage and furnish the same to the Borough
Clerk.
A. For every taxicab for which a license is issued by the Borough, the
owner thereof shall pay to said Borough annually a fee of $25. For every
livery for which a license is issued by the Borough, the owner thereof
shall pay a fee of $35 for the year 1991, $40 for the year 1992 and $50
for every year thereafter. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 45-90;
8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
B. The fee for any license granted after the first day of August in any year
shall be 1/2 of the annual fee for the vehicle for which the license is
applied. Every license shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of
the year for which the same is issued. Renewal applications for the
following year may be made on and after November 1.
§ 173-12 TAXICABS § 173-15
173:497
§ 173-16. Display of license card and fare rates in taxicabs.
Whenever a taxicab license is granted, the Borough Clerk shall also issue a
card containing the name of the owner, the license number of the vehicle,
the year of issue and the rates of fare as herein provided. Such card shall be
inserted in a card rack or frame to be provided by the owner and attached
in the inside of the taxicab visible to the passenger.
§ 173-17. Display of license card in liveries.
Upon issuance of a livery license, the Borough Clerk shall issue to the
licensee a card containing the name of the owner, the license number of the
vehicle and the year of issue. Said card shall remain in the livery for which
issued and shall be exhibited by the driver or owner thereof upon request.
§ 173-18. License transfer fee.
Any license issued for any taxicab or livery may be transferred in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter after approval of the Council
and upon the payment to the Borough of a transfer fee of $10 for each
vehicle for which the license is to be transferred.
§ 173-19. License fees for driver's license; term of license.
[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 45-90; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
37-2003]
A fee of $10 for the year 1991, $12.50 for the year 1992 and $25 for every
year thereafter shall be paid for each driver's license and for each and every
renewal thereof. Every driver's license shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of the year for which it was issued. The license fee as provided
above shall be paid to the Borough Clerk at the time the application for the
license is made.
§ 173-20. Qualifications of applicants for driver's license. [Amended
4-11-1960 by Ord. No. 708; 5-13-1963 by Ord. No. 767]
Every applicant for a driver's license hereunder shall be:
C. All fees shall be paid to and the licenses shall be issued by the Borough
Clerk. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 45-90]
A. A resident of the State of New Jersey at the time of making application.
[Amended 11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 47-86]
B. The holder of a New Jersey auto driver's license.
C. Able to understand, read and write the English language.
D. In possession of a satisfactory knowledge of traffic regulations105 and
geography of the Borough and its surroundings.
105. Editor's Note: For current Borough traffic regulations, see Ch. 185, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 173-15 MADISON CODE § 173-20
173:498
§ 173-21. Matters disqualifying applicants for driver's license.
No person will be granted a driver's license hereunder who shall:
§ 173-22. Driver's license application requirements; renewals.
[Amended 4-11-1960 by Ord. No. 708; 5-13-1963 by Ord. No. 767]
E. In good physical and mental condition, as well as of good character.
A. Be physically impaired in a manner to affect his ability to drive.
B. Be addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
C. Have a record as a habitual violator of the provisions of the New Jersey
motor vehicle and traffic regulations.
D. Have a record of having been involved in accidents occasioned by his
negligence or carelessness.
E. Have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of drugs or intoxicating liquor or of reckless driving, unless a
determination is made that such offense(s) should not be used as
grounds for disqualification based upon consideration of the nature,
circumstances and seriousness of such offense(s), age at the time of the
offense(s), evidence of rehabilitation and other pertinent factors.
[Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89]
F. Have been convicted of a crime which relates adversely to the business
for which a license is sought, which shall be determined in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2, based upon consideration of the following
factors or any other factors: [Added 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89]
(1) The nature and duties of the business for which a license is sought.
(2) The nature and seriousness of the crime.
(3) The circumstances under which the crime occurred.
(4) The date of the crime.
(5) The age of the person when the crime was committed.
(6) Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident.
(7) Social conditions which may have contributed to the crime.
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
in the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work-release programs or
the recommendation of persons who have or have had the applicant
under their supervision.
§ 173-20 TAXICABS § 173-22
173:499
§ 173-23. Approval of applications. [Amended 3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
3-89]
Every application for a driver's license, together with the other materials
and information required to be furnished in connection therewith under
the provisions of this chapter, shall be presented by the Borough Clerk to
the Council of the Borough of Madison. The Council shall then consider
said application, together with the information submitted therewith, and
shall approve or disapprove the granting of the license. The Council shall
notify the Borough Clerk of its action, and the same shall be entered in
the minutes of the Borough Council. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2,
if an application is denied based upon the grounds for disqualification
set forth in § 173-21F, the applicant shall be provided with a written
explanation based upon consideration of the factors enumerated therein.
A. Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall furnish with his
application three copies of a photograph of himself, of a size two inches
by two inches, taken within six months of the date of such application.
B. Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall also furnish with his
application a certificate of a reputable physician certifying that said
physician has examined the applicant within the thirty-day period
preceding the date of said application and that said applicant is of
sound physique, has good eyesight and is not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart ailment or any other infirmity of body.
C. Said applicant shall further present proof that within the thirty-day
period preceding the date of said application he has undergone and
satisfactorily passed a test indicating that his faculties of perception are
unimpaired and of a degree sufficient to permit him to properly operate
a taxicab without endangering persons or property by reason of lack of
perceptive ability or impairment thereof.
D. Every licensed taxicab driver who has complied with the provisions of
this section and who renews his taxicab driver's license annually
thereafter shall not be required to again furnish a certificate of fitness
until he presents his third successive annual application for renewal of
such license, when he shall again present with his application a
certificate indicating his fitness to operate a taxicab as hereinabove
required; provided, however, that, at the discretion of the Chief of
Police, every person of the age of 65 years or over shall, when applying
for a taxicab driver's license or renewal of any such license, present
proof of his fitness, as hereinabove set forth, with his application for
such license of renewal. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 37-94]
E. In order to ensure compliance with § 173-21 herein, every applicant
shall submit a completed form as provided for in § 34-18 of the Borough
Code for a criminal history background check. [Added 3-13-1989 by
Ord. No. 3-89]
§ 173-22 MADISON CODE § 173-24
173:500
§ 173-24. Issuance and display of licenses and identification cards.
[Amended 2-11-1980 by Ord. No. 1-80]
§ 173-25. Suspension or revocation of driver's license. [Amended
3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89]
The Council may suspend or revoke said driver's license as determined
under the circumstances to be appropriate in the interest of the public
safety and welfare if at any time after the issuance of any driver's license
hereunder the holder thereof is convicted of:
A. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements herein set forth and
approval by the Council, the Borough Clerk shall issue a driver's license
to the applicant.
B. Said Clerk shall also issue to the licensee an identification card
containing:
(1) The name of the licensee;
(2) A straight front view photograph of the licensee;
(3) The Borough license number; and
(4) A notice that in case of any complaint the Chief of Police of the
Borough should be notified.
C. While engaged as a taxicab driver, such licensee shall insert said
identification card in a card rack or frame, to be provided by the owner
of the taxicab which is being driven, and attached on the inside of the
vehicle in a place readily visible to the passengers. Said rack or frame
shall be of a type which will not conceal any of the information set forth
on the driver's identification card. The driver shall be responsible for
transferring his identification card to the taxicab being operated by him
at the time.
D. While engaged as a livery driver, such licensee shall have his
identification card in his possession and shall exhibit the same upon
request.
A. A crime or offense which relates adversely to the business for which the
license is held, as determined, in writing, according to consideration of
the factors specified in § 173-21F.
B. Operating any motor vehicle while under the influence of any drug or
intoxicant.
C. Reckless driving.
D. Habitual violations of the provisions of the New Jersey motor vehicle
and traffic laws or the parking and traffic regulations of the Borough of
Madison.106
E. Violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 173-24 TAXICABS § 173-25
173:501
§ 173-26. Temporary permits to drive taxicabs.
If the Chief of Police shall approve a driver's license and all other
requirements of this chapter relating to the application for a driver's license
have been complied with, including the payment of the license fee, the
Borough Clerk may issue to an applicant a temporary permit to enable
said applicant to drive a taxicab until the Council shall have considered
said application and either granted or rejected the same. Such temporary
permit shall immediately expire after consideration of said application by
the Council and the approval or rejection of the same.
§ 173-27. Suspension or revocation of owner's license.
The license of any owner of a taxicab or livery may also be suspended or
revoked if said owner permits the use of the same for any illegal or immoral
purpose or for violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 173-28. Designation of public taxicab stands; signs.
The Council is hereby authorized to designate by ordinance, as provided
in the motor vehicle and traffic regulations of the State of New Jersey,
public taxicab stands at such places, as, in its judgment, public convenience
may from time to time require; and such public taxicab stands shall be
designated in the manner required by law.107 A metal sign or signs shall
also be attached to a stanchion or stanchions at the curb or displayed at
some other conspicuous place adjacent to every such taxicab stand, setting
forth the number of taxicabs which are permitted to occupy such stand. Not
more than the number of taxicabs set forth on the metal sign may remain
at the stand while awaiting employment. Taxicab stands may further be
designated by appropriate markings on the street pavement.
§ 173-29. Solicitation of patronage other than at designated stands
prohibited.
No taxicab driver shall be permitted to solicit patronage on any of the
streets or public places in the Borough, except at the designated stands or
locations created by ordinance.
§ 173-30. Standing at other than designated stands; solicitation of
business by cruising.
No taxicab, while waiting for employment by passengers, shall stand on any
public street or space other than that at or upon a taxicab stand designated
F. Using or permitting the use of any taxicab or livery driven by him or her
for any illegal or immoral purpose.
106. Editor's Note: For current Borough parking and traffic regulations, see Ch. 185, Vehicles
and Traffic.
107. Editor's Note: For designation of taxicab stands by ordinance of the Borough Council, see
Ch. 185, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 173-25 MADISON CODE § 173-30
173:502
or established in accordance with this chapter; nor shall any driver of such
taxicab seek employment by repeatedly or persistently driving a taxicab to
and fro in a short space before or by otherwise interfering with the proper
and orderly access to and egress from any theater, hall, public building,
railway station or other place of public gathering.
§ 173-31. Improper conduct and language.
No owner or driver of any taxicab or livery shall use indecent or profane
language, indulge in any loud, offensive or boisterous talk or shouting,
engage in any disorderly conduct or vex or annoy passengers or citizens. In
addition to any other penalty herein set forth, the Council may suspend or
revoke the license of any driver or owner who shall, in its opinion, be guilty
of such conduct.
§ 173-32. Misleading information; circuitous routes.
No owner or driver of any taxicab or livery licensed hereunder shall induce
any person to employ him or his vehicle by knowingly misinforming or
misleading any such person, nor shall any driver convey any passenger to
any place or by any route other than the most direct route unless otherwise
directed by said passenger.
§ 173-33. Lost or abandoned property in vehicles; disposition.
The driver of any taxicab or livery shall, immediately after the termination
of any hiring or employment, carefully search his taxicab or livery for any
property lost or abandoned therein. Such property, unless sooner claimed
by or delivered to the owner, must be delivered to the Chief of Police for
safekeeping within 24 hours after the finding thereof.
§ 173-34. Rates of fare. [Amended 4-11-1960 by Ord. No. 708;
12-9-1968 by Ord. No. 28-68; 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 1-74; 12-8-1975
by Ord. No. 34-75; 4-9-1979 by Ord. No. 7-79; 12-27-1979 by Ord.
No. 32-79; 2-11-1980 by Ord. No. 1-80]
A. The prices that may be charged by the owner, operator or driver of any
taxicab for the transportation of passengers for hire, on any day
between 7:00 a.m. and the following 11:00 p.m., prevailing time, shall
not exceed the amounts herein stated:
(1) For transporting one passenger only between Madison Center and
any location within a radius of one mile in any direction from said
Center: $1.75; and for each additional passenger transported
between the same points during the same trip: $0.50.
(2) For transporting one passenger from Madison Center to a location
which is within the limits of the Borough of Madison but is outside a
radius of one mile in any direction from the Center: $2; and for
each additional passenger between the same points during the
same trip: $0.50.
§ 173-30 TAXICABS § 173-34
173:503
§ 173-35. Payment of fare; duty to convey persons upon request;
fare disputes.
(3) For transporting one passenger from any location other than the
Center to any destination other than the Center: $1.75; and for
each additional passenger transported between the same points
during the same trip: $0.50.
B. The owner, operator or driver of any taxicab for the transportation of
any passenger for hire, between any locations within the Borough of
Madison on any occasion between 11:00 p.m. and the following 7:00
a.m., prevailing time, may charge a minimum fee of $2.25; and for each
additional passenger transported between the same points during the
same trip: $0.50.
C. Every driver of a taxicab shall, while operating the same, carry within
such cab a map of the Borough of Madison, of a type and size to be
approved by said Borough, indicating thereon which portions of said
Borough are and which are not within the radius of one mile from
Madison Center, as herein defined. Every driver shall, when so
requested by a passenger in the taxicab being driven by him or when
requested by any police officer of the Borough of Madison, produce said
map and allow the same to be examined by said passenger or police
officer.
A. Every owner, operator or driver of any taxicab shall have the right to
demand payment of the regular fare in advance and may refuse
employment unless it is prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse or
neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request as
designated by this chapter to any place within four miles of the
Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad Station at Madison, nor
exhort or demand any sum other than as provided in this chapter;
provided, however, that taxicabs actively engaged in commuting or
answering a call shall not be deemed to violate this section for refusing
to carry or transport other passengers.
B. All disputes as to any rate of fare to be charged or as to any demand and
refusal for transportation shall, at the request of the owner, operator,
driver or passenger, be determined by the Chief of Police or other
officer then in charge of Police Headquarters. In the event it shall then
be determined that such passenger is entitled to transportation to the
requested destination for the price claimed by him and said owner,
operator or driver shall continue to refuse to effect said transportation
for the price so determined to be correct, then said owner, operator or
driver may be summoned before the Judge of the Municipal Court, who
shall determine the facts in the case, and, in the event that it shall
appear that such refusal on the part of the owner, operator or driver is a
violation of this chapter, then said owner, operator or driver shall be
subject to the penalties hereof.
§ 173-34 MADISON CODE § 173-36
173:504
§ 173-36. Number of taxicabs limited.
At no time in the Borough of Madison shall licenses for the operation of
more than 18 taxicabs be in effect, and the Council shall refuse to grant
any license in excess of that number, in the interest of the public safety and
welfare.
§ 173-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100. Each 24 hours of continuous violation of any of the provisions hereof
shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
Chapter 175
THEATERS
§ 175-1. License fees.
The annual license fee to be charged for licenses to maintain and operate
theaters in the Borough of Madison is hereby fixed at the sum of $0.25 for
each seat in every theater for which a license is required.
Chapter 175A
TOBACCO, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 163. Vending machines — See Ch. 232.
§ 175A-1. Tobacco and cigarette vending machines and display
containers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco/cigarettes through
a tobacco/cigarette vending machine or from a self-service freestanding or
attached display container of tobacco/cigarettes in the Borough of Madison.
§ 173-36 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 175A-2
175A:505
§ 175A-2. Removal of tobacco and cigarette machines and display
containers.
All tobacco/cigarette machines and self-service freestanding or attached
display containers made unlawful by the terms of this chapter shall be
removed within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 175A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Madison Board of Health.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, personal
representative, receiver, trustee or any other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device upon which,
upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products in any form.
SELF-SERVICE FREESTANDING OR ATTACHED TOBACCO/CIGARETTE
DISPLAY CONTAINER — Any promotion of tobacco/cigarette products in
any area of an establishment not specifically behind a sales counter or
locked display container where a customer can take the tobacco/cigarette
products without the assistance of any employee of the establishment.
§ 175A-4. Enforcement; complaints; inspections; obstruction of
justice.
A. Whenever the Health Officer, or his/her designee, reasonably believes
there exists a violation of this chapter, he/she may issue a violation
notice and/or summons not later than 90 days after discovery of the
alleged violation. The complaint shall be written and shall state with
reasonable particularity the nature of the violation, including reference
to the section of the chapter alleged to have been violated. The
complaint shall be delivered by the police or sent by certified mail to the
alleged violator.
B. The Health Officer, or his designee, or any other person charged with
enforcement of this chapter, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premise, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer, or his designee, who
may request the assistance of the Madison Police Department or other
§ 175A-2 MADISON CODE § 175A-4
175A:506
§ 175A-5. Severability; construal of provisions.
§ 175A-6. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 for each offense, together
with court costs. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Madison or before such other judicial officer having authority
under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 176
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 183.
§ 176-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the nondiscriminatory and
nonexclusionary regulation of local towing and storage operators engaged
in the business of removing and storing motor vehicles, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.49.
§ 176-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — A one-time charge per vehicle for the purpose of
compensating the Borough of Madison for the preparation of the regulating
police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or her
official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter through
the Health Department or Police Department.
A. If any section or paragraph of this chapter is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section or paragraph shall, to the extent
that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force
and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the
remaining sections or paragraphs of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall be liberally construed for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the Borough of Madison.
§ 175A-4 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-2
175A:507
and administrating the towing files and documentation and impounding of
vehicles in the Borough of Madison.
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile, station wagon, van, sport
utility vehicle or pickup truck.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
DAYTIME HOURS — From 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., prevailing time,
Monday through Friday.
IMPOUNDED FOR INVESTIGATION — Any vehicle that is impounded for a
official police investigation and processing will be towed at owner's expense
directly to the Madison Police impound yard unless otherwise directed by
the officer in charge. The vehicle will remain until the investigation is
completed by the Madison Police Department and storage fees have been
paid.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which an automobile
comes in contact with any other object for which the automobile must
be towed or removed for placement in a storage facility. This includes all
situations which are accidental as to the insured even if they were caused
by the intentional acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the
insured or not otherwise involved with the insured.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — From 4:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, and
all day Saturday and Sunday.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site
security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all other
storage facilities not defined above as inside building or outside secured.
ROAD SERVICE — Assisting a motor vehicle without towing or hookup.
Service such as providing fuel (plus cost of fuel), jump start, change flat tire
(with available spare), simple opening of vehicle lockout, etc.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private
passenger automobiles.
§ 176-2 MADISON CODE § 176-2
175A:508
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
TRUCK — Any motor vehicle other than an automobile as defined above
and which requires heavy-duty towing. medium duty: 10,001-26,000 pounds
GVW; heavy duty: 26,001 pounds GVW and up.
WINCHING — Moving a vehicle by use of the cable or winch from a position
that is not accessible for direct hookup by conventional means of loading
onto a tow vehicle. It shall not include pulling a motor vehicle onto a tilt bed
or car carrier or lifting a vehicle with a conventional tow sling.
YARD TOW — The removal of the vehicle from the towing operator's storage
yard for the benefit of another towing operator who is taking the vehicle
from the storage site and whose tow vehicle is physically unable to gain
access to the vehicle while it is inside the storage yard.
§ 176-3. Towing regulations.
A. Removal of motor vehicles. Whenever a police officer orders the
removal of automobiles from private or public property, the officer shall
utilize the rotation lists established in § 176-3C of this chapter.
B. An officer may allow the driver of a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle
crash or a disabled motor vehicle to arrange for their own selection of a
wrecker to tow said vehicle, provided that such a request does not
impair traffic and will not require the officer to remain at the scene
after his normal responsibility is concluded.
C. Towing operators. [Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 32-2006]
(1) Every three years the Borough Council shall establish by resolution
a list of licensed towing operators pursuant to § 176-7 to be utilized
by the Police Department on a rotating basis. Such list shall be
utilized by members of the Police Department on a
nondiscriminatory basis. Only those towing operators who meet the
minimum standards of operator performance set forth in this
chapter shall be included on such list. The list may be modified by
Council at any time.
(2) Applications by towing operators shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk between October 1 and November 30 of the year preceding
the renewal of the three-year towing operator list. The Borough
Clerk shall advertise in the official newspaper of the Borough the
availability of said applications on or before September 1 of the
year preceding the renewal of the list of operators.
(3) Application.
(a) Towing service owners applying for Police Department towing
must submit to a criminal background investigation after
authorizing the police to do so (N.J.S.A. 53: 1-20.5 et seq.). The
required criminal history check for towing service owners will
§ 176-2 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-3
175A:509
include the disclosure of any crime or lower disorderly persons
offense or local ordinance offense as well. The applying towing
service owner shall be fingerprinted according to current New
Jersey State Police procedures. [Amended 1-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 1-2009]
(b) Additionally, any and all employees of a towing service
applying for police towing who will be operating towing
equipment involved in police towing shall be required to
submit for a criminal background check. Employees of said
towing companies shall be required to complete and submit a
Request for Criminal History Record Information form for this
purpose, at a cost of $18. The form for tow company employees
requires a cashier’s check, certified check or money order
payable to the Division of State Police-SBI.
(c) Results of background checks on both tow service owners and
their employees shall be forwarded from the Chief of Police’s
office to the Borough Clerk’s office along with his
recommendation on the application.
(4) Equipment. All towing operators shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) For classification as an automobile towing service, the operator
must possess one flatbed-style tow vehicle and one hoist-type
tow vehicle with a sling and wheel lift.
(b) For classification as a truck-towing service, the operator must
have one heavy-duty tow vehicle capable of towing a fully
loaded tractor-trailer weighing 80,000 pounds.
(c) All tow vehicles must carry the following equipment:
[1] Shovel.
[2] Fire extinguisher.
[3] Jumper cables.
[4] Tire-changing equipment and portable air tank.
[5] Jack and hammer.
[6] Pry bar or similar tool.
[7] Speedy Dry or similar liquid absorbent and disposal
container.
[8] Push broom.
[9] Two-way radio communication system or cellular
telephone.
§ 176-3 MADISON CODE § 176-3
175A:510
§ 176-4. License fees, terms.
§ 176-5. Insurance.
[10] Hazmat cleanup kit.
(d) All towing vehicles must have amber emergency warning lights
mounted on the vehicle so as to warn approaching traffic of
their presence. The size and location of these lights must
conform to New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicle standards.
The operator must have an amber light permit.
(e) All towing vehicles must carry a copy of the rate schedule
established by Madison Borough. Said schedule must also be
displayed in a conspicuous manner at the operator's place of
business.
(5) Facilities. Each operator must have a storage lot and place of
business within Madison Borough, or within a two-mile radius of
the Madison Borough corporate limits. The towing business and
storage lot must comply with all zoning ordinances and
regulations108 in the municipality in which they are located.
(6) Availability and response time. Each operator must be available 24
hours a day, seven days a week, and must respond within 20
minutes during daytime hours and 30 minutes during nighttime
hours of the original telephone call request by the Police
Department.
A. The length of the license shall be for a three-year period. Each year
shall require passage of background check by owners and employees.
B. The license shall not be transferable to another owner without approval
of the Borough of Madison and posting of proper fee.
C. The Borough Council shall set the fees for the three-year period for
towing and storage. This license will take effect January 1, 2003.
D. The application fee will be $500 for the three-year term of the license.
E. All complaints referring to towing service shall be directed to the Police
Department by the applicant and/or his/her employees.
F. It is the responsibility of the applicant to notify the Borough of Madison
at once upon cancellation of business insurance.
G. The Borough of Madison shall not be responsible for insurance
coverage to the applicant.
A. The applicant shall provide insurance by a state approved licensed
carrier and must indemnify the Borough of Madison.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Land Development.
§ 176-3 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-5
175A:511
§ 176-6. Fees established.
B. The applicant shall maintain insurance coverage as set forth herein
during the entire length of the towing contract.
C. The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance indicating the
applicant has the minimum coverage of insurance as follows:
(1) Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(2) Workers' compensation for all employees.
(3) Garage keepers' liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
(5) Comprehensive general liability to provide complete protection to
the borough against any and all risks of loss or liability.
(6) Policies endorsed to provide collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
(7) The Borough shall be named as an additional insured.
(8) Theft insurance on stored vehicles.
D. The applicant shall also provide the Borough of Madison with a hold
harmless agreement, in a form satisfactory to the Borough Attorney.
A. Automobiles and motorcycles. The fee schedule for towing services,
storage and administrative services shall be established by the Borough
Council by resolution.109
B. Trucks. The fee schedule for towing services and storage shall be
established by the Borough Council by resolution.110
C. Inclement weather conditions. The towing operator may, during
inclement weather conditions, such as but not limited to snow storm,
ice storm, black ice conditions, flooding, or during a state of emergency,
charge an extra 20% of the final invoice (if towed under normal
conditions) for towing services provided (See Fee Schedule).
D. Use of a Hazmat kit by licensed tower associated with the cleanup of
fluid spills is $75 per kit.
109. Editor's Note: See § 176-10.
110. Editor's Note: See § 176-10.
§ 176-5 MADISON CODE § 176-7
175A:512
§ 176-7. Issuance of towing operator licenses.
The Borough Council shall by public resolution authorize the issuance of
towing operator licenses after consideration of the applications submitted
in conformity with this chapter.
§ 176-8. Regulations for towing service operators.
A. Release of impounded vehicles. No impounded vehicle is to be released
without proper authorization from the Police Department. Vehicle
release arrangements must be available from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon Saturday
(excluding New Jersey state holidays). The owner of the vehicle (or his
designee) shall provide a paid receipt from the towing operator, and
then respond to the Madison Borough Police Department to arrange for
the release of his/her vehicle from the police impound yard, or towing
operator's facility, as may be the case. An invoice for the towing service
provided, (when a vehicle is towed to the police impound yard) will be
left with the vehicle, as well as the keys for said vehicle. The Police
Department will retain custody of both the invoice and keys for all
vehicles towed to the police impound yard. All transactions of this type
will be recorded in a log book, and the principal of the towing
establishment will be required to sign the log book to acknowledge
receipt of said payment. The hours for release of the impounded vehicle
shall be Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. through 1:00 p.m. on Saturday. Appointment for release of the
vehicle shall be made through the Shift Supervisor, who shall be
responsible to ensure that all laws and procedures concerning the
release of vehicles are followed. The Borough shall supply junk titles or
good titles for abandoned vehicles in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:10.1 et seq., for vehicles unclaimed over 30 days. The
Borough shall compensate the towing service for the towing bill for
such vehicles unclaimed for over 30 days, for vehicles stored in the
police impound yard. A junk title shall be applied for, and the towing
invoice paid after the Borough recovers the value of the vehicle. For any
vehicles that are towed and stored by the towing operator, the Borough
shall apply for a junk title, and compensate the towing operator for
towing fees and storage, up to the limit of the value of said vehicle.
B. Insurance; indemnity.
(1) Each operator on the approved lists shall furnish the Borough Clerk
with a certificate of insurance from an insurance company
satisfactory to the Borough. Each certificate of insurance shall
identify the coverage provided and shall provide that such
insurance shall not be changed or canceled without giving 10 days'
prior written notice to the Borough by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Specific reference to the rotating lists of towing
operators shall be made on all policies of insurance.
§ 176-7 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-8
175A:513
(2) The applicant shall provide the minimum coverage of insurance as
defined in § 176-5(c).
(3) Each operator shall also provide the Borough of Madison with a
hold harmless agreement to indemnify and save the Borough
harmless from all damages and claims for damages which may be
made by any person for bodily injury or property damages resulting
from the operator's performance.
(4) Each operator shall have an on-hook vehicle rider on their towing
insurance policy. This rider will provide insurance should the towed
vehicle become uncoupled from the tow truck during towing
operations.
(5) The applicant shall maintain insurance for the entire length of the
towing contract and provide certificate of insurance on an annual
basis to the Borough Clerk.
C. Enforcement. The Police Department is designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with due process of law. In
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief is hereby
authorized to adopt additional reasonable regulations which are not
inconsistent with this chapter.
D. Abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
(1) Any vehicle which is not claimed by the owner within 30 days of
impoundment shall be reported by the operator storing the vehicle
to the Police Department, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 through
39:10A-7.
(2) After expiration of the thirty-day period, the Police Department
shall make application for title to the Division of Motor Vehicles as
per standing general orders. Vehicles that remain unclaimed after
all requirements of the general orders are met shall be auctioned
off to recover towing costs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 through
39:10A-7.
(3) Any operator found to be disposing of vehicles in violation of this
procedure will be charged with misapplication of entrusted
property (N.J.S.A. 2C:21-15) and will be prohibited from providing
service to Madison Borough.
E. Rights of owners.
(1) The owner of any vehicle towed shall have the right to remove
property belonging to him or her from the stored vehicle unless a
police hold is marked on the towing form.
(2) The vehicle owner or his or her representative shall have the right
to take photographs of stored vehicles.
§ 176-8 MADISON CODE § 176-8
175A:514
§ 176-9. Violations and penalties.
F. Public inspection. This chapter, all regulations adopted by the Police
Chief and the fee schedules of individual tow operators shall be
available to the public during normal business hours.
G. Operator dealings with public.
(1) The operator shall always act in a professional manner and at all
times be courteous and respectful toward members of the public,
as well as representatives of the Borough of Madison. If members
of the public, especially those whose cars may have been towed or
impounded, resort to strong language, threats and unbecoming
behavior toward the operator, the operator is expected to exercise
restraint and not to respond in kind and thereby reflect unfavorably
on the Borough of Madison and/or the Police Department.
(2) Repeated reports of discourteous behavior by the operator, which
can be substantiated and documented, may be considered by the
Borough as sufficient cause for removal of the operator from the
rotational list of automobile towing operators and truck towing
operators as established consistent with § 176-3C.
H. Removal of towed vehicles; location for storage.
(1) A vehicle that is removed by a towing company under this chapter,
in which the Police Department has a duty to impound said vehicle
for investigative or security reasons, shall be towed to the Police
Department impound yard and stored there, until all investigations
are completed and/or proper paperwork to support the release of
the motor vehicle back to the owner or his designee are presented
for Police Department approval.
(2) A vehicle that is removed by a towing company that the Police
Department has no interest in (i.e. disabled motor vehicle or one
that is involved in a crash without further Police Department
investigation required) may be towed back to the towing operator's
facility, or to a location of the vehicle owner's choice, provided the
towing operator is in a position to comply with such a request.
A. Complaint and hearing. The governing body shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any towing privileges issued pursuant to this section
for good cause upon written complaint of the Police Chief. In the event
that a towing operator fails or refuses to follow call out schedule or
refuses to retain the proper equipment, personnel or facilities
necessary to perform the services required for towing operators, or that
the services performed are not satisfactory or violate any provision of
this section, rule or regulation duly adopted, the Police Chief shall file a
written complaint with the governing body that there is probable cause
for revocation or suspension. Written notice of such complaint and the
basis of the complaint shall be given to the towing operator and said
§ 176-8 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-9
175A:515
§ 176-10. Towing and storage fees. [Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No.
32-2006; 8-27-2007 by Ord. No. 54-2007]
operator shall be entitled to a hearing before the governing body prior
to final determination of the complaint by the governing body.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any operator who violates any section of this chapter, in addition to
any other penalties provided by law, shall be subject to suspension
of towing privileges for one month for a first offense, three months
for a second offense and six months for a third offense. If the
operator commits a fourth offense, its right to provide towing
services to the Borough shall be permanently revoked, and the
towing operator shall be removed from the list of approved
operators.
(2) Any operator who violates the operator rate schedule shall receive
a fine of $250 and suspension of towing privileges for one month. A
second violation will result in a fine of $400 and suspension of
towing privileges for six months. A third violation will result in a
fine of $500 and permanent revocation of towing privileges.
(3) In all cases, if an operator overcharges a vehicle owner, the excess
moneys paid shall be returned by the operator to the owner within
10 business days.
(4) A towing operator may be removed from the list adopted pursuant
to § 176-3C, by resolution of the Borough Council, if its
performance is determined to be unreliable or inadequate. If there
is a breach of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable
regulations, an operator may be removed from the list by the Chief
of Police pending action by the Borough Council.
(5) Violators who are licensed as an automobile repair facility will be
reported to the Division of Motor Vehicles. Insurers may also report
violators under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:23-8 to N.J.S.A.
17:23-15.
A. Fee schedule.
Service Fee
Service call $65, cars; $95, trucks
Light-duty calls $125
Heavy-duty $350 per hour
Recovery calls $150, cars; $350, trucks
Storage rate (daily) $35, cars; $85, trucks; $175,
tractor-trailer
Inside storage rate (daily) $45
§ 176-9 MADISON CODE § 176-10
175A:516
§ 176-11. General provisions.
Service Fee
Mileage rate $4.50, cars
Hourly rate (heavy and recovery) $350
Recovery rates $150, cars; $350, trucks
Sliding crane service $450 per hour
Cleanup $25 minimum
Yard/administration fee $40
Waiting time $85 per hour
Additional man/labor $85 per hour
Fuel surcharge (when applicable) 20% of service/tow rate
B. Salvage title. If the Madison Police call out a duty wrecker for accident
or impound, and the vehicle has no value (salvage), and the owner fails
to respond for payment, then the Borough of Madison will obtain title to
the vehicle for salvage. The towing company will absorb the storage
charge until the vehicle title is conveyed to the towing company by the
Borough of Madison to discard the vehicle.
A. The Borough of Madison assumes no liability in collecting of bills for
towing services.
B. The applicant shall keep records of all towing for a period of three years
or each year of contract, if not renewed, as to who was towed, vehicle
plate number, vehicle identification number, location of event, amount
charged and date and time of call.
C. The applicant shall not use a satellite storage yard not named in the
application.
D. The applicant shall not impose any penalty on a customer for service
during normal working hours relating to pickup of vehicle left for
safekeeping.
E. The applicant shall be responsible for the conduct of his/her employees.
The borough accepts no responsibility for their actions, nor are they
agents of the borough.
F. The schedule for towing and storage fees shall be in accordance with
this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49.
G. The need/calling-out of heavy-duty wrecker and vehicles exceeding five
tons shall be the responsibility of the designated emergency personnel
at the scene, taking into account public safety, response time and any
other existing factors that might have arisen. The applicant may or may
not have this service available. If so, they shall be given priority over
outside vendors.
§ 176-10 TOBACCO, SALE OF § 176-11
175A:517
Chapter 177
TRAILERS; TOURIST AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulation of parking and traffic
generally — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER OR CAMP CAR — Any vehicle used or intended for the use as
a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensed as
such, including self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles so designed,
constructed and reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such
a manner as to permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or
sleeping place for one or more persons and having no foundation other than
wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be integral with or portable by
said trailer or camp car.
§ 177-2. Parking on streets restricted; use as dwelling or sleeping
place prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any
street, road or avenue in the Borough of Madison for more than two hours.
No trailer or camp car, while parked within the limits of the Borough of
Madison, shall be used by any person as a dwelling place, place of abode or
sleeping place.
H. The Borough of Madison shall keep and maintain a separate rotating
list of towing contractors for the towing of abandoned or junk vehicles.
The collection of fees for towing these vehicles shall be the sole
responsibility of the towing contractor. The Borough of Madison shall
not be liable for these towing fees.
I. The Borough of Madison assumes no responsibility for the storage of
abandoned vehicles taken in for safekeeping. The Police Department
shall assist the applicant in title research for proper destruction of said
vehicles.
J. These regulations as well as related fee schedules are available to the
public during normal business hours at Borough Hall.
K. The Chief of Police is the municipal officer or agency appointed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with due process of
law required by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49(c).
§ 176-11 MADISON CODE § 177-3
177:518
§ 177-3. Parking in public parks or public school grounds
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car in any
public park or public school grounds in the Borough of Madison.
§ 177-4. Operation of trailer parks, tourist camps, camp parks or
trailer camps prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to conduct
or operate any trailer park, tourist camp, camp park or trailer camp within
the limits of the Borough of Madison.
§ 177-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
Chapter 178
TREE PROTECTION
§ 178-1. Findings of fact.
The Borough Council finds that indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excessive
destruction and removal of trees upon lots and tracts of land within the
Borough of Madison will cause increased drainage control costs, increased
soil erosion and sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation
of water resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased buildup
of atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat island effect
and increased dust and pollution. The singular or cumulative effect of any
of the foregoing could adversely impact the character of the Borough,
decrease property values, render the land unfit and unsuitable for its most
appropriate use, and negatively affect the health, safety and general welfare
of the Borough's residents.
§ 178-2. Purpose.
The Governing Body desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and
excessive removal of trees within the Borough and to require appropriate
tree replacement.
§ 177-3 TRAILERS; TOURIST AND TRAILER CAMPS § 178-3
177:519
§ 178-3. Definitions.
The following words and expressions used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
BOROUGH TREE — A tree located on land owned by the Borough or
which is located on a street, highway, public place, right-of-way, Borough
easement, park or parkway or within the sidewalk lines.
DRIPLINE — A line connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a tree
projected vertically onto the ground.
LANDMARK TREE — Any tree designated and identified as such by the
Shade Tree Management Board (STMB) of the Borough of Madison
pursuant to the standards set forth in the General Code of the Borough of
Madison § 45-1.
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE LINE — The line on a property beyond which
the natural grade and existing vegetation will not be disturbed by a
construction project. It shall be indicated on a plan by a dashed line and
shall include not only the area around each structure's foundation but
also clearing and grading required for driveway, power, water, sewer,
communications, and other installations.
MUNICIPAL ARBORIST — The Administrative Officer of the Tree Protection
Ordinance, duly appointed by the Governing Body who shall have the
following qualifications:
NON-BOROUGH TREE — Any tree other than a Borough tree as heretofore
defined.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A nursery-grown certified tree marked with a
durable label indicating genus, species and variety, and satisfying the
standards for nursery stock and installation thereof set forth by the
American Nursery and Landscape Association and guaranteed for two
years. The Municipal Arborist shall publish on the municipal website a
suitable species list for replacement trees. Any tree used in a required
planting must be at least 2 1/2 inches caliper in diameter and must be
nursery stock, balled and burlapped and guaranteed for two years from the
date of installation.
SHADE TREE MANAGEMENT BOARD — The advisory committee
established by Chapter 45 of Borough of Madison Code.
Bachelor's degree in forestry, arboriculture or horticulture from an
accredited college or university; or
A.
Certification as a "certified/licensed tree expert" (CTE/LTE) by the State
of New Jersey; or
B.
C. International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist; and
A minimum of five years' experience in the planting, care and
maintenance of trees.
D.
§ 178-3 MADISON CODE § 178-3
177:520
SIGNIFICANT TREE — Any tree, measured 4.5 feet above the grade with a
diameter of 16 inches (circumference of 50 inches) or greater, or any tree
designated by the Shade Tree Management Board as a landmark tree.
TREE — Any deciduous or evergreen species, measured 4.5 feet above the
grade with a diameter of six inches (circumference of 19 inches) or greater,
up to a diameter of 16 inches (circumference of 50 inches).
TREE FUND — A fund established by the Governing Body only to be
expended for the planting of trees in any public street, public park or public
right-of-way at locations on the tree planting schedule defined herein.
§ 178-4. Appointment of Municipal Arborist.
A Municipal Arborist shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Council with the advice of the Shade Tree Management Board on
an annual basis commencing January 1 and ending December 31. The
Municipal Arborist shall possess the qualifications defined in § 178-3 and
shall be paid for any services authorized on behalf of the Borough in
accordance with an annual fee schedule established with the Borough.
The Municipal Arborist shall be prohibited from taking any action on or
representing any Madison private clients while under contract with the
Borough. After the selection of the Municipal Arborist, the Borough shall
enter into a contract with the Arborist, which shall set forth the fees
charged by the Arborist for providing services to the Borough. The
Borough's contract with the Arborist shall be published with the publication
of the tree inventory and tree planting schedule as provided herein.
§ 178-5. Duties of the Municipal Arborist.
The Municipal Arborist shall be charged with performing site inspections,
administration and enforcement of the tree removal and protection
requirements of this chapter, reviewing and providing written reports on
development applications, attendance at the Shade Tree Management
Board meetings, and the preparation, maintenance and updating of the tree
inventory.
§ 178-6. Removal restrictions.
Subject to the exemptions set forth herein, no person shall remove or
damage, or cause to be removed or damaged any tree located upon
Borough-owned land, easements or right-of-way without the express
approval of the Municipal Arborist, unless such action is specifically
exempted by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 178-7. Tree removal permits.
A. Permit required. A tree removal permit is required for any of the
following:
(1) Any tree six inches in diameter (circumference of 19 inches) or
greater; or
§ 178-3 TRAILERS; TOURIST AND TRAILER CAMPS § 178-7
177:521
(2) Any removal or destruction of any significant tree; or
(3) Any removal or destruction of more than 50% of standing non-
Borough trees on a lot during any calendar year.
B. Exemptions.
(1) A permit is not required for removal of any Borough tree directed
to be removed by the Borough of Madison, County of Morris or
State of New Jersey.
(2) Any property owner shall be permitted to remove two
nonsignificant trees on their property within any twenty-fourmonth
period without applying for a tree removal permit.
C. Permit application. Applications for a permit shall be made to the
Municipal Arborist on forms provided for this purpose in the Land Use
Department and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
(2) The name and address and phone number of the applicant. Where
the applicant is not the property owner, written consent of the
property owner is required.
(3) A development plan of the property or diagram that shall contain
the following information:
(a) A description of the premises where removal is to take place,
including lot and block numbers and street addresses as
assigned.
(b) An indication of all trees to be removed, specifically by an
assigned number, the species and diameter of each tree with a
diameter of six inches or more.
(c) An indication of all trees to remain and proposed replacement
trees, if any, including their size and species specifically by an
assigned number.
(d) Any other information which may reasonably be required to
enable the application to be properly evaluated including, but
not limited to, a description of the purpose for which this
application is to be made; e.g., scenic improvements, hardship,
danger to adjacent properties, removal of diseased or damaged
trees, transplanting or removal in a growing condition to other
locations, installation of utilities, drainage of surface water, or
other pertinent information.
(4) Any removed tree that requires a permit must be replaced on a one
to one basis. If, in the discretion of the Municipal Arborist, due to
available space, species of trees and/or required space between
§ 178-7 MADISON CODE § 178-7
177:522
plantings, a lesser number would be appropriate, the Municipal
Arborist may grant a downward adjustment.
D. In lieu of providing a replacement tree, the owner of real property must
contribute $350 per removed tree to the Tree Fund, with such funds to
be used for tree plantings in public spaces. Each December, the
Borough shall publish an inventory of trees located on public streets,
public parks and public rights-of-way ("tree inventory"). The Municipal
Arborist shall be required to maintain and update the tree inventory. In
conjunction with the publication of the tree inventory, the Borough shall
publish a schedule of trees on the tree inventory to be replaced or new
tree plantings to be made on public streets, public parks or public
rights-of-way in the ensuing 12 months ("tree planting schedule"). Trees
purchased with monies in the Tree Fund shall be planted at locations on
the tree planting schedule nearest to the site(s) that generated the
remittance of monies pursuant to § 178-12.
E. The Municipal Arborist shall deny the permit if the application does not
comply with this chapter.
F. Additional requirements for construction projects.
(1) Where the removal of a tree, and/or more than 50% of the standing
non-Borough trees on a lot (as defined in § 178-3 hereof), is
proposed for the construction of any building, recreation area or
any structure for which a building permit is required, no building
permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a tree permit
required under this chapter.
(2) The plan of the property submitted with the permit application
shall indicate the construction disturbance line.
(3) The plan shall indicate any or all trenches for underground public
utilities.
(4) Tree protection during construction. All trees to be preserved are
to be protected during construction using the following criteria:
(a) The limit of protection shall be the dripline unless otherwise
approved by the Borough Engineer or his or her designee with
the advice of the Municipal Arborist.
(b) Tree protection barriers shall be installed by the applicant and
approved by the Municipal Arborist and shall remain and be
maintained until all construction and grading are completed
and final inspection has taken place.
(c) The protective barriers shall be independently supported
fencing firmly secured and not supported by any trees and
shall be a minimum of three feet high.
(d) Unless the project site is constrained in such a manner that the
tree protection area would encompass all usable area typically
§ 178-7 TRAILERS; TOURIST AND TRAILER CAMPS § 178-7
177:523
required for construction activities to proceed, in the tree
protection areas, it shall be prohibited to:
[1] Store any building material.
[2] Store any fill of soil.
[3] Store or park any equipment, including temporary toilet
facilities.
[4] Use as a work area.
[5] Attach any signs, wires, or other attachments to any tree.
[6] Exception: Tree removal equipment is permitted, but only
during operations for tree removal.
(e) The provisions of § 195-44 et seq. of the Borough Code, Soil
erosion and sediment control, shall be adhered to where
applicable.
G. Applications for development.
(1) All land development applications to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment for development under the Borough of
Madison Land Development Ordinance shall contain a demolition
permit plan which shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed
professional (professional engineer, land surveyor, landscape
architect, professional planner, architect, forester, certified
arborist, certified tree expert, etcetera) showing all surface
features, subsurface structures and trees proposed to be removed
as part of the development.
(2) The demolition plan shall be a completeness item on the checklists
for single- and two-family residential applications, minor and major
subdivisions and site plan applications.
(3) The Municipal Arborist shall review the development plans and
provide a written report to the appropriate Land Use Board and the
applicant at least 10 business days prior to the scheduled meeting
date. The Municipal Arborist shall be paid from the technical
review escrow for each application pursuant to § 195-12B of the
Borough of Madison Land Development Ordinance.
H. Other permit considerations.
(1) All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve landmark trees and
significant trees, including, but not limited to, relocation of planned
and/or proposed infrastructure, driveways, and buildings. Removal
of landmark trees shall require written notice to the Shade Tree
Management Board.
§ 178-7 MADISON CODE § 178-7
177:524
(2) If the Municipal Arborist or certified arborist submits in writing
that a tree is dead, dying, hazardous, storm damaged and/or
infested with insects, a replacement tree is not required.
I. Standards. Upon receipt of a tree removal permit application the
Municipal Arborist shall inspect the site on which are located the tree
or trees sought to be removed. The Municipal Arborist shall issue such
permit based on any of the following factors:
(1) Where the area where such tree or trees are located will be
occupied by a building, deck, patio, pool or structure, a driveway, a
roadway, a stormwater management facility, or a sewer line or
other underground utility, or where the area where such tree or
trees are located is within 12 feet of a building or structure or
within seven feet of any of the other improvements set forth in this
subsection.
(2) Where a certified arborist recommends in writing that the
proposed removal would constitute a horticulturally advantageous
thinning of an existing overgrown area.
(3) Where proposed changes in the topography of the area where such
tree or trees are located would require significant remediation,
such as welling or construction of an aerification system, to allow
the tree or trees to survive.
(4) Where the presence of the tree or trees is likely to cause hardship
or will endanger the public or an adjoining property owner.
(5) Where the tree or trees are damaging a structure.
(6) Where the root system has become invasive to the extent that no
other solution remains.
(7) Where the location of the tree interferes with the use of an existing
outdoor pool.
J. Conflicts with other laws. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to
the contrary, no tree removal shall be permitted where prohibited by
any other municipal, state or federal statute, ordinance or regulation.
K. Fees.
(1) The application fee shall be $25 for each tree to be removed. Said
fee may be changed by ordinance at the discretion of the Governing
Body.
(2) The permit application fee shall be waived if the tree or trees to be
removed are determined by the Municipal Arborist to be dead,
dying, hazardous, storm damaged, infested and/or directed to be
removed by the State of New Jersey.
L. Scheduling requirements.
§ 178-7 TRAILERS; TOURIST AND TRAILER CAMPS § 178-7
177:525
§ 178-8. Public utilities and public transportation corporations.
Any public utility or public transportation corporation that maintains
overhead wires, underground pipes or conduits shall review plans for
pruning and/or tree removal at least two weeks prior to the commencement
of work with the Municipal Arborist and a representative of the Shade
Tree Management Board and obtain written permission from the Municipal
Arborist to proceed. Utilities and public transportation corporations may
undertake emergency tree work to restore electrical, telephone, cable TV or
other wire services without prior advance notice. In such event, the utility
shall notify the Municipal Arborist of said work within three business days
of commencement. The utilities owned and operated by the Borough of
Madison shall be exempt from the noticing requirements.
§ 178-9. Enforcement.
The Municipal Arborist shall have the sole jurisdiction and responsibility to
identify any violations hereunder. The Municipal Arborist shall oversee all
applicable tree removal or destruction and soil removal incidental thereto.
(1) The Municipal Arborist shall issue an approval or a denial of a tree
removal application within 10 business days of a complete permit
application being filed.
(2) The applicant must notify the Municipal Arborist when the
following events have taken place:
(a) Tree or trees to be removed shall be indicated on site with
flagging tape.
(b) All tree removals are completed.
(c) For construction projects:
[1] If existing trees are within the construction zone, after
required tree protection measures have been installed.
[2] For projects that require demolition, after demolition, but
prior to start of construction.
[3] If excavation of building structures is required after
excavation, prior to construction.
[4] If trenching is required, after mark-out of all trenches.
[5] Final grade is established.
M. Permit time limit. All tree removal permits shall be limited to one year
from date of issuance. If the approved tree removal has not occurred
within one year, a new permit must be applied for and is subject to the
payment of new fees. If, however, the applicant diligently pursues other
governmental approval, or if approved development is ongoing, the
permit may be renewed for up to one year.
§ 178-7 MADISON CODE § 178-9
177:526
Upon ascertaining a violation of this chapter, the Municipal Arborist shall
maintain all relevant documentation associated with any violation. The
Municipal Arborist shall contact the owner of the property within three
business days to correct the violation. If such violation(s) are not resolved
within 10 days, the Municipal Arborist shall issue a summons to be heard
in the Municipal Court as provided in this chapter. In addition to other
remedies, the Borough Engineer or his/her designee or other proper
municipal official may institute a stop work order to prevent a continuing
violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 178-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or causing to be violated any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$2,000 for each offense, together with court costs.
§ 178-11. Appeals.
If an applicant or permit holder disagrees with the decision of the Municipal
Arborist, as the administrative officer of this chapter, they may request
a meeting with the Municipal Arborist and the Shade Tree Management
Board for review of the matter and/or may appeal to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment regarding the decision of the administrative officer, as provided
for in the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 178-12. Payment to Tree Fund.
Chapter 179
(RESERVED)
Chapter 183
A. A Tree Fund shall be established by the Governing Body to receive and
disburse replacement tree contributions. Appropriations from the Tree
Fund shall be authorized by the Governing Body. The purpose of the
fund is to provide for the planting of replacement trees on public land.
The Tree Fund will also cover administrative costs to implement plans,
specifications, and bid documents for planting contracts on public lands
only, in accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law.111
B. All tree replacements under the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
be made on the actual site from which the trees were removed and shall
replace each tree destroyed or removed. However, if the site in question
cannot physically accommodate the total replacement amount of trees,
a fee of $350 per replacement tree may be paid to the Tree Fund in lieu
of such replacement.
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 178-9 (RESERVED) § 178-12
179:527
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Regulations of vehicles and traffic
generally — See Ch. 185.
Outdoor storage — See Ch. 195.
§ 183-1. Storage of inoperable vehicles on private property
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupant of lands in the
Borough of Madison to store, keep, place, park or accumulate upon such
lands any motor vehicles, automobiles or machines so in need of repair
as not to be readily operated under their own power, requiring substantial
repairs, not currently licensed or not being currently used for
transportation, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 183-2. Abandonment on land of another prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to park, leave standing or abandon any
machines, motor vehicles or automobiles so in need of repair as not to be
readily operated under their own power, which require substantial repair,
which are not currently licensed or which are not being currently used for
transportation on the land of another.
§ 183-3. Exceptions. [Amended 12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 878;
12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 52-77]
A. This chapter does not apply to an owner, possessor or occupant of lands
in the Borough of Madison who stores, keeps, places, parks or
accumulates:
(1) No more than one licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle, automobile
or machine not currently being used for transportation and being in
need or repair; provided, however, that the repairs upon any such
motor vehicle, automobile or machine is completed within 90 days
of the date that said vehicle, automobile or machine was first
parked, left standing or abandoned upon said property.
(2) Any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle, automobile or machine
not currently being used for transportation and being in need of
repairs, provided that same is kept in an enclosed building.
B. This chapter does not apply to a new car dealer or used car dealer
licensed by the State of New Jersey to sell new and/or used cars.
§ 178-12 MADISON CODE § 183-4
183:528
§ 183-4. Enforcement. [Amended 3-10-1969 by Ord. No. 5-69;
12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 52-1977]
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Madison, police officers of the Borough
of Madison or such other person as shall be duly authorized by the Borough
Council shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 183-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
9-70; 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by one or more of the following in the discretion of the Judge: a fine of not
to exceed $2,000; or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. In the event that
a fine is imposed, pursuant to this section, such fine shall be no less than
$100.
Chapter 185
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Committee — See Ch. 47.
Parking in fire zones — See Ch. 103.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 110.
Parking lots — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 173.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 183.
§ 183-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 183-5
183:529

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 185-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 185-2. Repealer. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 9-70]
Ordinance Numbers 149, 271, 274, 399, 407, 463, 478, 495, 497, 498, 502,
506, 519, 532, 554, 582, 611, 612, 615, 617, 624, 631, 633, 636, 640,
647, 651, 657, 674, 690, 712, 717, 759, 779 and 797 of the Borough of
Madison are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 185-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 185-4. Penalties. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76;
4-9-1990 as Ord. No. 15-90]
A. Penalties for specific violations shall be as follows: [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 47-90; 2-22-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93;
4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94; 10-15-1997 by Ord. No. 22-97;
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 42-99; 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004;
6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2004; 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 42-2004]
Section Violated Fine
§ 185-6 (parking prohibited, all times) $32
§ 185-6.1 (truck/van prohibited parking) $32
§ 185-8 (stopping/standing prohibited) $32
§ 185-10 (trucks over 4 tons excluded) $47
§ 185-15 (no parking, commercial loading
zone
$51
§ 185-16 (no parking, taxi stand) $51
§ 185-17 (no parking, bus stop) $51
§ 185-21 (no parking, posted) $32
§ 185-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-4
183:531
Section Violated Fine
§ 185-29 (no parking, designated streets and
no parking this side)
$32
§ 185-30 (no parking, 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.) $32
§ 185-32 (no parking/standing, specified time) $22
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by statute or except as
specifically provided in this section or some other section of this
chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable for a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 185-4 MADISON CODE § 185-4
183:532
ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 185-5. Regulations not exclusive. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord.
No. 15-76]
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 185-6. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 185-29) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 185-6.1. Truck and van parking prohibited at all times. [Added
10-11-1989 by Ord. No. 39-89]
No person shall park a truck or van at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule IA (§ 185-29.1) attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 185-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 185-30) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 185-8. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III (§ 185-31) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in said Schedule III attached to and made part of this chapter.
§ 185-9. Parking time limited.
A. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 185-32) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day except Sundays and public holidays upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The minimum penalty for any violation of this section shall be $19. Each
additional and consecutive one- or two-hour period, as applicable, in
which a vehicle remains parked in violation of this applicable time limit
shall constitute a separate and independent violation of this section.
[Added 7-13-1987 by Ord. No. 25-87; amended 12-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 47-90; 2-22-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93; 10-15-1997 by Ord.
§ 185-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-9
183:533
No. 22-97; 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 42-99; 1-26-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004; 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2004]
§ 185-9 MADISON CODE § 185-9
183:534
ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
[Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 18-76]
§ 185-10. Routes for trucks over four tons. [Amended 11-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 38-90; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 8-91]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets and parts of streets as described
in Schedule V (§ 185-33) are hereby designated as routes for trucks over
four tons. All trucks having a total combined registered gross weight of
vehicle plus load in excess of four tons are hereby excluded from all streets
within the Borough, except for those streets or parts of streets, described
in Schedule V (§ 185-33), which form a part of the system of truck routes.
Trucks will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup or
delivery of materials.
§ 185-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-10
183:535

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 185-11. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 185-34) attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 185-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-11
183:537

ARTICLE IVA
Private Driveways
[Added 7-10-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95]
§ 185-11.1. Private drive exit prohibitions designated.
The private driveways or streets described in Schedule VIA (§ 185-34.1) and
made a part hereof by reference are hereby designated as private driveways
or streets from which exiting onto public roadways is prohibited.
§ 185-11.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-11.1
183:539

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 185-12. Through streets designated. [Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord.
No. 15-76]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 185-35) attached to and made a part
of this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 185-13. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII (§ 185-36) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 185-14. Yield intersections designated. [Added 6-14-1970 by Ord.
No. 15-76]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 185-37) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 185-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-14
183:541

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 185-15. Loading zones designated. [Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; amended 5-13-1985 by Ord. No. 12-85]
The locations designated in Schedule X (§ 185-38) attached to and made
a part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading zones. Parking is
restricted during the indicated hours on the indicated days to commercial
vehicles engaged in the loading or unloading of goods or materials, subject
to a one-half-hour time limitation.
§ 185-16. (Reserved)112
§ 185-17. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 185-40) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 185-17.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-14-1994 by Ord. No.
3-94; amended 10-15-1997 by Ord. No. 22-97; 12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 42-99]
The penalty for improper parking in a special zone or area described in
this Article VI between the hours specified in Schedules X (§ 185-38), XI
(§ 185-39) and XII (§ 185-40) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in said Schedules X, XI and XII attached to and made a
part of this chapter is $44.
112. Editor’s Note: Former § 185-16, Taxi stands designated, was repealed 10-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 46-2018.
§ 185-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-17.1
183:543

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
[Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
§ 185-18. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 185-41) attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 185-19. Turns at intersections. [Amended 12-13-1976 by Ord. No.
33-76]
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XIV (§ 185-42) attached to and made a
part of this chapter. In addition thereto, no person shall make a right turn on
a red light at those locations described in Schedule XV (§ 185-43) attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 185-19.1. Left turns. [Added 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 29-87]
No person shall make a left turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
designated in Schedule XVA (§ 185-43.1) attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 185-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-19.1
183:545

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No-Parking
§ 185-20. Designation of snow no-parking areas.113 [Added
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 57-2014]
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
streets or highways, no vehicle shall be parked on any Borough streets
or highways. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after
the snow has ceased until the streets and/or highways have been plowed
sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal
flow of traffic.
§ 185-21. Posting of signs.
§ 185-22. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 185-23. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
113. Editor’s Note: Original Section 53.36 of the 1970 Revised Ordinances, which provided for
the designation of snow emergency no-parking areas, was repealed 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 185-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-23
183:547

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
[Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
§ 185-24. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XVI (§ 185-44) attached to and made a part
of this chapter is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 185-25. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 185-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-25
183:549

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
[Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
§ 185-26. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XVII (§ 185-45) attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 185-27. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Subtitle I of
Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design,
and shall be maintained in operation, as authorized by the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 185-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-27
183:551

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
[Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
§ 185-28. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII (§ 185-46) attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 185-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-28
183:553

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
§ 185-29. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Baker Avenue [Added
11-8-1971 by Ord. No.
27-71]
North From Alma Avenue to Roscoe
Avenue
Burnet Road
The no-parking restrictions
will apply during the school
year, during school hours
and during school sporting
and/or other events
occurring at Madison High
School throughout the
year. [Added 5-12-2014
by Ord. No. 10-2014;
amended 6-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 39-2014]
South From Ridgedale Avenue to
Chateau Thierry Avenue
Chapel Street [Amended
7-22-2019 by Ord. No.
31-2019]
South From Greenwood Avenue to
Central Avenue
Community Place
[Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
West From Park Avenue to Cook
Avenue
Cook Avenue South From Ridgedale Avenue to
Central Avenue
Danforth Road [Added
3-10-1975 by Ord. No.
6-75]
Both Entire length
Douglass Avenue [Added
11-8-1971 by Ord. No.
27-71]
North From Drew Place to Orchard
Road
Elmer Street South From Central Avenue to
Greenwood Avenue
Elm Street North From Park Avenue to West
Street
Elm Street Northwest
From Page Street to Madison
Avenue
§ 185-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-29
183:555
Name of Street Sides Location
Green Hill Road [Added
5-24-1999 by Ord. No.
13-99]
West From Hillside Avenue to Vinton
Road
Green Village Road
[Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
South From the west curbline of Kings
Road to a point 172 feet
westerly thereof
Greenwood Avenue
[Added 6-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 18-90]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Britten Street to a point 150 feet
southerly thereof
Highland Avenue [Added
6-27-2016 by Ord. No.
51-2016]
East South of Brittin Street, 300 feet
to the bend; the no-parking
restrictions will apply during the
school year, during school hours
and sporting events held at
Madison Junior School
Howard Street [Added
5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
29-86]
South Entire length
Keep Street [Added
5-11-1970 by Ord. No.
12-70; amended
6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; 8-14-1978 by Ord.
No. 26-78]
South Entire length
Kings Road [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
5-90]
Both From the west curbline of
Sampson Avenue to the east
curbline of Prospect Street
Kings Road [Amended
6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
Both From a point 500 feet east of the
east curbline of Sampson
Avenue to a point 500 feet west
of the west curbline of Sampson
Avenue
Kings Road [Added
11-13-1991 by Ord. No.
31-91]
North From a point 125 feet east of the
intersection of the north
curbline of Kings Road and the
east curbline of Bruns Street
Kings Road [Added
10-16-1991 by Ord. No.
29-91]
South From a point 500 feet east of the
east curbline of Sampson
Avenue to a point 1,037 feet east
of the east curbline of Sampson
Avenue
§ 185-29 MADISON CODE § 185-29
183:556
Name of Street Sides Location
Kinney Street [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
13-2003]
West From Park Avenue to the corner
of Kinney Street where Kinney
Street turns to become parallel
with Park Avenue
Myrtle Avenue [Added
5-27-1986 by Ord. No.
29-86]
West From the southerly curbline of
Howard Street to a point 600
feet southerly thereof
Niles Avenue [Added
11-12-1984 by Ord. No.
44-84]
East From the north curbline of Main
Street to a point 90 feet north
thereof
North Oak Court [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
South From Madison Avenue to Oak
Court
North Street North From Park Avenue to Burnet
Road
Oak Court [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
South From North Oak Court to South
Oak Court
Park Avenue [Amended
2-9-2004 by Ord. No.
5-2004]
East From a point opposite the
southerly side of Elm Street
northerly to a point opposite the
north side of Cedar Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
2-9-2004 by Ord. No.
5-2004]
West From the southerly side of Elm
Street northerly to the Northern
side of Cedar Avenue
Ridgedale Avenue
[Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76;
3-14-1977 by Ord. No.
5-77; repealed
6-13-1977 by Ord. No.
26-77]
Ridgedale Avenue [Added
6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
Southeast
From Park Avenue to Burnet
Road
Rosedale Avenue [Added
3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
7-96; amended
11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
55-2005]
East From Greenwood Avenue to
Sherwood Avenue
§ 185-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-29
183:557
Name of Street Sides Location
Rosedale Avenue [Added
3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
7-96; amended
11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
55-2005]
West From Parkside Avenue to Lewis
Drive
Sampson Avenue
[Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
Both From a point 500 feet north of
the north curbline of Kings Road
to a point 500 feet south of the
south curbline of Kings Road
Seaman Street [Added
1-10-1972 by Ord. No.
1-72]
East Entire length
Shunpike [Amended
6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
North From the east side line of Green
Village Road to a point 500 feet
east thereof
South Oak Court [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
7-2015]
North From Madison Avenue to Oak
Court
Station Road West From Main Street to Dean
Street
Strickland Place [Added
11-8-1971 by Ord. No.
27-71]
South Entire length
Walnut Street [Added
7-9-1984 by Ord. No.
10-84]
North From DeHart Place to Ridgedale
Avenue
Walnut Street114 [Added
2-10-1969 by Ord. No.
2-69; amended 6-14-76
by Ord. No. 15-76]
Wilmer Street North From Green Avenue to Green
Village Road
§ 185-29.1. Schedule IA: Truck and van parking prohibited. [Added
10-11-1989 by Ord. No. 39-89]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-6.1, no person shall park a truck
or van at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
114. Editor's Note: This entry for Walnut Street was superseded 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 10-84.
§ 185-29 MADISON CODE § 185-29.1
183:558
Name of Street Sides Location
Greenwood Avenue West From the southerly curbline of Britten
Street to a point 150 feet southerly
thereof
§ 185-30. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 185-7, no person shall park a
vehicle on any public street in the Borough of Madison between 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time.
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 185-7, no person shall park a
vehicle on any public street of the Borough of Madison for more than
four hours, Monday through Friday, except holidays, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. prevailing time unless posted otherwise.
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 7-2017115]
C. In addition to the provisions of Subsections A and B above and in
accordance with the provisions of § 185-7, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours listed upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets: [Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76;
amended 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 7-2017]
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Brittin Street
[Added
10-10-2001 by
Ord. No.
34-2001]
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m., Monday
to Friday, between
September 1 to
June 30 on days
that school is in
session
From the Madison
Junior School
driveway to the
intersection of
Highland Avenue
Cedar Street
[Added
2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 4-2000]
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m., and
2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days that
school is in
session
Entire length
115. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsection B was redesignated as
Subsection C.
§ 185-29.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-30
183:559
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Court Place
[Added
4-23-2001 by
Ord. No.
16-2001]
North 4:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday; 12:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.,
Saturday and
Sunday, April 1 to
June 30
Entire length
DeHart Street
[Added
2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 4-2000]
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m., and
2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days that
school is in
session
Entire length
Delbarton Drive
[Added
4-23-2001 by
Ord. No.
16-2001]
South,
entire
cul-desac
4:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 a.m.,
Saturday, April 1
to June 30
Niles Avenue to
Delbarton Park
Howard Street [Added 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 18-80; repealed
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 29-86]
Myrtle Avenue [Added 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 18-80; repealed
5-27-1986 by Ord. No. 29-86]
Rosedale Avenue
[Added
4-23-2001 by
Ord. No.
16-2001]
West 4:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 a.m.,
Saturday, April 1
to June 30
Longview Avenue
to Lewis Drive
Walnut Street
[Added
2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 4-2000]
North 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 11:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m., and
2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days that
school is in
session
From DeHart
Place to Central
Avenue
Walnut Street
[Added
10-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 43-86]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From a point 335
feet north of the
northerly curbline
of Central Avenue
to a point 435 feet
north of the
northerly curbline
of Central Avenue
§ 185-30 MADISON CODE § 185-31
183:560
§ 185-31. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Brittin Street [Added
10-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 35-2001]
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Friday, between
September 1 to
June 30 on days
that school is in
session
From the Alexander
Avenue to the
Madison Junior
School driveway
Brooklake Road
[Added 5-13-1974 by
Ord. No. 10-74]
North All From the east
curbline of Route 24
to a point 80 feet
east thereof
Condurso Way [Added
11-8-1971 by Ord.
No. 27-71]
Both All From Madison
Avenue (Route 24) to
Park Avenue
Danforth Road [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 8-85]
East All From the northerly
curbline of Route 24
(Madison Avenue) to
a point 145 feet
northerly thereof
Dodge Drive [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 8-85]
East All From the southerly
curbline of Route 24
(Madison Avenue) to
a point 92 feet
southerly thereof
Division Avenue
[Added 5-13-1974 by
Ord. No. 10-74]
North All From the west
curbline of Route 24
to a point 80 feet
west thereof
East Street [Added
12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 48-92]
North All From the northeast
corner of Howard
Street to a point 350
feet east thereof
Glenwild Road [Added
3-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 6-78]
North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From the west
curbline of Green
Village Road to a
point 200 feet west
thereof
§ 185-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-31
183:561
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Glenwild Road [Added
3-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 6-78]
South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From a point 50 feet
east of the east
curbline of Glenwild
Circle to a point 50
feet west of the west
curbline of Glenwild
Circle
Green Avenue [Added
3-10-1986 by Ord.
No. 5-86; repealed
5-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 24-2014]
Green Village Road
[Added 2-10-1969 by
Ord. No. 2-69;
amended 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76]
East All From the north side
line of the Shunpike
to a point 500 feet
north thereof
Green Village Road
[Added 7-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 28-85]
West All From Main Street
(Route 24) to Kings
Road
Greenwood Avenue
[Added 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 6-80]
East All From the northerly
curbline of Route 24
to a point 210 feet
northerly therefrom
Greenwood Avenue
[Added 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 6-80]
West All From the northerly
curbline of Route 24
at a point 215 feet
northerly therefrom
Kings Road
[Amended 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76;
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 15-85]
Both All From the easterly
curbline of Prospect
Street to the easterly
side of the Erie
Lackawanna Railroad
Bridge
Kings Road [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 15-85]
South All From the westerly
curbline of Prospect
Street to a point 110
feet west therefrom
Noe Avenue [Added
6-27-1983 by Ord.
No. 17-83]
West All From the northerly
curbline of Shunpike
Road to a point 120
feet north therefrom
§ 185-31 MADISON CODE § 185-31
183:562
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Park Avenue [Added
3-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 5-77; amended
6-13-1977 by Ord.
No. 26-77]
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue to a point
430 feet northerly
therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
3-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 5-77; amended
6-13-1977 by Ord.
No. 26-77]
East All From the southerly
curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 93
feet southerly
therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
3-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 5-77; amended
6-13-1977 by Ord.
No. 26-77]
West All From the northerly
curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue to a point
430 feet northerly
therefrom
Park Avenue [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 5-77; repealed 6-13-1977
by Ord. No. 26-77]
Prospect Street
[Added 5-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 15-85]
East All From the southerly
curbline of Kings
Road to a point 160
feet southerly
therefrom
Prospect Street
[Added 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 6-80;
amended 5-13-1985
by Ord. No. 15-85]
East All From the southerly
curbline of Route 24
to a point 200 feet
southerly therefrom
Prospect Street
[Added 5-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 15-85]
West All From the southerly
curbline of Kings
Road to a point 165
feet southerly
therefrom
Prospect Street
[Added 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 6-80;
amended 5-13-1985
by Ord. No. 15-85]
West All From the southerly
curbline of Route 24
to a point 100 feet
southerly therefrom
Ridgedale Avenue
[Added 3-14-1977 by
Ord. No. 5-77;
amended 6-13-1977
by Ord. No. 26-77]
Both All From the easterly
curbline of Park
Avenue to a point
225 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 185-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-31
183:563
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Rosedale Avenue
[Added 11-12-1984
by Ord. No. 44-84;
amended
11-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 55-2005]
West All From Sherwood
Avenue to Lewis
Drive
Woodland Road
[Added 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 5-86]
North All From the easterly
curbline of Green
Avenue to a point
100 feet easterly
therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 12-11-1978
by Ord. No. 46-78]
North All From the easterly
curbline of the
northern leg of
Loanaka Way to a
point 240 feet
easterly therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 5-86]
North All From the westerly
curbline of Green
Avenue to a point
100 feet westerly
therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 12-11-1978
by Ord. No. 46-78]
North All From the westerly
curbline of the
northern leg of
Loantaka Way to a
point 147 feet
westerly therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 5-86]
South All From the easterly
curbline of Green
Avenue to a point
100 feet easterly
therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 11-13-1990
by Ord. No. 36-90]
South 7:00 a.m to 4:00
p.m. (except
Saturday and
Sunday)
From the west
curbline of Green
Village Road to the
east curbline of
Orchard Street
Woodland Road
[Added 12-11-1978
by Ord. No. 46-78]
South All From the easterly
curbline of the
southern leg of
Loantaka Way to a
point 185 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 185-31 MADISON CODE § 185-31
183:564
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Woodland Road
[Added 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 5-86]
South All From the westerly
curbline of Green
Avenue to a point
100 feet westerly
therefrom
Woodland Road
[Added 12-11-1978
by Ord. No. 46-78]
South All From the westerly
curbline of the
northern leg of
Loantaka Way to a
point 245 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 185-32. Schedule IV: Time-Limit Parking. [Amended 2-10-1969 by
Ord. No. 2-69; 6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76; 7-13-1987 by Ord. No.
25-87]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-9, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. of any day upon the following streets or part of streets; provided,
however, that with respect to all locations subject to a one-hour time limit,
a two-hour time limit shall apply between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:00
p.m.:
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Alexander Avenue
[Added 5-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 24-86;
amended 8-13-2001
by Ord. No. 28-2001;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. from
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Brittin Street to Route
24 (Main Street)
Alexander Avenue
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Avon Drive [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 49-2015]
Both 2 hrs. on
weekdays
when
Madison High
School is in
session
Entire length
Belmont Avenue
[Added 3-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 11-2016]
Both 4 hrs. on
weekdays
Entire length
§ 185-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-32
183:565
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Belmont Avenue
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Brittin Street
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Brittin Street [Added
11-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 43-2001]
Both 4 hrs. From Central Avenue
to Alexander Avenue
Buckingham Drive
[Added 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. 49-2015]
Both 2 hrs. on
weekdays
when
Madison High
School is in
session
Entire length
Burnet Road [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 49-2015]
Both 2 hrs. on
weekdays
when
Madison High
School is in
session
Entire length
Canterbury [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 49-2015]
Both 2 hrs. on
weekdays
when
Madison High
School is in
session
Entire length
Central Avenue
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Central Avenue
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. From Main Street
(Route 24) to Chapel
Street
Central Avenue
[Added 7-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-2019]
East 15 minutes Single space: south end
corner of Main Street
Central Avenue
[Added 11-26-2001
by Ord. No. 43-2001]
East 4 hrs. From Chapel Street to
Brittin Street
Central Avenue
[Added 11-26-2001
by Ord. No. 43-2001]
West 4 hrs. From Chapel Street to
Walnut Street
§ 185-32 MADISON CODE § 185-32
183:566
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Chapel Street
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Chapel Street [Added
11-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 43-2001]
South 4 hrs. From Central Avenue
to Greenwood Avenue
Chateau Thierry Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Community Place
[Amended 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
East 90 mins. Entire length
Cook Avenue
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
North 90 mins. From Ridgedale Avenue
to Central Avenue
Dwyer Street [Added
5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 24-86; amended
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. Route 24 to Dean
Street
Elmer Street
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
North 90 mins. From Central Avenue
to Greenwood Avenue
Fairwood Road
[Added 5-11-1970 by
Ord. No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Ferndale Road [Added
5-11-1970 by Ord.
No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Forrest Road [Added
5-11-1970 by Ord.
No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Glendale Road [Added
5-11-1970 by Ord.
No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Green Avenue
[Amended 12-9-1968
by Ord No. 24-68]
Both 2 hrs. From Wilmer Street to
Kings Road
Green Village Road
[Amended
12-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 45-89]
Both 4 hrs. From a point 172 feet
west of the curbline of
Kings Road to Vinton
Road/Carteret Court
§ 185-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-32
183:567
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Green Village Road
[Added 11-26-2001
by Ord. No. 43-2001]
Both 4 hrs. From Kings Road to
Vinton Road/Carteret
Court
Greenwood Avenue Both 2 hrs. From Chapel Street to
Locust Street
Greenwood Avenue
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. From Main Street
(Route 24) to Chapel
Street
Howell Street
[Repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
John Avenue [Added
5-14-2018 by Ord.
No. 27-2018]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Keep Street
[Amended 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76;
repealed 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 6-78]
Keep Street [Added
8-14-1978 by Ord.
No. 26-78; amended
11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 55-2014]
North 4 hrs. Entire length
Kings Road [Repealed
7-11-1988 by Ord.
No. 37-88]
Kings Road [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 15-85; amended
7-11-1988 by Ord.
No. 37-88]
North 2 hrs. From Madison Avenue
to the westerly curbline
of Prospect Street
Kings Road [Added
11-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 37-90; amended
10-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 28-91]
South 15 mins.,
except when
school is not
is session
From a point 505 feet
east of the intersection
of the north curbline of
Kings Road and the
east curbline of Bruns
Street to a point 678
feet east of the
intersection of the
north curbline of Kings
Road and the east
curbline of Bruns
Street
§ 185-32 MADISON CODE § 185-32
183:568
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Kings Road [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 15-85; amended
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
South 90 mins. From Madison Avenue
to a point 110 feet
westerly of the
westerly curbline of
Prospect Street
Lincoln Place
[Amended 5-13-1985
by Ord. No. 12-85;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
North 90 mins. Entire length, except as
designated for tenminute
parking
Lincoln Place [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 12-85]
North 10 mins. From a point 426 feet
north of the west side
line of Prospect Street
to a point 115 feet
south of the east side
line of Waverly Place
Lincoln Place [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 12-85; amended
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
South 90 mins. Entire length
Lincoln Place [Added
12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 34-93]
South 10 mins. From a point 304 feet
east of the intersection
of Waverly Place to a
point 3,440 feet east of
the intersection of
Waverly Place
Locust Street Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Main Street
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. From Greenwood
Avenue to a point 90
feet east of Green
Village Road
Main Street (Route
124) [Amended
5-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 13-93]
South 2 hrs. From Prospect Street
to a point 725 feet west
of Cross Street
Main Street [Added
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
South 15 mins. Single space: west end
adjacent to loading
zone
Main Street [Added
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
South 15 mins. Single space: east end
adjacent to loading
zone
§ 185-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-32
183:569
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Maple Avenue
[Amended 5-11-1987
by Ord. No. 11-87]
Both 4 hrs. From Hillside Avenue
to Kings Road
Morris Place [Added
5-11-1970 by Ord.
No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Park Avenue
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. From Main Street to
Ridgedale Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
7-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 39-2005]
East 15 mins.,
from 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 81 feet
south of the
intersection of
Community Place/Park
Avenue to a point 77
feet north of the
intersection of Park
Avenue/Madison
Avenue
Prospect Street
[Amended 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 13-93;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
Both 90 mins. From Kings Road to
Main Street (Route
124)
Prospect Street
[Amended 5-13-1985
by Ord. No. 15-85;
5-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 13-93;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
East 90 mins. From Kings Road to a
point 200 feet
southerly from the
southerly curbline of
Route 124
Prospect Street
[Added 5-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 15-85]
East 2 hrs. From Hillside Avenue
to a point 160 feet
southerly of the
southerly curbline of
Kings Road
Prospect Street
[Added 5-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 15-85;
amended 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 13-93;
7-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 31-2019]
West 90 mins. From Kings Road to a
point 100 feet
southerly from the
southerly curbline of
Route 124
§ 185-32 MADISON CODE § 185-32
183:570
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Prospect Street
[Added 5-18-1985 by
Ord. No. 15-85]
West 2 hrs. From Hillside Avenue
to a point 165 feet
southerly of the
southerly curbline of
Kings Road
Ridgedale Avenue West 2 hrs. From Cook Avenue to
Sayre Court
Samson Avenue
[Added 4-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 16-2010]
Both 2 hrs. Main Street to Kings
Road
Seaman Street
[Added 1-10-1972 by
Ord. No. 1-72;
amended 1-30-1995
by Ord. No. 2-95]
West 2 hrs. Entire length
Shadylawn Drive
[Added 5-11-1970 by
Ord. No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Station Road [Added
4-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 16-2010]
East 2 hrs. Main Street to Dean
Street
Troy Court [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 49-2015]
Both 2 hrs. on
weekdays
when
Madison High
School is in
session
Entire length
Union Avenue [Added
11-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 44-84; repealed
8-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 32-2017]
Vinton Road Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Walnut Street
[Amended 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76;
7-9-1984 by Ord. No.
1084]
North 2 hrs. DeHart Place to
Central Avenue
Walnut Street [Added
7-9-1984 by Ord. No.
10-84; amended
10-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 43-86]
South 2 hrs. From the northerly
curbline of Central
Avenue northerly for
335 feet
§ 185-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-32
183:571
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Walnut Street [Added
10-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 43-86]
South 2 hrs. From a point 435 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Central
Avenue to the southerly
curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue
Washington Drive
[Added 3-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 11-2016]
Both 4 hrs. on
weekdays
Entire length
Waverly Place
[Amended 7-22-2019
by Ord. No. 31-2019]
Both (of
street and
island)
90 mins. Entire length
Wilmer Street South 2 hrs. Entire length
Woodside Road
[Added 5-11-1970 by
Ord. No. 12-70]
Both 2 hrs. Entire length
§ 185-33. Schedule V: Routes for Trucks Over Four Tons. [Added
6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 18-76; amended 11-13-1990 by Ord. No.
38-90; 4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 8-91]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as routes for
trucks over four tons. All trucks having a total combined registered gross
weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons are hereby excluded from
all streets within the Borough, except for those streets or parts of streets,
described in this Schedule V (§ 185-33), which form a part of the system of
truck routes. Trucks will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the
pickup or delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
Central Avenue Entire length
Green Village Road Entire length
Greenwood Avenue Entire length
Kings Road From Madison Avenue to Prospect Street
Loantaka Way Entire length
Park Avenue Entire length
Prospect Street From Main Street to Kings Road
Shunpike Road Entire length
§ 185-32 MADISON CODE § 185-34
183:572
§ 185-34. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Community Place East Entire length
Green Hill Road [Added
5-24-1999 by Ord. No.
13-99]
South Entire length
Wilmer Street Northwest Entire length
§ 185-34.1. Schedule VIA: Private Driveways. [Added 7-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 26-95]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-11.1, no vehicles traveling on the
following described private driveways or streets or parts thereof shall be
permitted to exit onto public roadways:
§ 185-35. Schedule VII: Through Streets. [Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
Name of Street Limits
Brittin Street [Added
11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 22-69]
From Greenwood Avenue to Rosedale
Avenue
Brooklake Road [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 23-90;
amended 5-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 13-93]
Between New Jersey Route 124 and
the Madison Borough - Florham Park
Borough line
Burnet Road [Added 7-9-1990
by Ord. No. 23-90]
Between Ridgedale Avenue and the
Madison Borough - Florham Park
Borough line
Danforth Road [Added 7-9-1990
by Ord. No.23-90; amended
510-1993 by Ord. No. 13-93]
Between New Jersey Route 124 and
Park Avenue
East Street [Added 11-14-1994
by Ord. No. 34-94]
From North Street to Wayne
Boulevard/Anthony Drive
A. Fairleigh Dickinson University, Danforth Road entrance driveway.
§ 185-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-35
183:573
Name of Street Limits
Garfield Avenue [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 23-90]
Between Green Avenue and Woodland
Road
Green Avenue Entire length
Greenwood Avenue Entire length
Kings Road From the Madison - Chatham Borough
line to Prospect Street
Lathrop Avenue [Added
2-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1-71]
From Gibbons Place to Green Village
Road
Morris Place [Added 9-8-1975
by Ord No. 24-75]
Entire length
Pomeroy Road [Added
12-10-1973 by Ord. No. 25-73]
From Prospect Street to Samson
Avenue
Prospect Avenue [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 23-90;
amended 5-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 13-93]
Between Woodland Road and New
Jersey Route 124
Ridgedale Avenue From Park Avenue to the Florham
Park Borough line
Rosedale Avenue [Added
12-11-1972 by Ord. No. 19-72;
amended 5-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 13-93]
From Main Street (Route 124) to
Greenwood Avenue
Samson Avenue [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No.23-90]
Between Woodland Road and Kings
Road
Valley Road [Added 7-13-1987
by Ord. No. 26-87; repealed
9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
44-2019]
Woodland Road From Loantaka Way to Green Village
Road
From Green Village Road to Green
Avenue
From Green Avenue to the Madison -
Chatham Township line
§ 185-35 MADISON CODE § 185-36
183:574
§ 185-36. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections. [Amended 2-8-1971 by
Ord. No. 1-71; 11-8-1971 by Ord. No. 26-71; 8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
26-84; 10-9-1984 by Ord. No. 40-84; 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 43-84;
9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 37-86; 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 40-86; 7-13-1987
by Ord. No. 26-87; 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 33-87; 4-11-1988 by Ord.
No. 13-88; 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 23-90; 10-14-1992 by Ord. No.
30-92]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Belleau Avenue Chateau Thierry Avenue
Canterbury Road Myrtle Avenue
Centre Street Elm Street
Community Place Cook Avenue
Crescent Road Hillside Avenue
Crestview Avenue Noe Avenue
Dean Street Dwyer Street
Dean Street John Avenue
Dean Street Station Road
East Street North Street
Essex Road Division Avenue
Green Hill Road Hillside Avenue
Highview Terrace Hillcrest Road
Howard Street Myrtle Avenue
Hoyt Street Fairview Avenue
Lathrop Avenue Gibbons Place
Maple Avenue Hillside Avenue
Maple Avenue Kings Road
Morris Place Danforth Road
Myrtle Avenue North Street
Niles Avenue Delbarton Drive
Page Street Elm Street
Prospect Avenue Midwood Terrace
Sherwood Avenue Hamilton Street
Sinclair Terrace Noe Avenue
South Street East Street
West Common Chateau Thierry Avenue
§ 185-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-36
183:575
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
West Street Elm Street
Wyndehurst Drive Hillside Avenue
§ 185-37. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections. [Added 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign On At Intersection Of
(Reserved)
§ 185-38. Schedule X: Loading Zones. [Added 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76; amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 24-82]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-15, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
Applicable Days
and Hours
Cook Avenue Parking
Lot [Added
5-11-1987 by Ord.
No. 12-87]
North From the
northwest corner
to a point 47 feet
east thereof
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Mon. through
Sat.
Main Street [Added
5-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 12-85]
North In front of 30 Main
Street
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Mon. through
Sat.
Main Street [Added
5-11-1987 by Ord.
No. 12-87]
South From a point 35
feet distant from
the east side line
of Green Village
Road, if projected,
to a point 25 feet
east thereof
9:00 a.m to 6:00
p.m., Mon. through
Sat.
Waverly Place
[Amended 5-13-1985
by Ord. No. 12-85]
West In front of 23
Waverly Place
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Mon. through
Sat.
§ 185-39. (Reserved)116
116. Editor’s Note: Former § 185-39, Schedule XI: Taxi Stands, was repealed 10-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 46-2018.
§ 185-36 MADISON CODE § 185-40
183:576
§ 185-40. Schedule XII: Bus Stops. [Amended 12-9-1968 by Ord. No.
24-68]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Street Side Location
Elm Street North
(westbound)
(a) Park Avenue (far side): from the
west curbline of Park Avenue to a
point 100 feet west thereof
(b) West Street (near side): from the
east curbline of West Street to a point
105 feet east thereof
(c) Madison Avenue (near side): from
the east curbline of Madison Avenue
to a point 105 feet east thereof
[Amended 6-14-1976 by Ord. No.
15-76]
Elm Street South
(eastbound)
(a) Madison Avenue (far side): from
the east curbline of Madison Avenue
to a point 100 feet east thereof
(b) West Street (far side): from the
east curbline of West Street to a point
100 feet east thereof
Kings Road [Added
3-12-1973 by Ord.
No. 5-73]
North
(westbound)
(a) From a point 279 feet from the
west curbline of Prospect Street to a
point 100 feet west thereof
Kings Road [Added
11-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 37-90]
South (a) From a point 730 feet east of the
intersection of the north curbline of
Kings Road and east curbline of
Bruns Street to a point 928 feet east
of the intersection of the north
curbline of Kings Road and east
curbline of Bruns Street
Park Avenue East
(northbound)
(a) Community Place (far side): from
the north curbline of Community
Place to a point 100 feet north
thereof
(b) Ridgedale Avenue (far side): from
the north curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 100 feet north
thereof
§ 185-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-40
183:577
Street Side Location
Park Avenue West
(southbound)
(a) Elm Street (far side): from the
south curbline of Elm Street to a
point 100 feet south thereof
(b) Ridgedale Avenue (near side):
from the north curbline of Ridgedale
Avenue to a point 105 feet north
thereof
Route 24 (Madison
Avenue) [Added
11-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 37-83]
North (a) Elm street (midblock): beginning
335 feet east of the easterly curbline
of Elm Street and extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom
(b) Treadwell Avenue (midblock):
beginning 195 feet west of the
prolongation of the westerly curbline
of Treadwell Avenue and extending
135 feet westerly therefrom
Route 24 (Madison
Avenue) [Added
11-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 37-83]
South (a) Kitchell Road (midblock):
beginning 640 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Kitchell Road and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
(b) Lancaster Road (midblock):
beginning 405 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Lancaster Road
and extending 135 feet easterly
therefrom
Woodland Road (the
Torey J. Sabatini
School) [Added
11-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 37-90]
North (a) From a point 395 feet west of the
intersection of the west curbline of
Green Village Road and the north
curbline of Woodland Road to a point
495 feet west of the intersection of
the west curbline of Green Village
Road and the north curbline of
Woodland Road
§ 185-41. Schedule XIII: U-Turn Prohibitions. [Added 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-18, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 185-40 MADISON CODE § 185-42
183:578
§ 185-42. Schedule XIV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections. [Added
6-14-1976 by Ord. No. 15-76]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-19, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 185-43. Schedule XV: Right Turn on Red Light Prohibitions.
[Added 12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 33-76; amended 7-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 23-90]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-19, no person shall make a right
turn on a red light at any of the following locations and during the hours
specified:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of Time
Prospect Street Southbound Kings Road All
§ 185-43.1. Schedule XVA: Prohibited Left Turns. [Added 8-10-1987
by Ord. No. 29-87]
In accordance with the provisions of § 185-19.1, no person operating a
motor vehicle shall make a left turn at any of the following locations:
A. From the driveway of the shopping center located at No. 6 Main Street
(Route 24) to east on Main Street (Route 24), said driveway being
located on the north side of Main Street, 238 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Community Place and extending 30 feet easterly thereof.
B. From Main Street (Route 24) onto the property located at No. 6 Main
Street (Route 24). [Added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
C. From the driveway on the property located at No. 4 Park Avenue to east
on Park Avenue, said driveway being located on the north side of Park
Avenue. [Added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
D. From Park Avenue onto the property located at No. 4 Park Avenue.
[Added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 30-90]
E. From the westerly and easterly driveways of the Bottle Hill Shopping
Center to west on Main Street (Route 24). [Added 10-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 31-92]
F. From the driveway on the property located at 135-137 Main Street to
west on Main Street (Route 124), said driveway being located on the
south side of Main Street (Route 124). [Added 11-5-2001 by Ord. No.
41-2001]
§ 185-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-44
183:579
§ 185-44. Schedule XVI: Speed Limits. [Added 6-14-1976 by Ord.
No. 15-76]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 185-24, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereto:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph)
Date, Letter of
Authorization Location
Kings Road [Adopted
2-10-1969 by Ord.
No. 1-69; amended
6-12-1972 by Ord.
No. 8-72; 6-12-1972
by Ord. No. 9-72;
7-9-1990 by Ord. No.
23-90; 9-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 44-95]
— 2-13-1968 and
7-7-1969
—
Zone 1 25 — Between Route 124
and Prospect Street
Zone 2 30 — Between Prospect
Street and the
Madison Borough/
Chatham Borough
corporate line
School Zone 25 — In the Kings Road
School Zone (880
feet east of Seaman
Avenue to
Kensington Road,
west leg) when the
flashing signs are
operating when
children are going
to or leaving school
during opening or
closing hours
Ridgedale Avenue
[Adopted 2-18-1968
by Ord. No. 2-68;
amended 5-9-2011
by Ord. No. 17-2011]
30 8-13-1964 From Central
Avenue to Park
Avenue
§ 185-44 MADISON CODE § 185-45
183:580
§ 185-45. Schedule XVII: Traffic Control Signals. [Added 6-14-1976
by Ord. No. 15-76]
Pursuant to § 185-26, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersection
Date, Letter of
Authorization
Shunpike Road, Southern Boulevard and
Green Village Road [Adopted 12-29-
1969 by Ord. No. 29-69]
10-31-1968
Kings Road and Samson Avenue (flashing
signal) [Adopted 3-9-1970 by Ord. No.
2-70]
2-10-1967
Park Avenue and Ridgedale Avenue
[Adopted 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 4-77]
——
Shunpike Road and Noe Avenue [Adopted
6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 16-83]
8-12-1983
§ 185-46. Schedule XVIII: No-Passing Zones. [Added 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 15-76]
Pursuant to § 185-28, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
(Reserved)
§ 185-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-46
183:581
Chapter 190
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer connections — See Ch. 155.
Street excavations — See Ch. 166.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 170.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
§ 185-46 MADISON CODE § 185-46
183:582
ARTICLE I
Rates
§ 190-1. Rates and fees for water service.
The fees for the water service to be rendered by the Borough of Madison
Water and Sewer Department shall be consistent with the provisions of
this chapter. The Department is hereby specifically authorized to prepare
schedules of water rates for posting, publication and/or distribution as it
deems appropriate.
§ 190-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-1
183:583

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 190-2. Words and terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAIN — The transmission and distribution pipe lines and appurtenances
owned by the Borough and located in a public street or right-of-way.
SERVICE LINE — The line from the Borough main to the curb or to the limit
of the right-of-way, and including the curb stop or valve at the end of such
line.
WATER UTILITY MAINS IN PRIVATE PROPERTY — Privately constructed
water mains and services which are turned over to and accepted by the
Borough to become part of the Borough water system, together with a
permanent right-of-way, or public easement so that the Borough may enter
upon to excavate, maintain and service said main.
§ 190-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-2
183:585

ARTICLE III
Water System Construction Standards
§ 190-3. Department rules and regulations to be established.
There shall be established by the Borough Council rules and regulations for
the operation of the Department which shall set forth the means for the
public to make application for and use of water in the Borough of Madison
and to provide for standards of construction, maintenance and operation of
the water supply and distribution system and any additions thereto.
§ 190-4. Standards for construction of extensions and alterations.
The constructions of all extensions and alterations to the Borough water
system shall be in accordance with the standards of the American Water
Works Association, as amended from time to time, and shall be set forth in
the rules and regulations of the Department and be subject to inspection
and approval by the Superintendent of Public Works or his agent or any
superior governmental agency having jurisdiction.
§ 190-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
183:587

ARTICLE IV
Privately Constructed Mains, Service Lines and House Connections
§ 190-5. Agreement with Borough.
No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of any main
by a private individual, firm or corporation, unless there is an enforceable
agreement, in a form approved by the Borough Attorney, on the part of
the person, firm or corporation constructing said main, upon completion
of said main, to turn the same over to the Borough to become part of
the Borough water system, and unless such agreement also grants to the
Borough a permanent easement of at least 15 feet in width for the purpose
of maintaining, operating, repairing and restoring said main.
§ 190-6. Supervision by Superintendent of Public Works.
All privately constructed mains and service lines designed to become part
of Borough water system shall be constructed under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works or his representative. The design, materials
and workmanship shall be the same as those set forth under Article III
herein. Twenty-four-hour notice shall be given to the Superintendent of
Public Works for any required supervision.
§ 190-7. Approval of plans and specifications; approval of
construction.
No work shall be started upon the construction of any mains or service
lines designed to become part of the Borough water system until complete
plans, specifications and profiles for the same have been submitted to and
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. Upon completion and
before acceptance by the Borough of Madison of the new construction,
the Water Department must be furnished with an as-built map of all water
improvements, including mains, hydrants, valves, curb boxes and stops and
services. All appurtenances to the water system shall be referenced to a
permanent structure, and all measurements shall be certified by a licensed
land surveyor.
§ 190-8. Supervision of construction; inspection fee.
All mains and service lines designed to become part of the Borough water
system shall be constructed under the supervision of the Superintendent of
Public Works or a properly appointed representative. This supervision shall
be continuous during the course of the construction. An inspection fee, as
set forth in § 190-33, shall be paid to the Department to offset the costs of
said supervision and inspection.
§ 190-9. Tests.
All mains, service lines and house connections shall be tested in accordance
with provisions of Article III herein.
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-10
183:589
§ 190-10. Street openings.
Where opening of streets is required for installation of new mains and/
or services, there shall be compliance with the Borough Street Opening
Ordinance117 and all other applicable regulations of the Borough, county
and state.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III.
§ 190-10 MADISON CODE § 190-10
183:590
ARTICLE V
Water Service
§ 190-11. Approval for house connection; application for water
service.
Before any house connection may be connected to the service line, the
main and such service line shall have been approved and accepted by the
Borough. In addition, the owner or his authorized representative shall make
application to the Department in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Water Department, and such application shall be accompanied by fees
required in § 190-33.
§ 190-11.1. Connection required.
§ 190-11.2. Connection fee. [Added 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009;
amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 36-2013; 9-8-2014 by Ord. No.
45-2014; 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 46-2015; 5-23-2016 by Ord. No.
43-2016; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 13-2017118; 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
22-2018119; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 12-2019120]
A. The owners of all houses, buildings, public buildings or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
requiring potable water, situated within the Borough and abutting on or
having a permanent right-of-access to any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
water main, are hereby required at their expense to connect all
facilities for potable water directly with the public water main, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after date
of official notice from the Borough of Madison to do so, provided that
said public water main is within 100 feet of any property line or right-ofway
access.
B. Any person, firm or corporation failing to connect to the public water
system in accordance with this chapter may be fined not more than $25
for failing to comply within the time provided by this chapter and $10
per day for each day thereafter that the provisions of this chapter are
not complied with.
A. There shall be a water connection fee established in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:31-11 in addition to the fees for department services set
forth in § 190-33. The water connection fee for the remainder of 2019
shall be:
(1) For single family dwelling units, $3,706, and for multiple dwelling
units, $3,706 per unit.
118. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2017.
119. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2018.
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-2019.
§ 190-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-11.2
183:591
§ 190-12. Subdivisions.
Application must be made by the owner of a subdivision to the Department
for each water service to be installed in said subdivision. A service fee,
as set forth in § 190-33, must be paid to the Department for each service,
and all service connections and meter installations must be approved by
the Water Superintendent. No service, other than as provided for with a
temporary permit, shall be permitted to be turned on prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough Building Department.
§ 190-13. Meters and meter fees.
Not more than one building shall be supplied from the same house service
line, except by special permission and under such restrictions as may be
imposed by the Department. If more than one meter is to be installed on any
house service line, such meter or meters will be installed and maintained by
the Department in the location or locations provided by the owner. Meters
shall be installed in any new building before a certificate of occupancy can
be obtained. Meter fees shall be as set forth in § 190-33. All meters two
inches or under shall be installed by the Borough.
§ 190-14. Temporary permits.
A temporary permit for the use of water taken from Borough mains for
construction purposes will be provided only upon written application by
the contractor or owner to the Department, accompanied by a temporary
service charge as set forth in § 190-33. The temporary permit for use of
water hereinabove provided may be revoked at any time if it is determined
by the Water Superintendent that water is being wasted or used
unnecessarily. Fire hydrants may not be used by anyone, other than
authorized Borough personnel, as a temporary source of water for
construction or other purposes without the written approval of the Water
Superintendent.
(2) In the case of any building or portion thereof to be used for
industrial, commercial, educational or other than dwelling
purposes, the Borough Engineer shall determine by accepted
standards the number of units to be connected or added to an
existing connection; where a unit equals an annual average daily
flow of 245 gallons or fraction thereof: $3,706 per unit.
B. This fee shall, pursuant to statute, be recalculated at the end of each
budget year and may be reset by ordinance of the Borough Council
after public hearing, on a yearly basis. The water connection fee shall
be payable in full to the Borough of Madison at the time a building
water connection permit is issued for connection to the municipal water
system by the Borough of Madison.
§ 190-11.2 MADISON CODE § 190-15
183:592
§ 190-15. Defects in property connection, privately owned main, or
service line. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 30-2017]
The owner of any premises shall be responsible for all repairs to any
property connection, privately owned main, or service line, and shall be
liable for all loss of water and damage resulting from any defect in a
property connection, privately owned main, or service line connected to the
Borough water system. The Water Superintendent and/or his/her designee
has the right to enter said property and inspect said lines and connections.
Except in the case of emergency, the property owner shall receive 24 hours'
notice before the Water Superintendent and/or designee shall have the right
to enter said property. From the time any defect is discovered until the
repair or replacement work is completed, the Department may shut off
the water with or without notice, if necessary, and for as long as it may
be deemed necessary. Leaks or damage in or to the property connection,
privately owned main, or service line shall be promptly reported to the
Department and repaired within 30 days unless otherwise determined by
the Water Superintendent. Failure to make said repairs within such time
frame shall result in a penalty of up to $500 per day. In addition, the Water
Superintendent shall determine the amount of water lost as a result of a
leak in or damage to the property connection, privately owned main, or
service line using as a guide the size of the pipe and the pressure per square
inch at the point of such leak and such other factors as may be applicable.
The owner or consumer shall be charged for this loss at the prevailing rate
for water consumed.
§ 190-16. Installation of water meters. [Amended 11-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 49-2003]
All water meters two inches or less in size shall be the property of the
Madison Water Utility. These meters shall be installed, inspected,
maintained and tested by the Madison Water Utility. Only an authorized
representative of the Utility shall be permitted to open, adjust, connect,
disconnect or in any other way service these meters. All water meters
greater than two inches shall be the property of the water customer. These
meters shall be maintained by a licensed plumber hired by the water
customer.
§ 190-17. Curb box maintenance.
Curb boxes shall be kept in accessible condition by the owner of the
premises. If it becomes necessary to reset, repair or replace any curb
box, such work shall be done by and at the expense of the Department
unless such work is necessitated by construction or by other than natural
damage, in which case the fee as set forth in § 190-33 shall be paid to the
Department.
§ 190-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-17
183:593

ARTICLE VI
Access to Water Facilities
§ 190-18. Obstructions not permitted.
Temporary or permanent obstructions which would prevent free access to
any meter, curb stop, curb box, valve or hydrant or other fixture required
for the control or public use of water in any of the streets, easements or
other rights-of-way of the Borough are not permitted.
§ 190-19. Free access by the Department.
No person shall at any time obstruct or prevent free access to any meter,
main, service line or house connection by any authorized employee or
employees of the Department for the purpose of reading, testing, repairing
or inspecting such meter, main, service lines or house connections.
§ 190-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-19
183:595

ARTICLE VII
Water Shutoffs and Turn-Ons
§ 190-20. Curb stop shutoffs and turn-ons.
The curb stop shall not be shut off or turned on except as authorized by the
Water Superintendent.
§ 190-21. Fire hydrant operation.
No person other than members of the Fire Department or Water
Department shall be permitted to open any fire hydrant. Only standard
hydrant wrenches shall be used in opening or closing of fire hydrants.
§ 190-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-21
183:597

ARTICLE VIII
Water Bills; Payment; Turn-On Fees; Meter Tests
§ 190-22. Water bills; inaccessible meters.
§ 190-23. Payments; penalties for nonpayment. [Amended
6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 30-2017]
A. Charges for the use or consumption of water by the owner or occupant
of any house, building, lot or premises, water rent or charges for work
done or services provided shall be billed to the owner of the real estate
quarterly each calendar year.
B. If, after reasonable effort, an authorized employee or official of the
Water Department is unable to gain access to a meter in order to obtain
a reading for billing purposes, he shall leave a form at the premises in
which the meter is located. The owner or occupant then shall be
responsible for entering the meter reading and other appropriate
information on the form provided by the Water Department and for
returning the same to the Water Department within one day of the date
on which the form was left at the premises. If the form is not returned
within this period, the owner shall be billed an estimated amount based
on the amount of water used or consumed during the same quarter of
the previous year or by averaging the amounts used or consumed
during the four quarters immediately preceding the one for which the
bill is being rendered.
A. Delinquent bills, penalties, and discontinuance of service. Refer to
Chapter 94, Appendix B, for policies concerning delinquent bills,
penalties and discontinuance of service.
B. If the water supply to any premises has been discontinued under the
provisions of this section, the Water Department shall not turn on and
restore the water supply until the owner pays in full the bill, together
with the shutoff fee, charged in accordance with this section, and a
turn-on fee, as provided in § 190-33, for restoration of service.
C. Unpaid water charges or rents and other costs and expenses thereon
shall be a lien upon the house, building, lot or premises to which they
relate to the same extent as taxes are a lien upon real estate in the
municipality and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as liens for taxes.
D. All charges and fees are payable to the Borough of Madison Water
Department by mail or in person at the office of the Department. No
person is authorized to accept or give a receipt for moneys due the
Department except the Borough Treasurer or Clerk of the Department
or their duly assigned assistants.
§ 190-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-24
183:599
§ 190-24. Turn-ons and shutoffs.
Except in the case of the initial installation of water service and meter,
no new consumer shall be served with water unless an application, on a
form to be furnished by the Water Department, shall have been completed
by the consumer and filed with the Department. Such application shall
be accompanied by payment of a turn-on fee as set forth in § 190-33. An
application signed by a tenant shall also be signed by the owner. Consumers
changing their place of residence within the Borough shall also be required
to execute the application and file the same with the Department, but
without payment of the fee. Water may be shut off by the Department on
receipt of a written request by a consumer to the Water Department. A
shutoff and turn-on charge as set forth in § 190-33, however, shall be made
for each turning-off and each restoration of the service. If a house is vacant,
no deduction from the minimum charge as set forth in § 190-33 shall be
made as long as the curb stop shall remain open.
§ 190-25. Meter test; adjustments. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 49-2003; 7-23-2012 by Ord. No. 17-2012; 6-26-2017 by Ord. No.
30-2017]
A. Borough-owned meters of two inches or less. The customer shall report
promptly any meter thought to be defective or out of order. The
Department will promptly comply with a request to test such meters.
Should such test disclose that the meter is not defective or out of order,
a charge as set forth in § 190-33 will be made for the test. Meters found
to be defective or out of order during the course of such tests will be
replaced or repaired, and the test fee will be waived. Water charges for
the quarter in which the meter is found to be defective or out of order
shall be based on the water consumed during the same quarter the
previous year or on an average of the meter readings for the four
quarters preceding that in which the meter was found to be defective or
out of order, whichever is greater. The customer is responsible for
maintaining adequate access to the meter as well as maintaining the
plumbing and piping before and after the meter. If the Department is
unable to adequately access the meter or if the Department is unable to
replace the water meter due to the condition of the piping, then a
penalty of up to $1,500 per quarter may be assessed in addition to any
water consumption charges until the condition is corrected.
B. Meters larger than two inches.
(1) All meters larger than two inches shall be tested by December 1,
2016, by a qualified inspection agency at the expense of the meter
owner. A written report from the agency shall be submitted to the
Borough Water Utility within two weeks of said test. Thereafter,
each meter larger than two inches shall be tested every three years
or as requested by the Borough and a report submitted to the
Borough as set forth herein. This report shall include: meter
location; meter size, manufacturer, model, serial number, and
month/year meter was manufactured; test date; test reading; and
§ 190-24 MADISON CODE § 190-25
183:600
accuracy for high, intermediate and low flows; and certification
from a qualified meter testing company. Failure to supply the test
report as requested by the Borough within 60 days of request
by the Borough will result in a penalty being assessed of up to
$100 per day. The Borough reserves the right to demand that
the customer replace the meter with a different design or type
approved by the Borough if the Borough deems the current meter
is not appropriate for the current use based on accepted industry
standards. Valves that permit water to bypass the meter shall be
affixed with a Borough seal to ensure that said valve has not been
used without permission of the Borough of Madison. Removal or
tampering of the seal without the permission of the Borough shall
result in a penalty of $750 per offense.
(2) If any such test reveals defects, the customer shall make the
repairs as requested by the Borough within 60 calendar days.
Failure to repair or replace the meter as requested by the Borough
within 60 calendar days of request will result in a penalty of up to
$250 per day being assessed. Failure to report any repair or
replacement of the water meter shall result in a penalty of up to
$750 per offense.
C. Meter tampering. Tampering with the meter, removal of the meter,
diverting water so as to bypass the meter, or using unmetered water
without the consent of the Borough shall result in service being
discontinued and/or a penalty not to exceed $10,000 being assessed.
§ 190-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-25
183:601

ARTICLE IX
Conservation of Water Supply and Restriction of Use
§ 190-26. Emergency shutdown.
The Department shall be diligent and exercise all reasonable care to provide
a continuous supply of potable water. However, in the event of breakage,
mechanical failure, power failure, accident or shutting off for extension
or repair or whenever, in the judgment of the Department, an emergency
exists, the Department may, with or without notice, discontinue the supply
for as long as it may deem necessary to make repairs or correct the
difficulty. The Borough shall not be liable to any consumer for any damage
or loss resulting from such temporary cessation of service.
§ 190-26.1. Restriction of water usage.
§ 190-27. Swimming pools.
Before any tank or swimming pool having a capacity in excess of 1,000
gallons is filled or refilled with water drawn from the system, notice of
filling or refilling such tank or swimming pool shall first be furnished to
the Department. The Department shall consider the demands on the system
and may, if necessary, limit the time of day, the rate of flow and number of
hours when such withdrawals from the system will be permitted between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. during the months of July, August and
September. The Borough shall not be liable to any consumer for any damage
or loss resulting from the denial or limitation of service hereunder.
A. If, in the opinion of the Mayor of the Borough of Madison, restrictions
should be placed upon the use of water for the watering of lawns and/or
filling of swimming pools during periods of drought and/or low rainfall,
the Mayor is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations
governing the time, place and amount of lawn sprinkling or filling of
swimming pools which can occur, in order to conserve the water
reserves of the Borough of Madison.
B. Said rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be published once in
the legal newspaper of the Borough of Madison and shall be posted in at
least three public places within the Borough at least three days prior to
the effective date of said rules and regulations.
C. Any person or persons violating said rules and regulations shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $50.
§ 190-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-27
183:603

ARTICLE X
Hydrants
§ 190-28. Maintenance of hydrants; uniform marking.
A. Fire hydrants will be maintained by the Department, and a yearly
maintenance charge as set forth in § 190-33 shall be paid by the
Borough of Madison to the Water Department. Fire hydrants shall be
tested at least once annually.
B. There is hereby adopted by the Borough of Madison, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing the uniform marking of fire hydrants,
those certain recommendations known as the "Uniform Marking of Fire
Hydrants" recommended by the National Fire Protection Association,
being particularly the 1935 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, of
which recommendations not less than three copies have been and now
are filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Madison, and the
same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
Borough of Madison.
§ 190-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-28
183:605

ARTICLE XI
Licenses
§ 190-29. Plumber's license required.
No person shall do any plumbing work in connection with the installation
and maintenance of a house connection unless he is a plumber duly licensed
in the State of New Jersey or unless he is working under the direction of a
plumber so licensed.
§ 190-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-29
183:607

ARTICLE XII
Health Regulations
§ 190-30. Compliance required.
All work done by or under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with
all rules and regulations of the State Department of Health and ordinances
of the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison121 and shall be performed
under the supervision of the Water Superintendent.
§ 190-31. Report of violations.
It shall be the duty of all employees of the Department to report any
violations of these regulations to the Water Superintendent. The Water
Superintendent shall report to the Borough Council all violations of this
chapter and all of the rules and regulations of the Department which come
to his knowledge or attention and the action taken.
121. Editor's Note: See Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of the Code.
§ 190-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-31
183:609

ARTICLE XIII
Water Rates and Service Fees
§ 190-32. Water rates for metered service. [Amended 3-12-1979 by
Ord. No. 3-79; 7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 20-82; 9-12-1983 by Ord. No.
27-83; 9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 36-84; 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 39-85;
12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 57-86; 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 14-89;
9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 46-2004; 3-24-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008;
3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 10-2009; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 58-2009122;
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011123]
The following charges are hereby established for water supplied by the
Borough of Madison, and the same are hereby fixed as follows:
A. Rates.
(1) All water furnished in any quarter annual period shall be priced at
the following rates, subject to the minimum quarterly charge
required in Subsection B below:
Rates per 100 Cubic Foot
0 to 1,000 $.0303
1,001 to 3,000 $.0319
3,001 and higher $.0349
B. The following minimum quarterly charges will be levied upon every
resident and/or property owner to whom water is furnished through
metered services for any and all amounts of water consumed, up to and
including the maximum amounts set forth below:
Meter Size
(inches)
For Any Amount of Water
Furnished Not in Excess
of
(Cubic Feet)
Minimum Charge
(per quarter)
5/8 670 $20.29
3/4 670 $20.29
1 1,682 $52.07
1 1/2 3,401 $108.11
2 5,412 $178.30
3 6,171 $204.78
4 9,888 $334.51
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect 2-1-2010. It also removed
all references to the cost of living adjustment (COLA) as the amount of rate increase to be
implemented each year (previously adopted 3-23-2009 by Ordinance Number 10-2009).
123. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 2-1-2011.
§ 190-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32
183:611
§ 190-33. Fees for Department services. [Amended 3-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 4-84; 9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 36-84; 10-15-1985 by Ord. No.
39-85; 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 57-86; 11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
49-2003; 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
Fees for services rendered by the Department, as provided for herein, shall
be as follows:
Meter Size
(inches)
For Any Amount of Water
Furnished Not in Excess
of
(Cubic Feet)
Minimum Charge
(per quarter)
6 and greater 18,632 $639.62
C. Borough-owned residential water meters. Any residential water
customer with two-inch water service whose average quarterly usage is
less than the minimum usage specified in § 190-32B (Article XIII) of the
Borough Code by at least 25% in a calendar year would have their water
bill set for the following year at the minimum charge for the next
smaller meter size or actual water usage, whichever is greater. [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017124]
A. Supervision of main and service line leakage and pressure tests as
provided for in § 190-6 herein: $280 per day, or $35 per hour for each
hour or fraction thereof during which the presence of the Inspector is
required.
B. Inspection of main and service line construction as provided for in
§ 190-8 herein: $280 per day, or $35 per hour for each hour or fraction
thereof during which the presence of the Inspector is required.
C. Tapping of main, construction of service line and installation of meter as
provided for in § 190-11 herein:
(1) Three-fourths inch: $1,500, including material and labor.
(2) One inch: $2,000, including material and labor.
(3) One and one-half inches: $2,800, including material and labor.
(4) Two inches or greater: via outside contracted services.
D. Services in new subdivisions as provided for in § 190-12 herein and for
meter installations as provided for in § 190-13 herein:
(1) Three-fourths inch: $75 per service.
(2) One inch: $150 per service.
124. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect retroactively to 1-1-2017
based on an analysis of 2016 residential water usage with any adjustment/credit taking
place in July 2017 and annually thereafter in the first quarter of each year.
§ 190-32 MADISON CODE § 190-33
183:612
(3) One and one-half inches: $200 per service.
(4) Two inches: $250 per service. In the case of three-fourths-, one-,
one-and-one-half- and two-inch service, labor, excavation and all
materials, except the meter, shall be provided by the developer. In
the case of larger services, labor, excavations and all material and
the meter shall be provided by the developer as approved by the
Water Utility.
(5) Four inches: $450 per service.
(6) Six inches: $1,000 per service.
(7) Eight inches: $1,800 per service.
E. Temporary services are provided for in § 190-14 herein: up to $250 per
quarter per residential unit and up to $200 per quarter per 1,000
square feet of commercial space. Labor, excavation and material shall
be provided for by the applicant. If consumption warrants it, the Chief
Financial Officer may determine that the customer shall provide the
Borough with a deposit of $250 for a temporary water meter which shall
be installed by the Borough and read quarterly with the customer being
billed based on the then current rates. The water meter deposit shall be
promptly refunded when the undamaged temporary meter is returned
to the Borough. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 30-2017]
F. Resetting, repairing or replacement of curb box as provided for in
§ 190-17 herein: $450, including all labor and materials.
G. Discontinuation and/or restoration of service as provided for in § 190-24
herein: $50 each.
H. Meter test of meter two inches or less as provided for in § 190-25
herein: $20.
I. Hydrant maintenance fee as provided for in § 190-28 herein: $115 per
year.
J. Fire sprinkler service fee.
(1) Four-inch connection: $57.50 per quarter.
(2) Six-inch connection: $71.25 per quarter.
(3) Eight-inch connection: $107.50 per quarter.
§ 190-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-33
183:613

ARTICLE XIV
Outside Consumers
§ 190-34. Compliance.
All consumers located beyond the municipal limits of the Borough of
Madison shall comply with all Borough ordinances and regulations with
respect to water service.
§ 190-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-34
183:615
Chapter 191
WATER EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 190.
§ 191-1. Annual water restrictions.
A. Voluntary restrictions. During the months of June, July and August of
each year, all residents, tenants and businesses of the borough are
requested to observe the following voluntary water use restrictions:
(1) Indoor conservation measures.
(2) Outdoor use for lawn and shrub watering, car washing, driveway
and sidewalk washing shall be restricted to alternate days, with
usage allowed on even-numbered days for those residents or
businesses whose dwelling, building or box number are even and
on odd-numbered days for those residents or businesses whose
dwelling, building or box number are odd. Such water use shall be
done only from 12:01 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and from 8:00 p.m. to 12:00
midnight on the allowed days. There should be no such outdoor
water usage on the 31st day of July or August. [Amended
8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 27-99]
B. Mandatory restrictions. The Borough Administrator shall declare the
water restrictions set forth in § 191-1A(2) of this chapter to be
mandatory whenever the Borough Water Utility Operator determines
that such is appropriate based on one of the following conditions:
(1) That 3,500,000 gallons of water per day are used for seven
consecutive days;
(2) That any borough well level drops six feet or more from a normal
level of 34 feet within a one-month period or less; or
(3) When in the opinion of the Borough Water Utility operator these
restrictions are necessary to maintain a sufficient water level in the
borough water tanks for customer use and firesafety.
C. Exempt businesses. The following types of businesses or organizations
shall be exempt from water use restrictions to the extent necessary to
operate their business: nurseries, garden centers, car washes and the
Madison Golf Course. The Borough Council may, however, impose water
restrictions upon such businesses or organizations by adoption of a
resolution so specifying. [Added 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 27-99]
§ 190-34 MADISON CODE § 191-2
191:616
§ 191-2. Declaration of emergency.
In addition to the restrictions set forth in S 191-1 of this chapter, whenever
the Borough Council shall be satisfied and finds that a water emergency
exists in the borough, it may adopt a resolution declaring that a water
emergency exists in the borough. Such resolution shall be adopted by the
Borough Council at any regular, special, adjourned or emergency public
meeting of the Borough Council. Such resolution shall specify which of the
water use regulations contained in § 191-3 of this chapter is being imposed,
as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be
effective immediately upon publication according to law and shall continue
in effect for 90 days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in § 191-4 of
this chapter. For the purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist
if, for any of the following reasons:
§ 191-3. Water use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the Borough Council of a resolution declaring that a
water emergency exists in the borough in accordance with § 191-2 of this
chapter, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures, and any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed
and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona
fide health emergency exists and to exempt businesses, as specified herein,
during the water emergency:
A. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
borough has adopted water use restrictions; has notified the borough,
the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other state,
county or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions; and such
restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any state, county or
local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so.
B. The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the municipality.
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of
cars;
B. Outside water usage on alternate days, allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of
any month during the water emergency. Such water use shall be done
only from 12:01 a.m. to 8 a.m. and from 8:00 p.m. to 12 midnight on the
allowed days. [Amended 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 27-1999]
C. Any other water use restriction specified by the Borough Council in the
resolution required by § 191-2 of this chapter which is reasonable under
§ 191-2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 191-3
191:617
§ 191-4. Duration of restrictions.
§ 191-5. Enforcement of restrictions.
§ 191-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
After a first offense in accordance with § 191-3 of this chapter, any person
or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with
this section. For a second offense, the fine imposed shall be $500 or
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency.
A. The declaration of mandatory water restrictions by the Borough
Administrator required by § 191-1 of this chapter and the resolution of
the Borough Council required by § 191-2 of this chapter shall, in
addition to complying with § 191-1 or 191-2, provide a period of time
during which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and
which shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water
emergency under the circumstances considering the nature and extent
of the water emergency.
B. At the expiration of the time period specified, the water use restriction
shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
C. If the Borough Council shall be satisfied that the water emergency has
been abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in their
resolution or by declaration of the Borough Administrator, it shall adopt
a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the water use
restrictions inapplicable.
D. If, at the expiration of the time period specified, the Borough Council
shall be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, it may
adopt a resolution in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
continuing the water use restrictions.
A. The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Madison.
B. Whenever the Madison Police Department shall find a violation of the
water use restrictions, it shall give the violator a written warning and
explain the penalties for a second and third offense as provided by
§ 191-6 of this chapter.
C. The Madison Police Department shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons
and businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The
Madison Police Department is hereby empowered to write summonses
for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 191-3 MADISON CODE § 191-6
191:618
imprisonment for 10 days, or both. For a third and subsequent offense, the
fine imposed shall be $2,000 or imprisonment for 90 days, or both.
Chapter 192
WILD ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and rabies control — See Ch. 59. Animals — See Ch. 203.
§ 192-1. Purpose.
It has been well established that the feeding of fish, wild animals and
waterfowl is both detrimental to fish, animals, and waterfowl and causes a
public health nuisance and safety hazard that is detrimental to the health
and general welfare of the public. Such activities also cause degradation of
water quality and/or are detrimental to the natural environment.
§ 192-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY OF WATER — Includes any stream, pond, lake, river or any and all
accumulation of water.
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., or on or near the sea; an aquatic fowl, including but not limited
to ducks, geese, swans, heron, and egrets.
WILD ANIMAL — Includes any animal which is not normally domesticated
in this state, including but not limited to bears, coyotes, deer, feral cats,
foxes, groundhogs, opossums, raccoons, skunks, and waterfowl.
§ 192-3. Feeding of fish, wild animals and waterfowl.
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed, bait, or in any
manner provide access to food to any fish, wild animal, or waterfowl in
the Borough of Madison, on lands either publicly or privately owned.
This section shall not apply to the feeding of farm animals.
B. No person shall purposely, knowingly, or otherwise feed, bait, or
otherwise provide access to food to any fish or cause to place in any
body of water any object or material of any nature or kind, except that
this shall not in any way be deemed to prohibit a person or persons
possessing a valid fishing license from engaging in normal fishing
activities, where permitted by law.
§ 191-6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 192-3
191:619
§ 192-4. Feeding of other songbirds and other backyard birds.
Feeding of other songbirds and other backyard birds shall be permitted
outdoors at such times and in such numbers that:
§ 192-5. Enforcement.
C. No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement, salt,
seed or birdseed, fruit, or grain in a manner that would constitute an
attractant to any wild animal or waterfowl.
D. No person shall fail to take remedial action to avoid contact or conflict
with wild animals, which may include the securing or removal of
outdoor trash, cooking grills, pet food, bird feeders or any other similar
food source or attractant, after being advised by the Borough to
undertake such remedial action. Further, after an initial contact or
conflict with a wild animal, no person shall continue to provide, or
otherwise fail to secure or remove, any likely food sources or
attractants, including, but not limited to, outdoor trash, grills, pet food
or bird feeders.
E. Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(1) Any agent of the Borough authorized to implement an alternative
control method set forth in any approved community-based deer
management plan and possessing a special deer management
permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c. 46;125 or
(2) Any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant
to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions
of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
A. Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects
the rights of surrounding property owners and renders other persons
insecure in the use of their property; and
B. Does not create an accumulation of droppings on the property and
surrounding properties; and
C. Does not become an attractant for rodents or other wild animals; and
D. Bird feeders are placed at least five feet above the ground.
A. Each property owner shall have the duty to remove any above-named
materials or devices placed on the owner's property in violation of this
chapter.
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 23:4-42.3 et seq.
§ 192-3 MADISON CODE § 192-5
191:620
§ 192-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a fine not
less than $50 or more than $500 for each offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or
part of each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 192-7. Severability.
Every section of this chapter or subdivision or separate part thereof shall
be considered a separate provision to the intent that if any portion shall
be declared unconstitutional it shall not affect the remaining parts of this
chapter.
Chapter 195
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown Development Commission — See
Ch. 15.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Historic District Preservation — See Ch. 112.
Official Map — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
B. Failure to remove such materials or devices or to make such
modifications within 24 hours after notice from the municipality shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
C. Health Department personnel, animal control officers and all police
officers of the municipality are hereby given full power and authority to
enforce this chapter.
D. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 192-5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 192-7
191:621

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 36-85; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
50-85; 2-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1-86; 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 20-91;
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 21-94; 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95; 4-22-1996
by Ord. No. 8-96; 10-16-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96; 5-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 14-97; 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 35-98]
§ 195-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "A Comprehensive Ordinance Regulating
and Limiting the Uses of Land and the Uses and Locations of Buildings and
Structures; Regulating and Restricting the Height and Bulk of Buildings
and Structures and Determining the Area of Yards and Other Open Spaces;
Regulating and Restricting the Density of Population; Dividing Madison
Borough into Districts for Such Purposes; Adopting a Map126 of Said
Borough Showing Boundaries and the Classification of Such Districts;
Establishing Rules, Regulations and Standards Governing the Development
of Land Within the Borough, Including Site Planning and Land Subdivision;
Establishing a Planning Board and a Board of Adjustment; and Prescribing
Penalties for the Violation of Its Provisions."
§ 195-2. Short title.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Madison."
§ 195-3. Statutory authority; purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975
("MLUL") (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), in order to promote and protect the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The purposes of this
chapter are as follows:
A. To plan and guide the appropriate use or development of all land in a
manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare in the following manner:
(1) By regulating the location of buildings and establishing standards
of development; establishing setback lines and the location of
buildings designed for residential, commercial, industrial, office or
other uses; and by fixing reasonable standards to which buildings
or structures shall conform.
(2) By prohibiting incompatible uses; and prohibiting uses, buildings
or structures which are incompatible with the character of
development of the permitted uses within specified zoning districts
and surrounding areas.
126. Editor's Note: Said map is located in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 195-1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-3
191:623
(3) By regulating alterations of existing buildings; and preventing such
additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder.
(4) By conserving the value of land and buildings throughout the
Borough.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters in order to:
(1) Reduce public expenditures for emergency operations, evacuations
and restorations.
(2) Prevent damage to transportation and utility systems.
(3) Minimize losses and damages to public and private property due to
inundation caused by floodwaters and storm runoff.
(4) Restrict structures and land uses which increase flood heights,
velocities, erosion and siltation.
(5) Prevent to the extent possible an increase in volume and rate of
surface runoff due to development.
(6) Prevent further unwise development in floodplains, thus reducing
future expenditures for protective measures.
(7) Preserve, protect and enhance the natural environment of the
floodplain.
(8) Maintain the useful life of water detention and retention areas by
preventing sedimentation.
(9) Prevent dangers to life and property from flooding resulting from
excessive water runoff and clogging of drainage structures.
(10) Preserve the recreational use of water bodies and enhance water
quality by preventing stagnation.
(11) Prevent pollutants from entering streams, rivers and potable water
supplies.
(12) Reduce public expenditures for repair of public facilities resulting
from soil erosion and sedimentation.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space
D. To ensure that land development does not conflict with the development
and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the
state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
§ 195-3 MADISON CODE § 195-3
191:624
§ 195-4. Interpretation of provisions.
maintenance of the character of the neighborhoods, preservation of the
environment and quality of life.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of
such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper land use.
K. To encourage planned developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
L. To encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of
such development and to the more efficient use of land.
M. To provide, within the community's resources, for the future housing
needs of the citizens of the Borough of Madison.
N. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
O. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
P. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan
goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs.
A. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those imposed by any other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the
provisions of this chapter shall control. Where the provisions of any
other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose a greater
restriction than this chapter, the provisions of such other law,
ordinance, regulation or resolution shall control.
§ 195-3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-4
191:625
§ 195-5. Prohibited uses. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 28-2015]
§ 195-6. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter:
§ 195-7. Definitions.
Definitions and usages. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings as herein
defined. Any word or term not defined below or in the MLUL shall be used
with a meaning as defined in Webster's Third New International Dictionary
of the English Language, unabridged (or the latest edition). Whenever a
term is used in this chapter which is defined in the MLUL, such term shall
have the same meaning as the MLUL.
ABUTTING COUNTY ROAD — Any existing or proposed county road shown
on the adopted County Master Plan or Official Map which adjoins or lies
within a lot or parcel of land submitted for subdivision or site plan approval.
ACCELERATION OR DECELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane
which permits integration and merging of slower-moving vehicles into the
main vehicular stream or slowing down of vehicles. See Figure 1.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be held
paramount to any less restrictive provisions or requirements
established by deed restriction, private covenant or agreement. Where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction or limitation upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or
requires greater lot areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces
than are presently imposed or required by existing provisions of law or
ordinance, by existing rules, regulations or permits or by covenants or
restrictions imposed by deed or private agreements, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
A. Following the effective date of this chapter, the establishment of any
use not expressly permitted by this chapter shall be prohibited.
B. Pipelines that are not public utilities that distribute services to end
users and are unregulated by the State of New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities are prohibited in all zone districts.
A. The present tense shall include the future.
B. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
D. The words "zone" and "district" are synonymous, and whenever the
term "structure" is used, it shall be construed to mean and include the
term "building."
§ 195-4 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:626
Figure 1
ACCESS — A physical entrance to property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure, the use
of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building located on the same lot. When an accessory building is attached in
a substantial manner by a wall or roof to a principal building or structure, it
shall be considered a part thereof.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot as the principal use.
ADDITION — A structure added to the original structure at some time after
the completion of the original structure.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Secretary of either Board (i.e., Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment).
ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or a distinct part of a
facility which is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health to provide
preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative services under
medical supervision to meet the needs of functionally impaired adult
patients who are not related to the members of the governing authority
by marriage, blood or adoption. Adult day health care facilities provide
services to patients for a period of time which does not exceed 12 hours
during any calendar day.
ADVERSE DRAINAGE CONDITION — The absence of drainage facilities,
drainage easements or drainage rights-of-way leading to, along or through
a street, road, drainage structure or property, either within or exterior to a
proposed subdivision or site plan of such location, size, design, construction
or condition which would provide adequately for storm drainage, or which
would prevent flooding, erosion, silting or other damaging effect to a street,
road, drainage structure or property, or remove the threat of such damage.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Development creating, imposing, aggravating or
leading to inadequate, impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory conditions on
a site proposed for development or on off-tract property or facilities. Such
conditions may relate to circulation, drainage, erosion, potable water,
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:627
sewage collection and treatment or those factors specifically set forth in
§ 195-23C.
ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ELEMENT — Any environmental
pollutant such as smoke, odors, liquid wastes, radiation, noise, vibrations,
glare, trespass lighting or heat.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A service way providing vehicular service access or pedestrian
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
of an existing building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows or any
enlargement or diminution of a building or structure. "Alteration" shall also
mean and include any conversion of a building or a part thereof from one
use to another or the moving of a building or structure from one location
to another. "Alteration" shall not be construed to mean any necessary
repairs and renovation of an existing structure solely for the purpose of
maintenance and/or improvements of the appearance.
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A health care facility or a
distinct part of a health care facility which provides preventive, diagnostic
and treatment services to persons who come to the facility to receive
services and depart from the facility on the same day. The facility shall not
be open before 5:00 a.m. nor after 12:00 midnight.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any coin-operated machine or device which,
whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by
the insertion of a coin; and may be operated by the public for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve
either a high or low score which, by comparison to the score of other
players, whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill
or competence or indicates in any other way competitive advantage of
one player over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include
devices such as marble machines, skill ball, pinball, mechanical grab
machines, the machines or contrivances commonly known as bagatelle,
baseball, hockey, football, pool table, target shooting, shuffleboard or
shuffle alley, bowling or any similar named device or any device which
utilizes an electronic display to reproduce symbolic figures and lines
intended to be representative of real games or activities. Specifically
excluded shall be any device, whether operated by coin or not, which merely
provides a ride, sensation, electronic reading or weight for use by and to
the amusement of the public.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding
and shall be incidental to such hospital use.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any building, structure or premises in which animals
are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial gain.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, garden apartment."
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:628
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plan, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, appeal or interpretation request to the Board of Adjustment or
request for the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter.[Amended
10-16-2013 by Ord. No. 41-2013]
APPROVED PLAN — A plan which has been granted final approval by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment of the Borough of Madison.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Madison Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment as the case may be, unless a different agency is
designated by this chapter.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation, group of geologic formations or part of a
geologic formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable rock, sand
or gravel which is capable of storing and transmitting usable quantities of
water to wells or springs.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed by the State
Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and congregate
dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed
for four or more adults unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer,
at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette
and a lockable door on the unit entrance. A coordinated array of supportive
personal and health services available 24 hours a day are usually provided.
ASSOCIATION — The entity responsible for the administration of a
condominium, which entity may be incorporated or unincorporated.
ATTIC — The open nonhabitable space between the ceiling beams of the top
habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The highest elevation, expressed in feet above
sea level, of the level of floodwaters occurring in the regulatory base flood.
BASEMENT — A space partially below grade level having 1/2 or more of its
floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground and
with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 6 1/2 feet. A basement shall
be counted as a story if used for business, industrial, office or residential
purposes.
BERM — A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Performance or design
standards established to minimize the risk of contaminating groundwater or
surface waters while managing the use, manufacture, handling or storage
of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 56-2010]
BICYCLE LANE — A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for
the exclusive use of bicycles.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:629
BICYCLE PATH — A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and
sidewalks, designed to be used by bicycles.
BILLBOARD — A sign advertising an occupant, product or service on other
than the lot upon which the billboard is located.
BLOCK — The area bounded by one or more streets or a municipal
boundary of sufficient size to accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size
required in this chapter.
BOARD — The Borough of Madison Planning Board or the Borough of
Madison Zoning Board of Adjustment, whichever is acting on an application
for development.
BOARDER — A person other than a member of a family occupying a part
of any dwelling unit who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping
accommodations in such dwelling unit and may be furnished meals as part
of this consideration.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling or part thereof which is licensed by the
state in which space is let for a fee by the owner or operator to more than
three persons who are not members of the family and whether or not meals
are provided.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — That person appointed to the position by the
Borough Council.
BRIDGE — A structure designed to convey vehicles and/or pedestrians over
a watercourse, railroad, street or any depression.
BUFFER, TRANSITION — A landscaped area intended to act as a visual
separation between two land uses of different intensity.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal plan projection of all covered or
roofed areas of a structure on a lot, whether permanent or temporary,
including cantilevered areas and similar projections, but excluding roof
eaves, roof overhangs, bay or bow windows, chimneys and similar
projections extending a maximum of two feet from the structure,
unenclosed front porches [including wraparound porches extending along
the side(s) of a structure] and entry roofs, divided by the lot area, expressed
as a percentage. See Figure 2.[Amended 10-15-2008 by Ord. No.
65-2008; 10-16-2013 by Ord. No. 41-2013]
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:630
Figure 2
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The two-dimensional space within which a
principal structure is permitted to be built on a lot and that is defined by
minimum yard setbacks. See Figure 2.
BUILDING HEIGHT — See "height of building."
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street line or the lot line touching
that part of a building closest to the street or lot line. In the case of a
cantilevered section of a building, the building line will coincide with the
most projected surface. All yard requirements shall be measured to the
building line. See Figure 2.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches a distance of
six inches off of the ground.
CAMPUS — The grounds and building of a public or private college,
university, school or institution.
CANOPY — A self-supporting roof-like shelter or marquee without sides,
permanently affixed to the wall of a building and providing overhead
protection from the weather at an entrance to said building, which shall be
construed to be a part of the building to which it is affixed.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — A timetable or schedule of all
future capital improvements to be carried out during a specific period and
listed in order of priority, and may also include cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project.
CARPOOL — A single-vehicle, share-the-expense method of transportation
for two or more individuals who regularly travel together to a common
destination.
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage
of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:631
CARTWAY — The hard or paved area of a street between the curbs,
including travel lanes and parking areas, but not including curbs, sidewalks
or swales. Where there are no curbs, the "cartway" is that portion between
the edges of the paved width.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CEMETERY — Any land or place dedicated for use, used or intended to be
used for the internment of the human dead.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — The major shopping area within the
Borough usually containing, in addition to retail uses, offices, service uses,
professional, cultural, recreational and entertainment establishments and
uses, residences, appropriate government activities and transportation
facilities.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO) — A document issued by the
Construction Official allowing the occupancy or use of a building and
certifying that the structure or use has been constructed and/or renovated
according to and in compliance with all the applicable state codes and
municipal ordinances and resolutions.
CERTIFICATION — A signed, written statement by the Borough Engineer
and/or Construction Official that specific constructions, inspections or tests,
where required, have been performed and that such comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter or regulations adopted hereunder.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which differs from the previous use of a
structure or land by way of function, operation, extent or products sold,
handled or manufactured and the like, including a change from one
permitted use to another kind of permitted use in the same zone, as well as
any change in activity which changes, alters or enlarges the previous use
or structure or which will change, alter, enlarge or affect drainage, traffic,
parking, sidewalks, paving, landscaping, fencing, sanitary disposal or other
similar consideration.[Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 43-2005]
CHANNEL — A watercourse with a definite bed and banks which confine
and conduct the normal continuous or intermittent flow of water.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision and protection of children that is licensed by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLINIC — See "ambulatory health care facility."
COLLEGE — See "university."
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:632
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership of two or more contiguous parcels
of real property by one person or by two or more persons or entity owning
such property jointly.
COMMON WATER/SEWERAGE — Water supply and/or sewage disposal
systems, whether privately or publicly owned and operated, that serve two
or more dwellings or other buildings.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not
be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act (P.L. 1971, c. 136; N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq.). In the case of such community residence housing mentally ill
persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service
contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be
established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of
the Department of Human Services.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department of
Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:40-1 to 30:14-14)
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical and
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Borough and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of the
application for development.
COMPOSTING — A controlled process of degrading organic matter by
microorganisms.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location and operation of such use
as contained in the Zoning Ordinance127 and upon the issuance of an
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:633
authorization therefor by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — Specially planned, designed and managed
multiunit rental housing with self-contained apartments. These retirement
communities are designed to provide supportive environments but also
to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle at a moderate cost. A
limited number of support services such as meals, laundry, housekeeping,
transportation and social and recreation activities are usually provided.
Health services available 24 hours a day are not part of congregate housing.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Borough official specified in the
Building Code who is charged with administering the Construction Code.128
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — Legal authorization for the erection, alteration
or extension of a structure.
CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances exceeding current federal and state maximum contaminant
levels in the water supply. The NJDEP residential cleanup standards shall
apply to residential uses, and the nonresidential standards shall apply to
nonresidential uses.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
CONTIGUOUS PARCELS — Tracts of land which share one or more common
boundaries.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — The provision
of lodging and nursing, medical or other health-related services at the same
or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for
the life of the individual or for a period greater than one year, including
mutually terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an
entrance fee with or without other periodic charges. A fee which is less than
the sum of the regular periodic charges for one year of residency is not
considered an entrance fee.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the plan elements for the
physical development of Morris County, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County
Planning Board.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Morris County Planning Board.
COURT — Any open space, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, that is
bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building.
CRITICAL AREA — Sensitive natural lands and waters which, when altered,
could lead to the degradation of water quality and include frequently
127. Editor's Note: See Art. V, Zoning, of this chapter.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Building Construction.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:634
flooded soils, water retention soils and potential prime aquifer recharge
soils. Sensitive natural lands and waters include streams, ponds and lakes,
one-hundred-year floodplains, freshwater wetlands, wetland transition
areas and slopes over 15%.
CUL-DE-SAC — The turnaround at the end of a dead-end street.
CULVERT — A structure under a driveway, road, railroad or pedestrian
walk, not incorporated in a closed drainage system.
CURB CUT (DROP CURB) — The opening along the curbline at which point
vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
CUT — A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed
or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface
or excavated surfaces
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEAD-END STREET — A street or portion of a street which is accessible by
a single means of ingress or egress.
DEDICATION FOR STREET PURPOSES — A dedication of land for
construction, reconstruction, widening, repairing, maintaining or improving
a street, public or private, and for the construction, reconstruction or
alteration of facilities related to the safety, convenience or carrying capacity
of said street, including but not limited to curbing, pedestrian walkways,
drainage facilities, traffic control devices and utilities in or along road
rights-of-way.
DE MINIMIS QUANTITY EXEMPTION — As defined by the Industrial Site
Recovery Act (ISRA), N.J.S.A. 13:1D-1 et seq., 13:1K-6, 58:10B-1 et seq.,
and 58:10-23.11a et seq. (or most current). The total quantity of hazardous
substances or hazardous wastes at an industrial establishment may be
a combination; the total quantity shall not exceed 500 pounds or 55
gallons.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DETENTION BASIN — See "stormwater detention."
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbances and any use, change in use or
extension of use of land for which permission may be required pursuant to
this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER — See "residential cluster."
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:635
DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned
development or cluster development.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map or other municipal regulation of the use and development of land or
amendment thereto adopted and filed pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law.129
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission, unless
pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid and effective
federal or state of New Jersey permit resulting in the releasing, spilling,
pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance
into the waters or lands of the State of New Jersey or into the waters or
natural resources within the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey. See also
the definition of "stormwater management measure" in § 195-37.[Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
DIVERSION CHANNEL — A drainage channel constructed across or at the
bottom of a slope to divert water.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes controls of runoff during and
after construction, or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of
vehicles and allowing access from a street to a lot, building or other
structure or facility.
DRY WELL (SEEPAGE PIT) — A covered pit with an open jointed lining
into which water is piped or directed from roofs, basement floors, other
impervious surfaces or swales or pipes to seep or percolate into the
surrounding soil.
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for
human habitation. "Dwellings" may include but are not limited to the
following types:
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling for one family that is not
attached to any other dwelling by any means.
A.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Three or more dwellings located within a
single building, with an entrance to each dwelling by direct access
B.
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:636
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
from the outside or through a common hall. "Garden apartments" may
include buildings in cooperative or condominium ownership. Also see
"dwelling, multifamily."
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY/TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in
a row of at least three such attached units in which each unit has its
own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another
unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more
vertical common fire-resistant walls.
C.
MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling units
that share common horizontal separations, including garden
apartments.
D.
SEMIDETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A single-family dwelling attached
to one other single-family dwelling on an adjoining lot by a common
vertical wall erected on the lot line dividing the two lots.
E.
PATIO HOME — Single-family units joined together by terrace, patio,
garage, porch or lanai.
F.
TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two dwelling
units, each of which is separated from the other by an unpierced
wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
G.
MOBILE — A structure constructed as a vehicle, containing living
quarters with accommodations for sleeping, and which may or may
not have built-in sanitary and cooking facilities. It may either move
from place to place under its own power or be towed by any other
vehicle. It may also be immobilized without changing its character. This
term includes habitable trailers, camping trailers and similar habitable
devices.
H.
AGE RESTRICTED — Housing restricted to occupancy by a head-ofhousehold
age 55 or older. No person 18 years or younger shall
permanently reside in the housing unit. [Added 4-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 20-2008]
I.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Housing restricted to occupancy by a head-ofhousehold
age 62 or older. No person 18 years or younger shall
permanently reside in the housing unit. [Added 4-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 20-2008]
J.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:637
EMBANKMENT — A man-made or natural deposit of soil, rock or other
materials.
ENCROACHMENT, FLOODPLAIN — Any obstruction within a delineated
floodplain.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — A study to determine the
potential direct and indirect effects of a proposed development on the
environment.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions,
telephone lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service to the zone
or neighborhood where located by public utilities, municipal or other
governmental agencies. "Essential services" shall include first aid and
emergency aid squad buildings.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of minerals,
mineral substances or organic substances, other than vegetation, from
the water, land surface or beneath the land surface, whether exposed or
submerged.130
EXTENDED CARE FACILITIES — A facility designed to provide skilled
nursing care only during the recuperative phase of an illness.
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based
on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and
stability.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the
division contracts for family day-care in which child care services are
regularly provided to no fewer than three and no more than five children
for no fewer than 15 hours per week. A child being cared for under the
following circumstances is not included in the total number of children
receiving child-care services:
A. The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
130. Editor's Note: The definition of "existing grade," which followed this definition, was
repealed 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002. See now the definition of "grade."
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:638
FENCE — A structure made of posts or stakes, joined together by boards,
wire or rails, serving as an enclosure, a barrier or as a boundary. The height
of a fence shall be measured from the ground surface at the base of the
fence to the highest part of the structure above the base except that posts
shall be permitted to extend up to six inches above the height limit. An
open fence shall be considered a structure having voids comprising 45% or
more of the fence facade area. Typical open fence styles include post and
rail, chain link, spaced picket, and ornamental rigid metal. All other fences
and walls shall be considered solid fences. Typical solid fence styles include
stockade, board-on-board, and solid picket.[Amended 11-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 71-2007]
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINAL PLAN — The final map of all or a portion of a development which
is presented to the Board for final approval in accordance with these
regulations and which, if an approved subdivision, shall be filed with the
proper county recording officer.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Any structure wherein business of primarily
a monetary nature is transacted, such as banks, savings and loans
associations, mortgage companies and similar institutions.
FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — The susceptibility of a specific land use at
a particular location to damage by flooding and the potential of the specific
land use to increase off-site flooding or flood-related damages.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — That portion of the flood hazard area outside the
floodway, based on the total area inundated during the regulatory base flood
plus 25% of the regulatory base flood discharge. See Figure 3.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodplain consisting of the floodway and the
flood-fringe area.
FLOOD HAZARD DESIGN ELEVATION — The highest elevation, expressed
in feet above sea level, of the level of floodwaters which delineates the floodfringe
area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community,
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between
parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents,
where no payment for the care is being provided.
B.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:639
adopted January 30, 1976, as Map Nos. H01-06 and 101-06, or as revised
by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOOD MAP — A map prepared by Richard P. Browne, Associates, entitled
"Delineation of Floodway and Flood Fringe Area" and approved by the
State of New Jersey Water Policy and Supply Council, October 18, 1976,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:16A-52, or as revised by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
FLOODPLAIN — The same as the "flood hazard area" and shall include
Zones A-1 through A-30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river. See
Figure 3.
FLOODWAY REGULATORY — The channel and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the regulatory base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 of one
foot.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building or group of buildings on a lot, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of a wall separating
two buildings, but excluding the following:[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 8-2004]
FLOOR AREA, NET — Gross floor area minus 15%.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of a building or structure
compared to the total area of the site.[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
8-2004]
Cellars, but only the floor area of rooms devoted to mechanical
equipment accessory to the principal use of the structure and/or rooms
with a ceiling height of less than 6.5 feet. All other rooms or space
within a cellar are not excluded from the floor area calculation.
A.
Any floors or portions thereof contained on terraces, balconies or
unenclosed porches extending beyond the exterior face of the building.
B.
C. Decks.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:640
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL — The square footage of all floors in a
building, excluding attic and basement floors, open porches, breezeways
and garages. Enclosed porches which are equipped with heating facilities
for year-round living shall be included as floor area.
FLY ASH — Particles of airborne matter, not including process material,
arising from the combustion of fuel, such as coal, wood or oil.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale of food which is processed or otherwise prepared for eventual
consumption but not consumed on the premises. Such uses include but
are not limited to the following: bakeries, delicatessens, ice cream parlors
and bagel shops. Where such uses have tables, such uses shall be deemed
restaurants.
FRONTAGE — See "lot, frontage."
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or a portion of the
main building used primarily for the storage of a passenger vehicle or
vehicles and not more than one commercial vehicle of a rated capacity not
exceeding two tons, which commercial vehicle is owned or used by the
occupant of the building to which the garage is accessory.
GARAGE, PARKING — A building intended for the parking of motor vehicles
as a business.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — An enclosed building intended for the storage,
servicing or repair of motor vehicles as a business including outdoor repair
and whether or not the facility is a part of an agency dealing in new or
used motor vehicles. A public garage shall not include a car wash and auto
detailing facility.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline or other motor
fuel is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into
motor vehicles and which may provide for the maintenance, service, storage
or washing of motor vehicles or the sale of equipment and accessories.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer who is qualified by
education and experience to practice applied soil mechanics and foundation
engineering.
GLARE — A sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is
sufficiently greater than luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing
annoyance, discomfort or loss of visual performance.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Madison.
GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent
agency or instrumentality of the United States and of the State of New
Jersey and any county, city, township, village, authority, district or other
governmental unit.131
131. Editor's Note: The definition of "grade, finished," which followed this definition, was
repealed 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002. See now the definition of "grade."
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:641
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of ground levels/
elevations in a given area. In the case of grade adjoining a structure
at exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by: the lowest
points within the area between the structure and the property line as
determined by perpendicular offset from the structure wall; or, where the
property line is more than 10 feet perpendicular from the structure, then
the lowest points between the structure and within 10 feet; or, where a
public road exists within 50 feet of the structure, the lowest points will
include the pavement level of the public road. Ground levels are to be
averaged at no more than ten-foot intervals, and include all building corners
or a perpendicular distance therefrom.[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No.
4-2002; amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 50-2006; 5-30-2018 by Ord.
No. 26-2018]
GRADING — Any operation that modifies the existing topography such as
cutting, stripping, filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit issued to authorize work to be performed
under Article VII.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from a field, diversion or other site feature.
GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a building other than a cellar or
basement.
GROUNDWATER — Water contained in interconnected pores of a saturated
zone in the ground, also known as "well water." A saturated zone is a
volume of ground in which the voids in the rock or soil are filled with water
at a pressure greater than atmospheric.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
56-2010]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Such elements or compounds which, when
discharged in any quantity into the environs of air, water or soil, present
potential danger to the public health or welfare and vegetation or any forms
of wildlife.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40 CFR
pursuant to § 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments
of 1972 [Clean Water Act (Public Law 92-500; 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.)], the
Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., or § 4 of
the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-4. Substances
listed include petroleum, petroleum products, pesticides, solvents and other
substances.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as a
hazardous waste pursuant to CFR Part 261, the Solid Waste Management
Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E et seq., or N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 56-2010]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from grade to
the level of the highest point of the roof surface thereof, exclusive of
cupolas, chimneys up to 10 feet above the highest point of the roof surface,
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:642
penthouses, as defined herein, steeples and spires.[Amended 2-25-2002
by Ord. No. 4-2002]
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or activity carried out for gain by a
resident and conducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in the
residents dwelling unit or other structure located on the lot.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other than
a condominium association, that is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for costs and
upkeep of common open space or facilities.
HOSPICE — A program of palliative and supportive services provided to
terminally ill persons and their families in the form of physical,
psychological, social and spiritual care.
HOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL or MOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and may provide additional services,
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreation facilities.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or groups of buildings
or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for
conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the
dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Any material which generally reduces or
prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground, including but not
limited to buildings, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, paving and patios,
but not swimming pools. All required parking areas which are permitted
to remain unimproved, and all gravel areas and detention areas with clay
lining shall be considered as impervious surfaces. Brick pavers in sand shall
be calculated as 80% of impervious coverage.
IMPROVED LOT — A lot upon which exists a structure or building.
INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC USES — Public or quasi-public institutions
and uses, such as houses of worship, public and private schools, libraries
and municipally owned or operated buildings, structures or land used for
public purposes.
INTERESTED PARTY —
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey.
A.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:643
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material and debris, whether or not
stored or used in conjunction with the dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. "Junk" may include,
for purposes of illustration, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper,
rags, metal, glass, plaster, household appliances, wood, lumber, brush and
building materials.
JUNKYARD — An open lot or part thereof, with or without ancillary
structures, on which is accumulated and stored objects and equipment
fit for and normally to be sold as scrap, junk or secondhand material.
For the purpose of this chapter, a "junkyard" shall also mean and include
any area used for the storage of wrecked and inoperable vehicles; or the
wrecking, dismantling and breaking of the same into parts; or the storage of
such parts, either for subsequent sale or otherwise. A "junkyard" shall not
include a municipally operated public works yard.
LAND — Ground, soil or earth, including improvements and fixtures on,
above or below the surface thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, cutting,
excavating, filling, grading and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
LOCAL UTILITY — Any sewerage authority created pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law, P.L. 1946, c. 138 (N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.); any
utilities authority created pursuant to the Municipal and County Utilities
Authorities Law, P.L. 1957, c. 183 (N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.); or any utility,
authority, commission, special district or other corporate entity not
regulated by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners under Title 48 of the
Revised Statutes that provides gas, electricity, heat, power, water or sewer
service to a municipality or the residents thereof.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY/NURSING FACILITY/SKILLED NURSING
HOME — A facility which provides a full range of twenty-four-hour direct
medical nursing and other health services. Registered nurses, licensed
practical nurses and nurses aides provide services prescribed by a
residence physician. It is for those older adults who need health supervision
but not hospitalization. The emphasis is on nursing care, but restorative
physical occupational speech and respiratory therapies are also provided.
This level of care may also include specialized nursing services such as
intravenous feeding or medication, tube feeding, injected medication, daily
wound care, rehabilitation services and monitoring of unstable conditions.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this Act or
whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this Act or under
any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this Act.
B.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:644
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, or
otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot but not including any
street rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land, either at the junction of and abutting
on two or more intersecting streets, or abutting a single street at the point
where the road tangents deflect by more than 45°.
LOT COVERAGE — That part of one lot or more than one lot which is
improved or is proposed to be improved with buildings and/or other
structures, including but not limited to driveways, parking lots, pedestrian
walkways, signs and other man-made improvements on the ground surface
which are more impervious than the natural surface. See also "open space."
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front and rear property
lines of any lot. If a lot does not have parallel front and rear lines, the
average of such depths taken at ten-foot intervals throughout its width shall
constitute its depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — The shortest distance between the intersection points
of the side lines of a lot with the front street right-of-way line. In the case
of corner lots, the frontage shall be measured along a straight line between
the intersection point formed by the projection of two street side lines and
the intersection point of a side lot line with a front street right-of-way line.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where
access to the public road is by a private right-of-way or driveway. See Figure
4.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:645
Figure 4
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts
upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way,
also referred to as a "street line." In the case of corner lots or through lots,
the line on which the primary entrance faces. See Figure 2.132
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line or the point at which the side lot lines meet.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. See Figure
2.133
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured at the
building setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
Act, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under the
circumstances specified in § 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5),
and cash.
132. Editor's Note: Figure 2 follows the definition of "building coverage" in this section.
133. Editor's Note: Figure 2 follows the definition of "building coverage" in this section.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:646
MAJOR DISCHARGES — Those discharges for which a NJPDES discharge
to groundwater permit is required. Examples include but are not limited
to discharges of sanitary wastewater from housing developments, schools,
businesses, factories; discharges of industrial wastewater; illicit
connections as defined in § 195-37; and some stormwater discharges.
Sanitary landfills and hazardous waste facilities can also be considered
potential major dischargers to groundwater. These discharges often use
injection wells (including subsurface disposal systems serving facilities with
an aggregate design flow in excess of 2,000 gallons/day); infiltration/
percolation lagoons; spray irrigation; overland flow systems; surface
impoundments; dredge spoils; and residuals surface impoundments.[Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARQUEE — Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction that
projects from the wall of a building, usually above an entrance.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 et seq.
MAUSOLEUM — A permanent structure or building for the entombment of
human remains in crypts, vaults or niches.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the Borough.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than three
lots and which does not involve a planned development; any new street;
or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to
be prorated pursuant to § 195-21 of this chapter. Any lot or remaining
land approved as a minor subdivision shall not be submitted as a minor
subdivision within five years from the date of approval as a minor
subdivision. Such lot or tract may be submitted as a major subdivision.
MULCHING — The application of suitable materials on the soil surface to
conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in establishing plant cover.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Borough Council when acting pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 through
40:55D-92, as amended.
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use made by the Borough of Madison of property
owned or leased by it or legally under its control by easement, license or
otherwise.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any grading, excavation or filling.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:647
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign lawfully existing on the effective
date of an ordinance, or any amendment thereto, that renders such sign
nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and
regulations of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
to a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING FACILITY/NURSING HOME — See "long-term care facility."
OBLIGOR — Any individual, firm, association, corporation or any other legal
entity and shall include the owner or subdivider, or both, as may be required
by the Borough. The obligor shall be responsible for posting and executing
any required performance guaranty.
OFFICE — A room, group of rooms or building used for conducting the
affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — A map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
OFFICIAL SOIL MAP — The individual map sheets that are part of the
Morris County Soil Survey of the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
published by the County Soil Conservation District and adopted by
resolution of the Morris County Planning Board.
OFFICIAL SOILS INTERPRETATION — The interpretations of the soils
described in the Morris County Soil Survey of the National Cooperative
Soil Survey of the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture, published by the County Soil Conservation District and adopted
by resolution of the Morris County Planning Board.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:648
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek or authorize
development of land under this chapter.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Any open area, including parking spaces and
access aisles providing direct access thereto, used for the temporary
storage of automobiles and other permitted vehicles for the private use of
the owners or occupants of the lot on which the area is located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Any open area, (other than a street or other
public way), including parking spaces and aisles, used for the temporary
storage of automobiles and other permitted vehicles and available to the
public, with or without compensation, or as an accommodation for clients,
customers and employees.
PARKING FACILITY — Any public or private parking area or garage.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the off-street parking of one operable,
licensed motor vehicle within a public or private parking area.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PATIO — A level, surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building at
or within 1 1/2 feet of the finished grade, not covered by a permanent roof
and used primarily for passive recreation.
PENTHOUSE — A roofed enclosure up to 12 feet in height on top of a
building and occupying not more than 20% of the main roof area.
PERCOLATION TEST — A test designed to determine the rate of absorption.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Standards:
Adopted by ordinance pursuant to Subsection 52d (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d)
regulating noise levels, glare, skyglow, earthborne or sonic vibrations,
heat, radiation, television or radio waves, noxious odors, toxic
materials, explosive and inflammable materials, smoke and airborne
particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions
A.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:649
PERMEABILITY TEST — A test to determine the ability of soil to transmit
water.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
PERMITTED USE — Any use which shall be allowed, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit is issued in accordance with
this chapter.
PERSON — A corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership
or joint-stock company, as well as an individual, the state and all political
subdivisions of the state or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel, including the following: cleaning and pressing service, linen supply,
diaper service, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, funeral services,
steam baths, reducing salons and health clubs, clothing rental, locker
rental, porter service and domestic services.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed,
intended for or capable of use in preventing, destroying, repelling,
sterilizing or mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory
animals, fungi, weeds and other forms of plant or animal life or viruses,
except viruses on or in persons or animals. The term "pesticide" shall
also include any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or
intended for use as a defoliant, desiccant or plant regulator.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of 175 acres or
more to be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing
one or more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
only office uses and other uses incidental to a predominant use as may be
permitted by this chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan
which is presented to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment for final
approval in accordance with this chapter.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment for consideration and preliminary approval.
PORCH — A roofed open area, which may be screened, usually attached to
or part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights, pursuant to
§§ 34, 36 and 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and
and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the
municipality; or
B. Required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:650
40:55D-49), prior to final approval after specific elements of a development
plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main use of
the lot.
PROHIBITED USE — A use which is not permitted in a zone.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements which the Board may deem
necessary or appropriate, including but not limited to streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors
monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans, other on-site
improvements and landscaping.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone and electric lines, poles,
equipment and structures, water or gas pipes, hydrants, valves, mains or
structures or sewer pipes, together with accessories and appurtenances,
maintained, operated and conducted for the service, convenience, necessity,
health and welfare of the public.
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:651
RAINFALL EXCESS — The portion of rainfall which becomes direct surface
runoff.
RECHARGE — Release of collected or directed stormwater through soil
infiltration.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — A vehicular-type portable structure
without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled or driven and
primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational,
camping and travel use, and including:
RECREATION FACILITY — A place where sports, leisure time activities and
customary and usual recreational activities are carried out.
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — Facilities operated as a business
and open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PERSONAL — An accessory use located on the
same lot as the principal permitted use and designed to be used primarily
for the occupants of the principal use and their guests.
RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE — Facilities operated by a private
organization and open only to bona fide members and guests of such
organization.
RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC — Facilities operated by the Borough,
county or other governmental agency.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Research and development includes
uses involved in the conduct of basic and applied research, as well as the
application of such knowledge to the production process, which do not
pose a public nuisance by virtue of noise, vibration, odor, air emissions or
discharge of hazardous substances. R&D uses include a mix of research
facilities, laboratories, corporate offices, and support services in a
coordinated and high-quality, aesthetic environment. Research and
development uses can range from incubator facilities for start-ups and
BOATS and TRAILERS — Includes any type of boat, float or raft, plus
the normal equipment to transport the same on the public highway.
A.
CAMP TRAILER or FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis or metal-walled body unit, mounted on
wheels with a superstructure made, in part or in whole, of canvas and
metal frame and designed for travel, recreational and vacation uses.
B.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
C.
PICKUP CAMPER — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or truck and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses.
D.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or
vacation uses.
E.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:652
growing technology/research companies to established research
corporations, but shall not include testing on animals; testing of blood
and tissue samples shall be permitted. [Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
35-2010]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area, including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared and/
or served and consumed at tables within the principal building, including
sidewalk dining where allowed and takeout service without facilities for
drive-through order and for drive-through pickup.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment where food and
drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal
building with facilities for drive-through order and/or drive-through pickup.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law; or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances made so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL SERVICE — Establishments engaged in providing services for
individuals, businesses, government and other organizations and includes
finance; insurance, real estate and personal services; business services and
miscellaneous repair services; motion pictures, amusement and recreation
services; health services and educational services; social services,
museums, art galleries, botanical gardens and zoological gardens.
RETAIL TRADE — Establishments engaged in selling merchandise for
individuals, businesses, government and other organizations on a retail
basis.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The lines that form the boundaries of a right-ofway.
RIGHTS-OF-DISCHARGE — A legally recordable instrument granting to the
developer the right to discharge collected waters upon lands exterior to the
development.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or
used for education of students up to and through the secondary level and
licensed by the State of New Jersey.
SEDIMENT — Any solid material that is in suspension and is being or has
been moved by water, ice, wind, gravity or other means.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:653
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other
suitable locations to retain sediment.
SEDIMENT POOL — The reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of
submerged sediment during the life of the structure
SETBACK LINE — That line to which a building must be set back from the
property line.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A commercial establishment which
regularly features live performances, characterized by the exposure of a
specified anatomical area or by a specified sexual activity or which regularly
shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or photographic
representations which depict or describe a specified sexual activity or
specified anatomical area.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular shaped portion of land established at
intersections in accordance with the requirements of this chapter in which
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to limit or obstruct sight distance of motorists entering or leaving
the intersection.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses color, form,
picture, display, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise,
attract attention to, announce the purpose of or identify a person, entity or
thing or to communicate any information to the public.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign maintained which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to a use, business, products, commodity, service, activity
or entertainment manufactured, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
on the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, BUILDING — Any sign attached below the roofline to any part of a
building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. Building signs include wall
signs, window signs and canopy signs.
SIGN, CANOPY — Any sign on, or attached to, an awning, marquee or
canopy, fixed or movable, projecting from a building, and generally designed
and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below
a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
A.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — The fondling or other erotic touching
of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breasts or any actual or simulated act of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse.
B.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:654
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Signs limited to directional messages, principally
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance" and "exit."
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by structures or supports
that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.
SIGN, HANGING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and that projects perpendicular more than 12 inches
from such building.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark or
other identifying symbol, address or any combination of the name, symbol
and address of a building, business, development or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
SIGN, MENU BOARD — A sign which is located on the building of an eating
establishment which displays the menu of such eating establishment.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign, located on the premises, giving the name or
address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises.
SIGN, PERMANENT — Any sign that is painted directly on the window glass
with permanent paint or that is mounted by bolts or screw, or otherwise in
a permanent fashion, on a permanent structure.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof a building or that is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the
top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with
a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deckline of a building with a mansard
roof.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A sign that is permanent but is not affixed to
a building, structure or the ground.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign designed or intended to be displayed for a
short period of time.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
SIGN, WINDOW — Any sign that is placed within a window or upon the
window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:655
SLOPE — Deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in
percent or degree.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The governmental subdivision of this
state which encompasses this municipality, organized in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et. seq.).
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule for installation,
which will effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such
measures shall be at least equivalent to the standards and specifications as
adopted by the Morris County Soil Conservation District.
SOIL MOVING — Any removal of soil from or depositing of soil on any
premises except as otherwise exempted by Article VII.
SOLE SOURCE AQUIFER — Any drinking water aquifer upon which 50%
of a population group depends and for which there is no practicable or
affordable alternate water supply as certified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency as defined § 1424(e) of the federal Safe
Drinking Water Act (SDWA) of 1974.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
56-2010]
SPILL PREVENTION CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE PLAN (SPCC)
— A written document that describes measures to be taken to prevent,
contain and clean up oil spills or other regulated wastes prior to discharge
to surface or groundwaters.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
STORAGE — The keeping or placing of goods, wares, materials,
merchandise or equipment in a warehouse or other structure or in any open
space.
STORAGE SHED — An accessory building used for the storage of items such
as, but not limited to, tools, lawn and garden equipment and furniture and
similar items of personal property belonging to the occupant of the principal
structure.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices;
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board, adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
C.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:656
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique which
retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking
lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination
thereof.
STORMWATER RETENTION — Collection and storage of stormwater runoff
with release being through infiltration and evaporation.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof decking and wall face not more than three feet
above the top floor level and in which space the possible floor area with a
headroom of five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of
the story directly beneath.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel
through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET —
A street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way:
(1) Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway.
(2) Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law.
(3) Which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter.
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines.
(4)
A.
For the purpose of this chapter, "street" shall be classified as follows:
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that collects traffic from local
streets and connects with major and minor arterials. See Figure 5.
(1)
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single common ingress
and egress with a turnaround at the end. See Figure 5.
(2)
STREET, LOCAL — A street intended primarily for access to
individual properties and designed for local traffic. See Figure 5.
(3)
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL — Any street or road intended to carry
large traffic volumes at steady speeds through the Borough. See
Figure 5.
(4)
B.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:657
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
STUDIO/EFFICIENCY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit consisting of not
more than one habitable room, together with a kitchen and sanitary
facilities.[Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 17-2010]
SUBDIVISION —
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL — Any street that collects and
distributes traffic to and from collector streets. See Figure 5.
(5)
STREET, SERVICE — A street running parallel to a freeway or
major arterial and serving abutting properties. See Figure 5.
Figure 5
(6)
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter
if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the chairman to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
A.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:658
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement
of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
SURFACE WATER — Water on land surface.
SURVEY — A map showing the boundary lines of the property and location
of existing improvements thereon, prepared by a licensed land surveyor.
SURVEY CERTIFICATION — A certification in lieu of oath or affidavit
confirming the accuracy of the survey.
SWALE — A depression in the ground that channels runoff.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — An artificial basin or other structure for the
holding of water, constructed on residential premises for the sole use of
the occupant of the premises, his family and guests, for wading, swimming,
diving or other aquatic sports and recreation. The term "swimming pool"
shall not include any plastic, canvas, rubber or other small receptacle
temporarily erected on the ground and which holds less than 500 gallons of
water.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Any basin or structure for the holding of
water for wading, swimming, diving or other aquatic sports and recreation
by the public and for which a fee may or may not be charged, including
any swimming pool operated by a group, association or club, whether the
use thereof is restricted to members of said group, association or club or
otherwise.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons, and all of which
are found and certified by the Administrative Officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax
Map or Atlas of the Borough.
(5)
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:659
TOPSOIL — The surface soil and soil material to a depth of six inches tillage,
its equivalent in cultivated soil or the original or present "A" horizon plus
"B" horizon (if in top six inches), as defined by the National Cooperative Soil
Survey of the United States Department of Agriculture, before its removal
or displacement for any purposes whatsoever. Topsoil shall be capable of
supporting vegetation indigenous to the area.
TRACT — Property which is the subject of a development application.
TRACTOR —
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
ROAD TRACTOR — Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry either any load
thereon independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so
drawn.
A.
TRUCK TRACTOR — Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily
for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load
other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
B.
A. TRAILER, HABITABLE — See "dwelling, mobile."
TRAILER, IMMOBILIZED — A mobile habitable structure which has
been parked or semipermanently or permanently fastened to the
ground, with or without sanitary, water and other utilities directly
connected to the unit, which may be used for storage as well as other
purposes.
B.
TRAILER, GENERAL — A mobile structure which is movable from place
to place, either under its own power or by towing, for use as an
office, chapel or meeting room for the display of exhibits or advertising
material or for use as a mobile machine or repair shop or as a portable
generating station.
C.
SEMITRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other
than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
D.
POLE TRAILER — Every vehicle without motive power designed to be
drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means
of a reach or pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the
towing vehicle and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly
shaped loads, such as poles, pipes or structural members, capable,
generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting
connections.
E.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:660
TRESPASS LIGHTING —
UNIVERSITY — A full-time institution of higher learning, with dormitory
facilities for at least 200 students, authorized to award baccalaureate
degrees by the State of New Jersey.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are arranged,
designed or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary activity of any lot or parcel.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.134
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas by covering the soil with permanent or short-term seeding,
mulching or sodding.
VEHICULAR SALES AREA — An open area, other than a right-of-way or
public parking area, used for display, sale or rental of new or used vehicles
in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
WALL — A solid, vertical structure of wood, masonry or other material
serving to enclose, divide, retain or protect an area. The height of a wall
shall be measured from the ground surface at the base of the wall to the
highest part of the structure above the base including any fence placed
on top of a wall. All walls shall be considered solid fences.[Amended
11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 71-2007]
WALL, RETAINING — A type of wall that is constructed between lands of
different elevation to stabilize the land surfaces. The height of a retaining
wall shall be measured from the lowest ground surface at the base of the
wall to the highest part of the structure above the base including any fence
placed on top of a wall. Where a series of retaining walls are located on
the same slope, the wall height shall be calculated as the sum of the wall
heights in the series of walls.[Added 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 71-2007]
WAREHOUSE — A building or place adapted to the reception and storage
of goods, wares, materials and merchandise.
WATER BODIES — Any natural or artificial collection of water, whether
permanent or temporary.
WATER-CARRYING CAPACITY — Ability of a channel or floodway to
transport flow as determined by its shape, cross-sectional area, bed slope
and coefficient of hydraulic friction.
Any illumination exceeding 0.1 horizontal footcandle at grade on any
adjacent residential property;
A.
Any light emanating from a fixture which is so positioned or aimed as
to produce objectionable glare on any adjacent property.
B.
134. Editor's Note: See Art. V, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:661
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river,
creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine
or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and shall include any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA) — A land area described in plan
view around a well from which groundwater flows to the well and
groundwater pollution, if it occurs, may pose a significant threat to the
quality water withdrawn from the well. A wellhead protection area is a
mapped area around a public water supply well that delineates the
horizontal extent of groundwater captured by a public water supply well
pumping at a specific rate over a specific time. A WHPA has three tiers
which serve to delineate priority areas for the protection of groundwater
quality. Tier 1 is a two-year time of travel (i.e., the groundwater within this
tier flows to the well within a two-year time period). Tier 2 is equivalent to
a five-year time of travel, while Tier 3 is equivalent to a twelve-year time
of travel. For the purposes of this chapter, the WHPA shall refer to the
wellhead protection areas as shown on the Madison Wellhead Protection
Area Map, as amended from time to time.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
56-2010]
WHOLESALE SALES AND SERVICES — Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users; other wholesalers;
or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling
merchandise to, such individuals or companies, but excluding lumber and
building material sales.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS — Devices which are used for
the transmission and reception of wave frequencies for the purposes of
any wireless communications (e.g., telephone, data, radio, paging and/or
television communications, etc.) and which are permitted as conditional
uses in accordance with the specific zoning conditions and standards for
their location and operation included within this Land Development chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, wireless communications antennas shall
not be considered to be a public utility.[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No.
3-2000]
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings
and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this
chapter shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as may be specifically provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
YARD, FRONT — A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building
at its closest point to the front lot line. Said front yard shall be unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be permitted
elsewhere in this chapter. See Figure 2.135
135. Editor's Note: Figure 2 follows the definition of "building coverage" in this section.
§ 195-7 MADISON CODE § 195-7
191:662
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to
the building at its closest point to the rear lot line. Said rear yard shall be
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be
permitted elsewhere in this chapter. See Figure 2.
YARD, SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line. See Figure 2.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established under
this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer:
A. Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building.
B. Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provision of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by the appropriate agency of the Borough pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.
§ 195-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-7
191:663

ARTICLE II
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
[Amended 4-8-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85; 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 36-85;
6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 19-87; 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 28-87; 3-14-1988
by Ord. No. 2-88; 9-11-1989 by Ord. No. 36-89; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
3-93; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93; 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 12-93;
10-14-1993 by Ord. No. 35-98]
§ 195-8. Planning Board.
A. Establishment of Planning Board.
(1) The Madison Planning Board, created pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 et seq., shall consist of nine members of the following
four classes:
(a) Class I: the Mayor.
(b) Class II: One of the officials of the municipality, other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor,
provided that, if there is a Madison Borough Environmental
Commission (herein referred to as the "Environmental
Commission"), the member of the Environmental Commission
who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning
Board member for the purposes of this chapter in the event
that there is among the Class IV or alternate members of the
Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education.
(c) Class III: a member of the Borough Council to be appointed by
the Borough Council.
(d) Class IV members: six other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no
other municipal office, except that one member may be a
member of the Board of Adjustment. One Class IV member may
be a member of the Board of Education. If there is an
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV Planning
Board member unless there are among Class IV members of
the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which
case the member common to the Planning Board and the
Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II member
of the Planning Board. For the purpose of this section,
membership on a municipal board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, the establishment of which is
discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of municipal office.
§ 195-8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-8
191:665
(2) Terms. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond
to his or her official tenure as Mayor. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminate
at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever
occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission
shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of his or her
term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission,
whichever comes first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a
member of the Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or
at the completion of his or her Class IV term, whichever occurs
first. The term of all other Class IV members shall be four years. If a
vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above
provided, for the unexpired term.
(3) Substitute members when conflict exists. If the Planning Board
lacks a quorum because any of its members are prohibited by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1 from acting on a matter
due to the member's personal or financial interest, regular
members of the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve,
for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board
in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board of
Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without
any personal or financial interest. If a choice has to be made
between regular members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the
Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
(4) The Planning Board shall organize annually by selecting from
among its Class IV members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson.
The Board shall also select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill
such other offices as established by ordinance.
(5) The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
(6) The Planning Board may annually appoint an attorney at law of
New Jersey other than the Municipal Attorney as Planning Board
Attorney and may fix his or her compensation or rate of
compensation not exceeding the amount appropriated.
(7) The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize
expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 195-8 MADISON CODE § 195-8
191:666
(8) No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which there is any personal or financial interest, either
directly or indirectly. Any member other than a Class I member,
after a public hearing, if requested, may be removed by the
governing body for cause.
B. Powers and jurisdiction of Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25 and shall accordingly exercise its powers in regard to:
(a) The Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(b) Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37 et seq.
(c) The Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
(d) The Zoning Ordinance, including conditional uses, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(e) The capital improvements program pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29 et seq.
(f) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 et seq.
(2) The Planning Board may:
(a) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulation.
(b) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(c) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Ancillary powers of the Planning Board.
(1) Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment.
(a) Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board shall have
the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
[1] Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c;
[2] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public
area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32; and
§ 195-8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-8
191:667
[3] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(b) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of
the hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for variances or direction for issuance
of a permit, as the case may be.
(c) The applicant may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance
of a permit and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The
separate approval of the variances or direction of the issuance
of a permit shall be conditioned upon the grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Planning Board. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose
of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Time periods.
(a) Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site
plan or conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by
an applicant of a complete application to the administrative
officer or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. In the event that the applicant elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall
apply to the application for approval of the variance(s) or
direction for issuance of a permit. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law.136 Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant. It shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(b) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of
a subdivision, or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan,
the Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 195-8 MADISON CODE § 195-8
191:668
§ 195-9. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
D. Referral powers of the Planning Board.
(1) Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to
the Borough Council, within 35 days after referral, a report,
including identification of any provisions in the proposed
development regulation, revision or amendment which are
inconsistent with the Master Plan and recommendations
concerning these inconsistencies, and any other matters as the
Board deems appropriate. The Borough Council, when considering
the adoption of a development regulation, revision or amendment
thereto, shall review the report of the Planning Board and may
disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a majority
of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the
reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of the
Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day
period provided herein shall relieve the Borough Council from the
requirements of this subsection in regard to the proposed
development regulation, revision or amendment referred to the
Planning Board. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
diminishing the application of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32
to any Official Map or an amendment or revision thereto or of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 to any Zoning Ordinance or any amendment or
revision thereto.
(2) The Borough Council may, by ordinance, provide for the reference
of any matter or class of matters to the Planning Board before final
action thereon by a Borough body or Borough officer having final
authority thereon except for any matter under the jurisdiction of
the Board of Adjustment. Whenever the Planning Board shall have
made a recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this Act
to another municipal body, such recommendation may be rejected
only by a majority of the full authorized membership of such body.
A. Establishment of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(1) The Madison Zoning Board of Adjustment (herein referred to as the
"Board of Adjustment"), created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et
seq., shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate
members, each of whom shall the residents of Madison and shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council. In the event that the Mayor fails to make a nomination at
least 15 days prior to the date of the second regular public meeting
of the Council after a position becomes vacant or the Borough
Council fails to confirm a nomination, then the appointment shall
be made by the Borough Council by the vote of a majority of the
§ 195-8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-9
191:669
members present at the meeting, provided that at least three
affirmative votes shall be required, with the Mayor to have no vote
thereon except in the case of a tie. All persons so appointed shall
serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year of their
appointment.
(2) Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of two years and at
the time of their appointments shall be designated Alternate No. 1
and Alternate No. 2, respectively. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A
vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
(3) No member of the Board of Adjustment shall hold any elective
office or position under the municipality. For the purpose of this
section, membership on a municipal board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, the establishment of which is
discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered
the holding of municipal office.
(4) No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he/she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
(5) A member, after a public hearing, if requested, may be removed by
the governing body for cause. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(6) The Board of Adjustment shall annually elect a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson from its members and a Secretary who may or
may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
(7) If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because its regular or
alternate members are prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from
acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial
interest, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called
upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the
Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board
shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority of continuous
service to the Planning Board until there are the minimum number
of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the
matter without any personal or financial interest. If a choice has to
be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chairperson of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
(8) The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 195-9 MADISON CODE § 195-9
191:670
(9) The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney,
and experts and other staff services as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts and grants, the amount appropriated
by the Borough Council for its use.
B. Powers and jurisdiction of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
(a) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or refusal made by an administrative officer based on
or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Interpretations. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of
the Zoning Map or Ordinance or for decisions upon other
special questions upon which such Board is authorized to pass
by any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(c) Variances.
[1] Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness
or shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason
of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely
affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation pursuant to Article 8 of this Act,137 would result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of
such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; or
[2] Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property, the purposes of this Act would be
advanced by a deviation from the Zoning Ordinance
requirements and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to Article 8 of
this Act,138 provided, however, that the fact that a
proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be
dispositive of a decision on a variance under this
subsection, and provided that no variance from those
departures enumerated in Subsection B(1)(d) of this
137. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq.
§ 195-9 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-9
191:671
section shall be granted under this subsection; and
provided, further, that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision,
site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the
Planning Board has the power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to Subsection a of § 47 of this Act.139
(d) Use variances. In particular cases and for special reasons,
grant a variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et seq. to permit a use or principal
structure in a district restricted against such use or principal
structure; an expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation
from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in the
permitted floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; an
increase in the permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4 except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or
lots for detached one- or two-dwelling unit buildings which lot
or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision; or a height of a principal structure
which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height
permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance
under this subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote
of at least five members.
(e) If an application for development requests one or more
variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in
Subsection B(1)(d) of this section, the decision on the
requested variance or variances shall be rendered under
Subsection B(1)(c) of this section.
(f) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan
and zoning ordinance.
(g) An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such other powers:
(a) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, Subdivision a.
§ 195-9 MADISON CODE § 195-9
191:672
(b) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36
for a building or structure not related to a street.
(c) To grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional
use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the
proposed development requires approval by the Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall
be conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent
approvals of a site plan or subdivision by the Board of
Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless such approval can be granted without substantial
impairment to the public good and without substantial
impairment to the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
Zoning Ordinance. The number of votes of Board members
required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval in question,
and the special vote pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall not
be required.
(d) Whenever an application for development requests relief
pursuant to Subsection B(2)(c) of this section, the Board of
Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 120 days after submission by a developer of a complete
application to the administrative officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the event that
the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance. The period for
granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise required in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the
Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. It
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted
by the county recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 in the case of a
subdivision, or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 in the case of a site plan, the
Board of Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
§ 195-9 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-9
191:673
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time.
C. Annual report on variances heard by Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by
resolution a report of its findings on Zoning Ordinance provisions which
were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for
Zoning Ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Board of
Adjustment shall send copies of the report and resolution to the
governing body and Planning Board.
D. Appeals and applications to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an official of Madison based on or
made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map.
Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of
appeal with the official from whom the appeal is taken, with three
copies of the notice given to the Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment. The notice shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
The official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) A developer may file an application for development with the Board
of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to an administrative officer.
(3) The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify
the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all powers of the
municipal official from whom the appeal is taken.
(4) An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the municipal official from whose action the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in, his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other
than by an order of the Superior Court of New Jersey upon notice to
the municipal official from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
(5) If, in the case of an appeal made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, the
Board of Adjustment determines there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or refusal made by the administrative officer
pursuant to a report submitted by the Historic Preservation
Commission or Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-111, the Board of Adjustment shall include the reasons for
its determination in the findings of its decision.
§ 195-9 MADISON CODE § 195-9
191:674
§ 195-10. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
E. Time period.
(1) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the appeal is taken from the decision of the municipal official;
or of submission of a complete application for development to the
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant.
(3) Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under
the Zoning Ordinance or Official Zoning Map shall be submitted in
writing to the Board of Adjustment, which shall issue a written
response within 45 days after the next meeting following receipt of
the request or within such additional time as may be consented to
by the inquirer.
A. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall
be scheduled no less often than once a month and shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of pending applications. Both
Boards may have discretion to eliminate one meeting during one
summer month.
(2) Special meetings may be held at the call of the Chair or at the
request of any two Board members. The members of the respective
Board and the public shall be given notice of such meeting in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act140 and, if applicable,
MLUL requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, said quorum to be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the respective Board.
(4) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
respective Board present at the meeting except as otherwise
required by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and/or
40:55D-70d. A member of the Board who was absent for one or
more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible
to vote on a matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding the absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that a transcript or recording of all of the
hearing from which he/she was absent exists, and provided,
further, that such Board member certifies in writing to the Board
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 195-9 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-10
191:675
that he/she has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to
approve an application for development shall be deemed an action
denying the application.
(5) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance
with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act.
(6) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
municipal board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the municipal board, the findings, if any, made by it
and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the administrative officer. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use or evidence in
any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of such
minutes. Such interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for
reproduction of the minutes for his or her use.
(7) At least once a year, each Board shall review the minutes of all
closed meetings held in conformance with the Open Public
Meetings Act to determine whether the minutes may be made
public.
B. Public hearings.
(1) The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on
each application for development or on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan. Each Board shall make the rules
governing such hearings.
(2) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce
other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
(3) Payment of taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39
and 40:55D-65, every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or to the Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied
by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application, or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are
delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted
by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the Borough
will be adequately protected.
§ 195-10 MADISON CODE § 195-10
191:676
(4) The officer presiding at the hearings or such person as he/she may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties; and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
(5) The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer or attorney for the Board, and the right of crossexamination
shall be permitted to all interested parties through
their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented,
subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable
limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
(6) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
(7) The municipal board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either a stenographer or mechanical or electronic
means. The municipal board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his
expense.
(8) Decisions.
(a) The municipal board shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application
for development and shall reduce the decision to writing.
[1] The municipal board shall provide the findings and
conclusions through:
[a] A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time
period provided in the act for action by the municipal
board on the application for development; or
[b] A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held
not later than 45 days after the date of the meeting at
which the municipal board voted to grant or deny
approval. Only the members of the municipal board
who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of
such members present at the meeting at which the
resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient
to adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9 resulting from the failure of a motion to
approve an application shall be memorialized by
resolution as provided above, with those members
voting against the motion for approval being the
§ 195-10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-10
191:677
members eligible to vote on the memorializing
resolution. The vote of any such resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the
municipal board and not to be an action of the
municipal board; however, the date of the adoption of
the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications
required by this section.
[2] If the municipal board fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any
interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the municipal
board to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing
within a stated time, and the cost of the application,
including attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the
municipality.
(b) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the municipal board
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if
represented, then to his or her attorney, without separate
charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a
reasonable fee. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the
municipal board in the office of the administrative officer. The
administrative officer shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and
available for public inspection at his or her office during
reasonable hours.
(c) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, provided that nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the
applicant from arranging such publication if he/she so desires.
The municipality may make a reasonable charge for its
publication. The period of time in which an appeal of the
decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the
decision, whether arranged by the municipality or the
applicant.
C. Notice of applications.
(1) Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall
be given, except for:
(a) Preliminary site plan review pursuant to § 34 of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-46 if the proposed development is of a minor nature
and located a considerable distance from the perimeter lot
boundary lines;
(b) (Reserved)141
§ 195-10 MADISON CODE § 195-10
191:678
(c) Final approval pursuant to § 38 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50; and
provided that public notice shall be given in the event that
relief is requested pursuant to § 47 or 63 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
or 40:55D-76 as part of an application for development
otherwise excepted herein from public notice.
(2) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the
applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the
following manner:
(a) By publication in the official newspaper of the Borough.
(b) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing,
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by
notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit
owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment
has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by
serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on said
current tax duplicate or his or her agent in charge of the
property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his or her address as shown on said current
tax duplicate.
(c) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which
is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner
as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners
or homeowners on account of such common elements
or areas.
(d) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of said
adjoining municipality or municipalities. Notice shall be given
by personal service or certified mail.
(e) To the Morris County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road as shown on the County Official Map or
the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or
141. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(b), excepting minor subdivisions pursuant to § 35
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, was repealed 10-16-2013 by Ord. No. 40-2013.
§ 195-10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-10
191:679
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary. Notice shall
be given by personal service or certified mail.
(f) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a state highway. Notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail.
(g) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves
an application for the development of property which exceeds
150 acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall
include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the administrative officer. Notice shall be given by
personal service or certified mail.
(h) On applications for approval of a major subdivision or a site
plan not defined as a minor site plan, to a public utility, cable
television company or local utility which possesses a right-ofway
or easement within the municipality and which has
registered with the municipality in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.1 by:
[1] Serving a copy of the notice on the person whose name
appears on the registration form on behalf of the public
utility, cable television company or local utility; or
[2] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person
whose name appears on the registration form at the
address shown on that form.
(3) Upon the written request of an applicant the Borough Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the Borough to
whom the applicant is required to give notice. Failure to give notice
to any lot owner not on the list obtained in such manner shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum, not to exceed the
maximum set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, shall be charged for
such list.
(4) The applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice to all
property owners.
(5) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, at least
five days prior to the scheduled meeting.
(6) The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be discussed, including an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current tax duplicate in the Borough Tax Assessor's office;
and the location and times at which any maps or documents for
which approval is sought are available for inspection.
§ 195-10 MADISON CODE § 195-10
191:680
D. Registration by public utilities, cable television companies and local
utilities.
(1) Every public utility, cable television company and local utility
interested in receiving notice pursuant to Subsection h of § 7.1 of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 may register with any municipality in which the
public utility, cable television company or local utility has a right-ofway
or easement. The registration shall remain in effect until
revoked by the public utility, cable television company or local
utility or by its successor in interest.
(2) A registration fee of $10 is required for any public utility, cable
television company or local utility which registers to receive notice
pursuant to Subsection D(1) of this section.
E. Conditional approval.
(1) In the event that an applicant submits an application proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a
legal action instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or
other party to protect the public health and welfare or by directive
or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or court of
competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall process such
application in accordance with this chapter, and if such application
complies with all Borough regulations, the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment shall approve such application conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
(2) In the event that development proposed by an application requires
an approval by a governmental agency other than the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, the Board shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of
such governmental agency. The Board shall make a decision on any
application within the time period provided in this chapter or
within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the
applicant, unless the Planning Board is prevented or relieved from
so acting by the operation of law.
F. Tolling of running of approval period. In the event that, during the
period of approval heretofore or hereafter granted to an application,
the developer is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development otherwise permitted under such
approval by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able
to proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval
under this section shall be suspended for the period of time said local
action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
G. Time extensions. The Board and an applicant may mutually agree to
extend the time limit specified for action. Such extension shall be made
§ 195-10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-10
191:681
in writing or verbally at a public meeting of the Board for a specific
period of time and indicated in the minutes of the meeting.
H. Expiration of variance. Any variance from the terms of this chapter
hereafter granted by either Board permitting the erection or alteration
of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any
premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every
structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted use has
actually been commenced, within two years from the date of publication
of the notice of the judgment or determination of the Board; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided
shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
Board to the governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
I. Appeal or petition in certain cases to the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
(1) If a public utility, as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, is aggrieved by the
action of a municipal board through said agency's exercise of its
powers under this Act, with respect to any action in which the
public utility has an interest, an appeal to the Board of Public
Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey may be taken
within 35 days after such action without appeal to the municipal
governing body pursuant to § 8 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17) of this Act
unless such public utility so chooses. In such case appeal to the
Public Utility Commissioners may be taken within 35 days after
action by the governing body. A hearing on the appeal of a public
utility to the Public Utility Commissioners shall be had on notice to
the agency from which the appeal is taken and to all parties
primarily concerned, all of whom shall be afforded an opportunity
to be heard. If, after such hearing, the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners shall find that the present or proposed use by the
public utility of the land described in the petition is necessary for
the service, convenience or welfare of the public, the public utility
may proceed in accordance with such decision of the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners, any ordinance or regulation made
under the authority of this Act notwithstanding.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to a development proposed by a public
utility for installation in more than one municipality for the
furnishing of service if, upon a petition of the public utility, the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners shall after hearing, of which
any municipalities affected shall have notice, decide the proposed
installation of the development in question is reasonably necessary
for the service, convenience or welfare of the public.
(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to restrict the right of any
interested party to obtain a review of the action of the municipal
§ 195-10 MADISON CODE § 195-10
191:682
§ 195-11. Appeal to governing body.
board or of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners by any court
of competent jurisdiction according to law.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the Borough Council any final
decision of the Board of Adjustment approving an application for
development pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. Such
appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such
final decision pursuant to Subsection i of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. The appeal
to the Borough Council shall be made by serving the Borough Clerk in
person or by certified mail with a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof and the name and address of the appellant and the
name and address of his or her attorney, if represented. Such appeal
shall be decided by the Borough Council only upon the record
established before the Board of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Borough Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant,
to those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to Subsection h of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 and to the Board from which the appeal is taken, at
least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting. The parties may submit
oral and written argument on the record at such meeting, and the
Borough Council shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts of
such meeting pursuant to Subsection f of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
C. The appellant shall:
(1) Within five days of service of the notice of the appeal pursuant to
Subsection A hereof, arrange for a transcript pursuant to
Subsection f of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 for use by the Borough Council
and pay a deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of such transcript,
whichever is less; or
(2) Within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a
transcript as otherwise arranged to the Borough Clerk; otherwise,
the appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute.
D. The Borough Council shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the publication of the notice of the decision
below pursuant to Subsection i of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10, unless the
applicant consents in writing to an extension of such period. Failure of
the Borough Council to hold a hearing and conclude a review of the
record below and to render a decision within such specified period shall
constitute a decision affirming the action of the Board.
E. The Borough Council may reverse, remand or affirm, with or without
the imposition of conditions, the final decision of the Board of
Adjustment approving a variance pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70. The review shall be made on the record before the Board of
Adjustment.
§ 195-10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-11
191:683
§ 195-12. Fees.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any services by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs shall be as provided in the Fee Ordinance of Madison
Borough.
F. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Borough Council shall be necessary to reverse or remand to the
Board of Adjustment or to impose conditions on or alter conditions to
any final action of the Board of Adjustment. Otherwise the final action
of the Board of Adjustment shall be deemed to be affirmed; a tie vote of
the Borough Council shall constitute affirmance of the decision of the
Board of Adjustment.
G. An appeal to the Borough Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Borough Council, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with the Board, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an
order of the Superior Court on application upon notice to the Board
from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
H. The Borough Council shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant
or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and for
a reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it, not
later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality,
if there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the applicant unless
a particular Borough officer is so designated by ordinance, provided
that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing the
applicant from arranging such publication if he so desires. The Borough
Council may make a reasonable charge for its publication. The period of
time in which an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction may be
made shall run from the first publication, whether arranged by the
Borough or the applicant.
A. Application fees. At the time of filing any application for development,
any application for amendment to or extension of any development
approval, any request for a zone change or recommendation of a zone
change, any request for amendment of the Master Plan, and/or any
request for concept review of a development proposal, zoning permit
for building construction or permit to erect a sign, each applicant shall
pay to the Borough of Madison a nonrefundable application fee, or fees,
in accordance with the following schedule. The applicant shall pay the
fee required for each application which is submitted. [Amended
7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 22-99; 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 38-2003;
§ 195-11 MADISON CODE § 195-12
191:684
8-9-2010 by Ord. No. 39-2010; 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-2012;
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 22-2012; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
Application Fees
Type Fee
Subdivisions:
Minor subdivisions $375
Major subdivisions, sketch plat $375
Preliminary major subdivision $1,000
Final major subdivision $500
Site plans:
Waiver of site plan details $300
Preliminary major site plan $300, plus $50 for
each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area. In
the case of a parking
lot reconstruction not
associated with the
construction of a
building, the fee shall
be $1,600.
Final major site plan $600
Variances:
Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a) $300
Interpretations (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b) $300
Dimensional (each)
Residential $150
Nonresidential $150
Use
Residential $500
Nonresidential $750
Other
Amended application $375
Extension of approval $150
Request for zone change or
recommendation of zone change
$400
Request for Master Plan amendment $400
§ 195-12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-12
191:685
Application Fees
Type Fee
Concept review (such fee to be a credit
toward the fee for any future application
for the same development proposal filed
within one year of the date of the concept
review meeting)
$400
Zoning permit for building construction $50
Permit to erect a sign $100
Temporary signage: banner and signs
permit
$50
Individual lot grading plan review; new
home
$300
Minor lot impacts review; drives/decks/
fences/sheds/ pools/retaining walls/fills
$50
Signs
Refacing of previously approved signage
(within 36 months)
$25
Additional signage to previously approved
application (within 36 months)
$25
Temporary signage - banner and signs
permit
$25
B. Technical review fees.
(1) Components of fee. Each applicant shall pay to the Borough of
Madison a technical review fee in connection with each application
for development, each application for amendment to or extension
of any development approval, any request for a zone change or
recommendation of a zone change, any request for amendment of
the Master Plan, and/or any request for concept review of a
development proposal. All such requests are included in this
Subsection B with the term "application." The technical review fee
shall be equal to the sum of the following two components:
(a) The dollar amount of all charges by outside professionals (as
defined herein) for professional services rendered to the
Borough and/or the reviewing board in connection with the
application, plus all actual out-of-pocket disbursements
incurred in regard to such services. All charges for services by
each outside professional shall be billed at the same rate as all
other work of the same nature performed by such professional
for the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on an applicant. Charges for professional services of
outside professionals shall be based upon a schedule of fees
§ 195-12 MADISON CODE § 195-12
191:686
established by resolution of the reviewing board, in the case
of professionals retained by the board, and by resolution of
the Borough Council, in the case of professionals retained by
the Borough. Such schedules shall be subject to revision from
time to time in the discretion of the reviewing board and/or the
Borough Council, as the case may be.
(b) The dollar amount of the hourly base salary of each in-house
professional (as defined herein) who has rendered professional
services to the Borough and/or the reviewing board in
connection with the application, multiplied by both the total
number of hours of professional services spent by each inhouse
professional in connection with the application, and
200%. The hourly base salary of each in-house professional
shall be established by ordinance annually.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
IN-HOUSE PROFESSIONAL — Engineers, planners, attorneys and
other professionals whose salary, staff support and overhead are
provided by the Borough of Madison.
OUTSIDE PROFESSIONALS — Engineers, planners, attorneys and
other professionals whose salary, staff support and overhead are
not provided by the Borough of Madison. "Outside professionals"
shall include, without limitation, consultants who are not normally
utilized by the Borough or the reviewing board when an application
presents issues which are beyond the scope of the expertise of
the professionals who normally serve the reviewing board or the
Borough.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Time spent by a professional
engineer, professional planner, attorney, traffic expert or other
professional in connection with review of an application and/or
review and preparation of documents in regard to such application.
In appropriate cases, such services shall include, without
limitation, review of plans, reports, relevant ordinance provisions,
statutory law, case law and prior approvals for the same parcel;
site inspections; and preparation of resolutions, developer's
agreements and other documents.
(3) Limitations on scope of charges for professional services.
(a) All charges for professional services shall be reasonable and
necessary given the status and progress of the application.
Such charges shall be made only in connection with:
[1] An application which is presently pending before a
reviewing board;
[2] Review of an applicant's compliance with conditions of
approval; and/or
§ 195-12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-12
191:687
[3] Review of an applicant's request for modification or
amendment of an application or approval.
(b) A professional shall not review items which are subject to
approval by a state governmental agency and which are not
under municipal jurisdiction, except to the extent that
consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the effect
of a state approval on the applicant's application.
(c) If the Borough or the reviewing board shall retain a different
professional in place of the professional originally responsible
for review of an application, the Borough or the reviewing
board, as the case may be, shall be responsible for all time and
expenses of the new professional to become familiar with the
application. Neither the Borough nor the reviewing board shall
charge the applicant or the applicant's technical review fee
deposit for such services.
(d) Neither the Borough nor the reviewing board shall bill an
applicant, or charge the applicant's technical review fee
deposit, for any municipal clerical or administrative functions,
overhead expenses, meeting room charges or other municipal
costs and expenses, except as provided for in this § 195-12, nor
shall any professional add any such charges to his or her bill.
(4) Payment of technical review fee deposits. At the time of filing any
application with the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, each
applicant shall pay a technical review fee deposit, or deposits, in
accordance with the following schedule. The applicant shall pay the
deposit required for each approval which is requested.
Technical Review Fees
Type of Application Deposit Amount
Subdivisions:
Minor subdivision
Residential $500 per lot
Nonresidential $750 per lot
Major subdivision
[Amended 8-11-2003 by
Ord. No. 38-2003]
$1,000 per lot
Preliminary major
subdivision
$750 per lot for the first 3 lots,
$100 per lot for additional lots
Final major subdivision 1/2 the cost of preliminary
Site plans:
Waiver of site plan details $150 per residential unit; $50 per
100 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 195-12 MADISON CODE § 195-12
191:688
Technical Review Fees
Type of Application Deposit Amount
Preliminary major site plan
Residential $150 per residential unit
Nonresidential $50 per 100 square feet of gross
floor area; $50 per parking
space, in the case of a parking lot
recon- struction not associated
with the construction of a
building.
Final major site plan 1/2 the cost of preliminary major
site plan
Variances
Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
70a)
$750
Interpretations (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b)
$750
Dimensional
Residential (excluding oneand
two-family homes)
$500
Nonresidential $1,000
Use
Residential (excluding preexisting,
noncon- forming
one- and two- family
homes)
$1,500
Nonresidential $2,500
Other
Amended application $1,000
Extension of approval $500
Request for zone change or
recommendation of zone
change
$2,000
Request for Master Plan
amendment
$2,000
Concept review $1,000
(5) Custody of deposits; procedure for payments against deposits;
submission of vouchers; monthly statements.
§ 195-12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-12
191:689
(a) All technical review fee deposits shall be placed into an escrow
account, which account shall be maintained by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough of Madison. The Chief
Financial Officer shall make all payments for the escrow
account.
(b) All payments charged to an applicant's technical review fee
deposit shall be pursuant to vouchers from the professionals
performing professional services in connection with the
application. All vouchers shall identify the professional
performing the services, the dates when services were
performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour increments,
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred.
(c) All outside professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief
Financial Officer on a monthly basis. A copy of the voucher
shall be sent to the applicant simultaneously. All in-house
professionals shall submit to the Chief Financial Officer on a
monthly basis a statement containing the same information as
the voucher of an outside professional. A copy of the statement
shall be sent to the applicant simultaneously.
(d) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare, and send to the
applicant on a monthly basis a statement providing an
accounting of the applicant's technical review fee deposits. The
accounting shall include all deposits made, interest earned,
disbursements made and cumulative deposit balance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if monthly charges to an
applicant's deposit are $1,000 or less, such statement may be
provided by the Chief Financial Officer on a quarterly basis.
(6) Replenishing of deposit.
(a) If a technical review deposit shall be insufficient to enable the
Borough or the reviewing board to perform required
application reviews, the Chief Financial Officer shall notify the
applicant (this notice is referred to herein as an "insufficiency
notice") of both the insufficient deposit balance and the
amount of additional funds required, in the judgment of the
Chief Financial Officer, to cure the insufficiency. In order for
work to continue on the application, the applicant shall, within
a reasonable time period post additional funds to the escrow
account in an amount to be agreed upon by the Borough
(acting through its Chief Financial Officer) and the applicant.
(b) The determination of insufficiency shall be made by the Chief
Financial Officer in his or her reasonable discretion.
Furthermore, as used herein, a "reasonable time period" for
the posting of additional funds to the escrow account shall be
not longer than 15 days after the date of the Chief Financial
Officer's insufficiency notice. The applicant shall be deemed to
§ 195-12 MADISON CODE § 195-12
191:690
agree to the terms of the insufficiency notice unless, within 15
days after the date of such notice, the applicant shall deliver to
the Chief Financial Officer a written notice of objection.
(c) If the applicant timely files such an objection, the applicant
shall have the right to pay the amount requested under protest
and the right to challenge same in the Superior Court, Law
Division, in an action in lieu of prerogative writs filed within 45
days after the applicant's receipt of the Chief Financial
Officer's final accounting with respect to the applicant s
technical review fee deposit.
(d) If the applicant fails to timely pay (under protest or otherwise)
the amount requested, the Borough, the reviewing board and
all professionals shall have the right to cease all further work
on the application immediately, and the reviewing board shall
have the right to deny without prejudice any pending
application, because of the applicant's failure to post additional
technical review fees needed for the proper review of such
application. In no event shall any approved plans be signed or
delivered to the applicant, nor shall any construction permits,
certificates of occupancy or other approvals or authorizations
be issued to an applicant when there exists any deficiency in
the applicant's technical review fee deposit.
(7) Final accounting; return of unused balance of deposit. After the
reviewing board has granted final approval and signed the
approved subdivision plat or site plan, or otherwise taken final
action on the application, the applicant shall provide written notice
of the same, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal delivery, to the Chief Financial Officer, the reviewing
board and all professionals who have rendered services in
connection with the application. Within 30 days after receipt of
such notice, each professional shall submit a final bill (or a
statement in lieu of bill in the case of in-house professionals) to the
Chief Financial Officer with a copy to the applicant. The Chief
Financial Officer shall render to the applicant a final accounting
within 45 days after receipt of all final bills and/or statements. The
Chief Financial Officer shall return to the applicant with the final
accounting any unused balance of the deposit, including any
interest earned thereon in accordance with Subsection E.
C. Transcript fees. Each applicant shall be required to reimburse the
Borough of Madison for its actual costs for the preparation of a
transcript of all hearings on any site plan application, major subdivision
application, application for amendment to the Master Plan or appeal to
the Borough Council of decisions by the Board of Adjustment. Fifty
percent of the estimated cost of the transcript shall be deposited at the
time the transcript is ordered.
§ 195-12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-12
191:691
D. Special meeting fees. A fee of $1,500 shall be charged to the applicant
for any special meeting of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
held at the request of the applicant to hear and/or decide any site plan
application, major subdivision application, application for amendment
of the Master Plan or any other matter. Nothing herein shall obligate
any board to hold a special meeting on any application for development.
E. Deposits with the Borough; escrow accounts; interest.
(1) Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by an applicant with the Borough for technical review fee
deposits, for inspection fees or to satisfy the requirement for any
performance guaranty or the requirement for any maintenance
guaranty pursuant to this chapter, such money, until repaid or
applied for the purposes for which it was deposited, including the
applicant's portion of the interest earned thereon, shall continue to
be the property of the applicant and shall be held in trust by the
Borough, except as otherwise provided for in this section.
(2) The Borough shall deposit such money in a banking institution or
savings and loan association located in the State of New Jersey and
insured by an agency of the federal government or in any other
fund or depository approved for such deposits by the State of New
Jersey. Such moneys shall be maintained in an account bearing
interest at the minimum rate currently paid by such institution or
depository on time or savings deposits.
(3) The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which such deposit is
made and the amount of the deposit. The Borough shall not be
required to refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit which
does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds
$100 for any year, that entire amount shall belong to the applicant
and shall be refunded to the applicant by the Borough annually, or
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for
which it was deposited, as the case may be. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary above, the Borough may retain for
administrative expenses a sum equal to 33 1/3% of the annual
interest earned by such deposit. The amount so retained shall be in
lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses charged by
the Borough in connection with the deposit.
F. Borough tree protection deposit. At the time of filing any application
with the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, each applicant shall
pay a deposit to protect Borough trees, as such trees are defined in the
Shade Tree Management Board Ordinance, Chapter 45 of the Madison
Borough Code. The deposit amount shall be $750 per Borough tree
which may be damaged during construction, and such deposit shall be
held in trust by the Borough in accordance with Chapter 195, § 195-12,
Subsection E. Such deposit may be applied by the Borough to remedy or
replace Borough trees damaged by the applicant, as determined by the
§ 195-12 MADISON CODE § 195-12
191:692
§ 195-12.1. Waiver of building permit fees. [Added 9-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 48-2014]
§ 195-13. Application by corporation or partnership.
Shade Tree Management Board. The deposit may be held up to 24
months from issuance of the C. O. to insure the Borough tree survives
the construction. Any balance will thereafter be returned to the
applicant. [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 43-2017]
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of
the facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or a sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his/her own living unit.
C. For the purposes of this section, "disabled person" means a person who
has the total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial
gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or
mental impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the
Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a
60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this subsection,
"blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better
eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered
as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
A. A corporation or partnership applying to the Planning Board, the Board
of Adjustment or the governing body for permission to subdivide a
parcel of land into six or more lots, or applying for a variance to
construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more dwelling units or for
approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning
at least 10 percent of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the
interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
B. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation or interest of 10% or greater in a partnership, either of
which is subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.2, that
corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses of its
stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or interest of 10% or
greater in the partnership, as the case may be; and this requirement
§ 195-12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-13
191:693
§ 195-14. Technical Coordinating Committee. [Amended 3-26-2018
by Ord. No. 13-2018]
A Technical Coordinating Committee (TCC) shall be established to serve
as the Review Advisory Board to review all applications for development
or requests for review submitted to the Planning Board. A designee of
the Chairperson of the Planning Board shall chair the Committee. The
Committee shall include the Board Engineer, Borough Construction Official,
Board Planning Consultant, Board Attorney, a representative from the
Shade Tree Management Board and, in addition, any member of the
Planning Board or any other official as appointed by the Chairperson of the
Planning Board whose particular expertise may be required on a specific
application or all applications.
shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or partner in said
partnership until the names and addresses of the noncorporate
stockholders and individual partners exceeding the ten-percent
ownership criterion established in the Act have been listed.
C. The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or governing body shall not
approve the application of any corporation or partnership which does
not comply with § 195-1A or B of this chapter.
D. Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names of the
stockholders owning 10 percent or more of its stock or of the individual
partners owning an interest of 10% or greater in the partnership, as the
case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, which shall
be recovered in the name of the Borough of Madison in any court of
record in the state in a summary manner pursuant to the Penalty
Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.)
A. The TCC shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Determine adequacy of application materials provided to address
technical standards set forth in this chapter.
(2) Determine compliance with the technical standards set forth in this
chapter.
(3) Make recommendations on the design and technical elements of
any application.
(4) Consider and make recommendations regarding waivers of specific
checklist requirements if the proposed development results in
minor changes that do not warrant provision of specific items.
(5) In the case of permitted uses with waiver of site plan details, make
recommendations to the Board regarding waiving requirements if
the proposed development has secured previous site plan approval,
involves normal maintenance or replacement, such as painting or
siding, or does not affect existing drainage, circulation,
§ 195-13 MADISON CODE § 195-14
191:694
§ 195-15. Zoning Officer.
landscaping, lighting, and other considerations of site plan review,
with the exception of signage and solid waste disposal.
(6) Determine whether the project is in a critical area as defined by the
Environmental Resources Inventory.
(7) Recommend whether an environmental impact assessment, traffic
impact assessment, or any other special studies should be required.
B. The Committee shall make known its findings through a combination of
written correspondence provided in advance of any TCC meeting and
through TCC minutes.
A. Creation of office; appointments. The office of the Zoning Officer of the
Borough of Madison is hereby continued. Appointments to the office of
the Zoning Officer shall be made by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Madison. The term of office
shall be one year. A vacancy in the office shall be filled by the Mayor
subject to confirmation by the Borough Council for the unexpired term
only.
B. Duties.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce this chapter
and, pursuant to that duty, to:
(a) Discover and ascertain the existence of any violations of this
chapter.
(b) Investigate and inspect any alleged violation of this chapter
within his/her knowledge or coming to his/her attention.
(c) Prevent further or continued violations of this chapter which
are known by him/her to exist and by every lawful means cause
the violators to cease and desist from committing such further
violations.
(d) Prosecute violations of this chapter in the manner provided by
law.
(2) Whenever any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, used or maintained within the
Borough of Madison, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
ascertain that the same is done in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and not in violation thereof; and whenever any
building or structure is so erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, used or maintained contrary to or any land is used in
violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to proceed with the enforcement of this chapter in
the manner herein provided and as otherwise provide by law, and
he/she is hereby further authorized and empowered to institute and
§ 195-14 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-15
191:695
maintain any further statutory legal actions and proceedings for
the enforcement hereof, now existing or heretofore or hereafter
provided, which may be available to him/her.
C. Enforcement procedure. Whenever the Zoning Officer shall ascertain
that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he/she
shall:
(1) Promptly notify the person committing such violation to cease and
desist from continuing such violation . If such violation consists of
the construction or erection of an illegal building or structure, he
shall order the same demolished and the site cleared or the
building or structure removed. If such violation consists of an
illegal alteration or conversion of an existing building or structure,
he shall order each building or structure restored to a conforming
condition.
(2) Sign and file a complaint alleging the violation in the Municipal
Court of the Borough of Madison, in the manner prescribed by law
and the rules governing the practice in such Court. He/she shall
also institute further proceedings in the Superior Court when, in
his opinion, the same are warranted to enjoin said violation and to
effect the discontinuance thereof. Nothing herein shall prevent any
person other than the Zoning Officer from instituting a complaint
for any violation of this chapter in the manner prescribed by law.
D. Search warrants. In the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
may apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Madison for a warrant or warrants to search and inspect the properties
and premises upon which he/she has reason to believe any violation of
this chapter has taken or is taking place and, upon probable cause
shown the Judge may issue such a warrant or warrants in the manner
authorized by law, and the information obtain pursuant thereto shall be
admissible as evidence in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
purposes of proving any case brought for violation of this chapter.
E. Administrative duties. In addition to the duty of enforcement of this
chapter and prosecuting the violations thereof, the Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Make an inspection of every parcel of land, building or structure for
which an occupancy or land use permit is requested prior to the
issuance of such permit, in order to ascertain that said occupancy
or use will comply with every standard, regulation and requirement
of this chapter for such occupation and use.
(2) After proper inspection and investigation, issue land use permits
and certificates of occupancy in appropriate instances and within
his/her jurisdiction.
(3) Report to the Board of Adjustment with respect to matters which
are properly before the Board and otherwise conduct
investigations, report to and be responsible to the Mayor and
§ 195-15 MADISON CODE § 195-15
191:696
§ 195-16. Deputy Zoning Officer.
Borough Council with respect to matters pertaining to the Zone
Plan and this chapter and otherwise within his/her jurisdiction.
(4) Start and maintain an accurate and complete file with respect to
every alleged violation of this chapter or other matters investigated
and processed by him/her.
(5) File a monthly report of his/her activities, including the complaints
and case processed by him/her and the disposition thereof, with the
Mayor and Borough Council.
A. The office of Deputy Zoning Officer of the Borough of Madison is hereby
continued. Appointments to the office of Deputy Zoning Officer shall be
made by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Borough Council.
The term of office shall be one year.
B. The Deputy Zoning Officer shall fill the office of the Zoning Officer, with
all the powers thereof, in the event of incapacity, death, absence,
resignation or removal of the Zoning Officer, upon the approval of the
Mayor and Borough Council.
C. The Deputy Zoning Officer shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the
Zoning Officer with respect to issuance of notice to individuals to cease
and desist from violating this chapter and to sign and file complaints
alleging the violation of this chapter in a Municipal Court in the
Borough of Madison.
§ 195-15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-16
191:697

ARTICLE III
Development Procedures
[Added 4-8-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85; 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 36-85;
7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 20-91; 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 35-98]
§ 195-16.1. Zoning permit required for change of use, change of
occupancy or change of ownership. [Added 9-12-2005 by Ord. No.
43-2005]
A. Issuance of zoning permit. No property or building subject to a change
of use, change in occupancy or change in ownership, in whole or in
part, shall be occupied or used for any purpose, and no certificate of
occupancy, building permit, demolition permit or similar permit shall be
issued and no site improvements, including excavation or construction
or public or private improvements, shall be commenced until the
Zoning Officer of the Borough of Madison has issued a Zoning Permit
for such property. If the subject property complies with all provisions of
the Borough Code, all matters incorporated by the Borough Engineer,
any lawful prior orders issued under the authority of the construction,
property maintenance, fire prevention and health codes are properly
abated, all prior conditions established by site plan, subdivision or
variance approvals are satisfied, and the subject property is not subject
to site plan approval as set forth below, the Zoning Officer shall issue
the zoning permit within 10 business days of receiving a complete
application and evidence that all taxes have been paid on the subject
property. Otherwise, the Zoning Officer shall deny the application
within the ten-day period, citing the reason or reasons for such denial.
B. Zoning permit subject to site plan approval. If site plan approval is
required pursuant to § 195-20B(2), as determined by the Zoning Officer,
no zoning permit shall be issued until a site plan for the subject site is
approved by the Planning Board. The Zoning Officer may refer the
question of whether site plan approval is required to the Technical
Coordinating Committee for review and recommendation. If the Zoning
Officer determines that site plan approval is required, the Planning
Board may waive the requirement for site plan approval if the Board
determines that the change in use, occupancy or ownership will have no
adverse effect on drainage, traffic, parking, sidewalks, paving,
landscaping, fencing, sanitary disposal or other similar considerations.
C. Exemptions.
(1) Changes in the use, ownership or occupancy of a residential
building, or a residential portion only of a mixed-use building, shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(2) Any change of ownership which is exempt from the payment of the
realty transfer fee imposed under New Jersey Public Law 1968, c.
49, as amended, by reason of a deed for a consideration of less than
$100; which confirms or corrects a deed previously recorded;
between husband and wife, parent and child; by an executor or
§ 195-16.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-16.1
191:699
§ 195-17. Application requirements.
administrator of a decedent to a devisee or heir to effect
distribution of the decedent's estate in accordance with the
provisions of the decedent's will or the intestate laws of the State
of New Jersey; or recorded within 90 days following the entry of a
divorce decree which dissolves the marriage between the grantor
and grantee, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
D. Fees. The fee for a zoning permit is more particularly set forth in
§ 195-12. Application forms are available from the Borough Clerk or
Zoning Officer.
E. Violations. Failure of an owner, agent or occupant to comply with this
section may result in the issuance of administrative penalties and
violations. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense and a summons may be issued for each and every day that a
zoning permit is not obtained. Each separate offense may result in a
summons being issued with a maximum daily penalty of $500 per
instance. Repeat offenders will be assessed an additional penalty of
$250 per day.
F. Zoning Officer. Any reference to Zoning Officer set forth in this section
shall be deemed to include any designee of the Zoning Officer.
A. Assignment. The applicant may file an application and proceed before
the Board which the applicant believes to be appropriate, or the
applicant may seek the direction of the administrative officer as to
which approvals are required from the appropriate Board.
(1) Waiver of site plan detail.
(2) Concept plan.
(3) Minor subdivision.
(4) Preliminary major subdivision.
(5) Preliminary site plan.
(6) Final major subdivision.
(7) Final site plan.
(8) Amended site plan.
(9) Variance(s).
(10) Conditional use approval.
(Note: Certain applications may involve a combination of actions.)
B. Content. An application for development shall include all relevant
completed checklist(s) as specified in Schedule III,142 the items
§ 195-16.1 MADISON CODE § 195-17
191:700
§ 195-18. Permitted use with waiver of site plan details. [Amended
3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
specified in the checklist(s), and a completed application form including
all attachments. With the exception of requests for permitted uses
with waiver of site plan details (in specific instances only) or for
interpretation or appeals of a decision of a Borough official, all
applications shall provide all items specified in Checklist A in Schedule
III. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
C. Complete application. The administrative officer or his/her designee
shall review all applications and accompanying documents required by
this chapter to determine whether or not the submission is a valid
application for development in accordance with § 195-17B. Upon such a
finding, the administrative official or his/her designee shall certify the
application as being complete and shall so notify the applicant and the
TCC. If the application is found to be incomplete, the administrative
officer shall indicate the manner in which the application is incomplete,
by reference to the specific section or sections of the applicable
checklist(s). The administrative official shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of any finding of incompleteness and said specific deficiencies
of the application. The application shall be deemed to be complete if a
written notification of incompleteness, as provided above, has not been
sent to the applicant within 45 days of the submission of the application
to the Board. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the TCC shall
consider the waivers and provide a recommendation to the Planning
Board, which shall grant or deny the request within 45 days from the
first hearing date before the Board. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 13-2018]
D. Additional information. In its review of the application, the TCC or
Planning Board may request additional information after certification
as a complete application to correct any information found to be in
error and/or submission of additional information not specified in this
chapter or any revision to the accompanying documents, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
A. Where no physical exterior improvements are proposed on a site
occupied by a permitted use, with the exception of signage and solid
waste/recycling receptacles, an applicant may apply for permitted use
with waiver of site plan details.
B. The applicant shall submit the required fee and the requisite
application materials itemized in Checklist E143 for review and
consideration by the administrative official for completeness. Upon
142. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included as an attachment to this chapter.
143. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included in Schedule III, an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-17 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-18
191:701
§ 195-19. Informal review.
determination by the administrative official that the application is
complete, the applicant shall submit additional copies of all plans as
directed by the administrative official, who will then place the item on
the TCC agenda.
C. The TCC shall review the application and determine if any additional
details are necessary for formal consideration by the Planning Board,
particularly if signage variance relief is triggered.
D. Where appropriate, the provisions of § 195-22 shall apply.
A. Prior to the submittal of a formal plan, the applicant for subdivision or
site plan may request an informal review before a meeting of the
Planning Board in order to:
(1) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural
requirements of the subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.
(2) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan,
Zoning Ordinance and other development requirements.
(3) Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that may
aid the application.
(4) Identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose
significant constraints for the proposed development.
(5) Consider opportunities to increase development benefits and
mitigate undesirable project consequences.
(6) Permit input into the general design of the project.
B. Applicants seeking review of a concept plan shall provide 12 copies of
the plan and the completed application and the required review fees to
the Board Secretary at least 10 days before a regularly scheduled
meeting of the TCC. The TCC shall review the application pursuant to
the requirements of § 195-14 and shall provide input on the materials to
be provided to the Planning Board. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
C. After the TCC has reviewed the plan, 15 copies of the concept plan that
incorporates any TCC comments shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for discussion purposes. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
D. The concept plan is a general plan that is neither fully engineered nor
surveyed. The plan should be sufficiently detailed to allow the Planning
Board to make suggestions on general site design and layout for
circulation, stormwater management, location of open space and
buffers, building arrangements and to determine how the proposal
§ 195-18 MADISON CODE § 195-19
191:702
§ 195-20. General provisions for site plan and subdivision.
meets the Borough's development goals and objectives. [Amended
3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
E. Effect of concept plan/informal review. Neither the applicant nor the
Board is bound by any concept plan or informal review. The suggestions
made at the concept plan stage may change with new information
discovered when a formal development application is prepared using
current detailed site-specific data and on-site test findings. The
applicant may request a review of an additional concept plan based
upon new information prior to submission of a formal application for
development. The amount of any fees for such informal review shall be
a credit toward fees for review of the application for development.
A. Submission procedures. All site plan and subdivision applications
submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all the
applicable requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
B. Uses requiring site plan approval.
(1) All development activities except the following shall require site
plan approval: [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]
(a) The construction, customary use and modification of single- or
two-family dwellings, including any permitted accessory
buildings and/or uses incidental to the principal use of the
property.
(b) Any structure or use for which site plan approval was granted
prior to the effective date of this chapter and that was
developed in accordance with such approval.
(c) Construction which is determined by the Construction Official
to constitute ordinary repairs, as defined by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs Uniform Construction
Code.
(d) Soil disturbance of less than 300 cubic yards in total, over
time, except that nothing shall be construed to prevent the
otherwise lawful excavating or cutting, stripping or other
change in the existing configuration of the land for the
following purposes and no others:
[1] Gardening for noncommercial purposes.
[2] The construction or reconstruction of curbs, sidewalks,
private residential driveways, drainage systems, sewage
disposal systems and other utility service connections,
provided that all other Borough, county, state and district
approvals have been received.
§ 195-19 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-20
191:703
(e) Any structure or use on municipal properties.
(f) Any structure or use on other governmental properties to the
extent of exemptions from local requirements as allowed by
law.
(2) Change in use or occupancy. [Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No.
43-2005; 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 35-2017]
(a) A change in use or occupancy of a building or land in all zoning
districts except the CBD-1 Zone requires site plan approval if
one or more of the following criteria is met as determined by
the Zoning Officer or his designee:
[1] The previous use never received required site plan
approval.
[2] The proposed use requires more off-street parking than
the previous use based upon the parking requirements of
this chapter.
[3] The proposed use has significantly different hours of
operation than the previous use.
[4] The proposed use has different loading requirements that
require deliveries by vehicles that exceed 30 feet in length.
[5] The proposed use involves the storage or handling of
chemicals or hazardous substances.
[6] The proposed use will generate a greater amount of solid
waste, requiring one or more dumpsters to be stored
outside.
(b) In determining whether the above criteria are met, the Zoning
Officer or his designee may refer the matter to the Technical
Coordinating Committee for review and recommendation.
(c) In the CBD-1 Zone, a change in use or occupancy of a building
or land requires site plan approval if one or more of the
following criteria is met as determined by the Zoning Officer or
his/her designee:
[1] The proposed use requires more off-street parking than
the previous use based upon the parking requirements of
this chapter.
[2] The proposed use opens before 5:00 a.m. and is proposed
to stay open past 11:00 p.m.
[3] The proposed use requires deliveries by vehicles that
exceed 30 feet in length.
§ 195-20 MADISON CODE § 195-20
191:704
[4] The proposed use involves the storage or handling of
chemicals or hazardous substances.
[5] The proposed use will require one or more new dumpsters
to be stored outside.
C. Waiver of site plan approval. [Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No.
43-2005]
(1) By Zoning Officer or his designee. Where a proposed development
does not involve a change in use and is for nonstructural change in
the facade of a structure or an interior change which does not
increase parking, drainage or other site development
considerations, the Zoning Officer or his designee may waive the
requirement for site plan approval.
(2) The Zoning Officer or his designee shall not waive site plan
approval for a nonstructural change in the facade of a structure if
the structure is in a zone or portion thereof covered by a duly
adopted historic preservation plan.
D. Review of impervious coverage requirements by Borough Engineer. In
all applications for an impervious coverage variance regarding singleand
two-family dwellings, the Borough Engineer shall review the plans
and application prior to the scheduled hearing and provide an advisory
report for the Board which may include recommendations.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) No subdivision or site plan involving any street(s) requiring
additional right-of-way width as specified in the Master Plan or
Official Map and the street requirements of this chapter shall be
approved unless such additional right-of-way, either along one or
both sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded to the
municipality or other appropriate governmental agency.
(2) The Board reserves the right to require additional information
before granting preliminary approval when unique circumstances
affect the tract and/or when the application for development poses
special problems for the tract and surrounding area. Such
information may include, but not be limited to, drainage
calculations, traffic analysis, noise and other impacts, and detailed
environmental information.
F. Environmental impact assessment.
(1) When required. An environmental impact assessment as part of
preliminary approval shall be required for a major subdivision. The
Board may, at the request of an applicant, waive portions of the
environmental impact assessment requirements upon a finding that
a complete report need not be prepared in order to evaluate
adequately the environmental impact of a particular project.
§ 195-20 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-20
191:705
(2) Submission to the Environmental Commission. The Board shall
submit the environmental impact assessment, together with a copy
of the preliminary plat, to the Madison Environmental Commission
for review. The Environmental Commission shall make a report
thereon to the Board within 30 days following the submission of the
environmental impact report to the Environmental Commission. In
reviewing the application for preliminary approval, the Board shall
take into consideration the effect of the applicant s proposed
project upon all aspects of the environment, as well as the
sufficiency of the applicant's proposals for dealing with any
immediate or projected adverse environmental effects.
(3) Submission format. All environmental impact assessments shall
consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the
following information:
(a) Project description. A description of the proposed project shall
be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be
altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed and the uses
intended. The resident population, working population and
visitor population shall be estimated.
(b) The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed project
shall be described in relation to the following:
[1] Madison Borough Master Plan.
[2] Morris County Master Plan.
[3] New Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
(c) Site description and inventory. The suitability of the site for the
intended use shall be discussed. This shall include a
description of environmental conditions on the site which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following items:
[1] Types of soils. A description and list of each soil type
including capabilities and limitations on the site shall be
provided and identified on a map. Soils shall be described
with reference to criteria contained in the Morris County
Soil Conservation District Standards and Specifications.
[2] Topography. A description and map of the topographic
conditions of the site shall be provided. Areas where
slopes are in excess of 15% shall be identified on the map.
[3] Geology. A description and map of the geologic formations
and features of the site shall be provided. Areas where
bedrock is within two feet of the surface as well as major
rock outcroppings shall be shown on the map.
[4] Vegetation. A description and map of existing vegetation
on the site showing the location of major vegetative
§ 195-20 MADISON CODE § 195-20
191:706
groupings such as woodlands, open fields and isolated
trees greater than six inches caliper shall be provided.
Where woodlands are delineated, the forest type and its
characteristics shall be identified.
[5] Wildlife. Habitats of any rare or endangered species
defined by the State of New Jersey shall be identified and
described.
[6] Critical areas. A description and map of the wetland areas,
wetland buffers and floodplains on the site shall be
provided.
[7] Surface water. A description and map of existing
watercourses and water bodies that are partially or totally
on the site shall be identified.
[8] Subsurface water. Subsurface water conditions on the site
shall be described both in terms of depth to groundwater
and water supply capabilities. Where existing conditions
warrant, detailed information of the depth, capacity and
water quality of existing wells within 500 feet of the site
shall be provided. The water supply capabilities of the
adjacent areas and the recharge capabilities of the site
shall be described.
[9] Unique, scenic and/or historic features. Describe and map
those portions of the site that can be considered to have
unique, scenic and/or historic qualities and any scenic
view from the site.
[10] Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as
prescribed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. When warranted, the Board
may also request delineation of conditions on adjacent
properties.
(d) Impact. The negative and positive impacts of the project during
and after construction shall be discussed. The specific
concerns that shall be considered include the following:
[1] Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface
runoff.
[2] Flooding and floodplain disruption.
[3] Degradation of surface water quality.
[4] Groundwater pollution.
[5] Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
§ 195-20 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-20
191:707
[6] Sewage disposal.
[7] Solid waste disposal.
[8] Vegetation destruction.
[9] Disruption of wildlife habitats of endangered species.
[10] Destruction or degradation of scenic and historic features
on and off site.
[11] Air quality degradation.
[12] Noise levels.
[13] Lighting levels, including trespass lighting.
[14] Effect on community, including projected population
increase, increase in municipal and school services and
consequences to the municipal tax structure.
(e) Environmental performance controls. The applicant shall
indicate the measures which will be employed during the
planning, construction and operation phases which will
minimize or eliminate negative impacts on and off site. Of
specific interest are:
[1] Drainage plans, which shall include but not be limited to
soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
[2] Water supply and water conservation proposals.
[3] Site design techniques sensitive to the natural
environment which should include innovative landscape,
building and circulation design.
[4] Noise reduction techniques.
[5] Screening and landscaping intended to enhance the
compatibility of the development with adjacent areas.
[6] Miscellaneous on-site and off-site public improvements.
(f) Alternatives. A discussion of site design and project location
alternatives that were considered shall be provided. The
discussion shall indicate why an alternative was rejected if it
would have resulted in less of a negative impact than the
proposed development.
(g) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms
of approval required by law for the construction and operation
of the proposed project. This list shall include, but is not to be
limited to, approvals required by the municipality and agencies
of the county, state and federal governments. Where approvals
§ 195-20 MADISON CODE § 195-20
191:708
have been granted, copies of said approvals shall be attached.
Where approvals are pending, a note shall be made to that
effect.
(h) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or
other written sources of information which were consulted in
preparation of the environmental impact assessment shall be
listed and footnoted. A list of all agencies and individuals from
whom pertinent information was obtained orally or by letter
shall be listed separately. Dates and locations of all meetings
shall be specified.
(i) Disposition. The Board shall review the environmental impact
assessment to determine if the development will result in
appreciable harmful effects to the environment.
G. Traffic/transportation impact statement. [Amended 3-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 13-2018]
(1) When required. The Board may require a transportation impact
statement as part of preliminary approval if, in the opinion of the
Board, the development could have an adverse impact on the road
network, pedestrian safety, existing on-site parking, ingress/egress
or on-site circulation.
(2) General provisions.
(a) The traffic/transportation impact statement shall be prepared
by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer having
appropriate experience and background.
(b) All relevant sources of information used in the preparation of
said statement shall be identified.
(3) Submission format. All impact statements shall provide a
description of the impact and effect of the proposed land
development upon all roads that are adjacent to or immediately
affected by traffic and shall specifically address the following items:
(a) Existing conditions in the vicinity of the proposed project,
including:
[1] Roadway network.
[2] Representative traffic counts, not during holiday or
summer periods.
[3] Traffic accident statistics for the most recent three-year
period, including all crashes involving pedestrians or
cyclists.
[4] Availability/locations of public transportation and onstreet/
public parking.
§ 195-20 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-20
191:709
§ 195-21. Approval of minor subdivision.
[5] Level of service of adjacent roadways.
[6] Existing and proposed off-street parking serving the
proposal.
(b) Traffic/parking demand generated by the proposed
development including:
[1] Trip generation.
[2] Trip distribution.
[3] Modal split.
[4] Trip assignment.
[5] Level of service under proposed conditions.
[6] Anticipated parking demand based on acceptable industry
sources.
(c) Identification of transportation impacts caused by the
proposed development.
(d) Explanation of traffic reduction/traffic management plans
necessary pursuant to any current federal, state or county
requirements, and, where applicable, proposed interaction
with appropriate County Transportation Management Areas
(TMA).
(e) Recommendations for alleviating or diminishing any possible
congestion or disruption to the established traffic or
transportation or parking patterns.
(f) Any other information requested by the appropriate Board
reasonably required to make an informed assessment of
potential transportation impacts.
A. Application. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
(1) The applicant shall submit the required elements of an application
for development, as identified in § 195-17.
(2) Upon determination by the administrative official that the
application is complete and upon review by the TCC, the applicant
shall submit the requisite number of additional copies of all plans
and application materials, and the Board Secretary will place the
item on the TCC agenda.
B. Submission requirements. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
§ 195-20 MADISON CODE § 195-21
191:710
(1) Submission requirements for subdivision applications are provided
in the checklists in Schedule III.144
(2) The Board Secretary, within five business days of the certification
of completeness for preliminary approval, shall forward copies of
the plat or site plan to the following for review and comment,
where appropriate:
(a) Environmental Commission.
(b) Borough Fire Department.
(c) Borough Police Department.
(d) Borough Water Department.
(e) Borough Electric Department.
(f) Borough Public Works Department.
(g) Borough Historic Preservation Commission.
(h) Sign and Facade Committee of the Downtown Development
Commission.
C. Review. The officials and agencies cited above shall forward their
comments and recommendations in writing to the Board within 30 days
from receipt of the plat or site plan or by the date of the scheduled
public hearing.
D. Notice of public hearing. At the time when the application is deemed
complete, the Board Secretary shall set a date for the public hearing
and notify the applicant of said date. After such notification, the
applicant shall follow the procedures established with respect to notice
of hearing.
E. Action.
(1) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a minor
subdivision within 45 days of the certification that the application is
complete, unless the applicant shall extend the period of time
within which the Board may act. Where a variance is requested
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70, the Board shall take action within 120 days from which
the application is certified complete.
(2) Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Board to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant. The certificate shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
144. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-21 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-21
191:711
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording
officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats or deeds.
F. Effect of approval. Approval of a minor subdivision shall be deemed
final approval and shall be prepared in accordance with final
subdivision requirements, provided that the Board may condition such
approval on the provision of improvements as may be required pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor
subdivision or site plan approval was granted shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of approval is
adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been
duly recorded.
G. Conditions of approval. Whenever review or approval of the application
by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3.
H. Filing with the county recording officer. Approval of a minor subdivision
shall expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution of approval
is adopted unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county
recording officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by
the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board. In reviewing the
application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Board may accept a plat not in conformity with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq.; provided that, if the developer chooses to file the minor
subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such plat shall
conform to the provisions of said act.
I. Extensions.
(1) The Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period for filing
a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to this chapter if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board:
(a) That the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities; and
(b) That the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
the required approvals.
(2) The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
§ 195-21 MADISON CODE § 195-21
191:712
§ 195-22. Preliminary approval of major subdivision and site plan.
Board. The developer may apply for the extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(3) The Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision approval
for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year
from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental agencies and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval; or the 91st day after the developer receives
the first legally required approval from other governmental
entities, whichever occurs later.
J. Distribution of copies. A copy of the recorded plat or a copy of the
recorded deed shall be filed with the administrative officer of the
appropriate Board. The Administrative Officer shall distribute copies of
the plat, deed or plan to the following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Construction Official.
(3) Borough Engineer.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Borough Water Department.
(6) Borough Electric Department.
(7) Board of Health.
(8) Shade Tree Authority.
(9) Such other Borough, county or state agencies as directed by the
Board.
A. Application. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
(1) The applicant shall submit the required elements of an application
for development, as identified in § 195-17.
(2) Upon determination by the administrative official that the
application is complete and upon review by the TCC, the applicant
shall submit the requisite number of additional copies of all plans
and application materials, and the Board Secretary will place the
item on the agenda.
§ 195-21 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22
191:713
B. Submission requirements. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
(1) Submission requirements for all application types are provided in
the checklists in Schedule III, specifically Checklist A and Checklist
C.145
(2) The Board Secretary, within five business days of the certification
of completeness for preliminary approval, shall forward copies of
the plat or site plan to the following for review and comment,
where appropriate:
(a) Environmental Commission.
(b) Borough Fire Department.
(c) Borough Police Department.
(d) Borough Water Department.
(e) Borough Electric Department.
(f) Borough Public Works Department.
(g) Borough Historic Preservation Commission.
(h) Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
(i) Sign and Facade Committee of the Downtown Development
Commission.
(3) The Board shall also have the authority to refer any plat to other
agencies or individuals for comment or recommendations.
C. Review. The officials and agencies cited above shall forward their
comments and recommendations in writing to the Board within 20 days
from the receipt of the plat or site plan or by the date of the scheduled
public meeting. In the case of signage, the time periods for review as
established in § 195-33.1B shall apply. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 13-2018]
D. Notice of public hearing. At the time that the application is deemed
complete, the Board Secretary shall set a date for the public hearing
and notify the applicant of said date. After such notification the
applicant shall follow the procedures established in this chapter with
respect to the notice of hearing.
E. Action.
(1) Subdivisions.
(a) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a
preliminary major subdivision application of 10 lots or less
145. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-22 MADISON CODE § 195-22
191:714
within 45 days after the application is certified complete unless
the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the
Board may act.
(b) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the
preliminary major subdivision application of more than 10 lots
within 95 days after the application is certified complete unless
the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the
Board may act.
(c) If a preliminary subdivision application is being considered by
the Board of Adjustment simultaneously with an application for
a use variance, the Board of Adjustment shall act on the
application within 120 days after the application is certified
complete unless the applicant shall extend the period of time
within which the Board may act. If the applicant elects to
bifurcate the application for approval of the variance and the
subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision and/or site plan, the one-hundred-twenty-day limit
shall apply only to the variance. The subdivision and/or site
plan application shall be denied or approved in accordance
with the applicable time limits.
(d) Failure of the Board to act within the time prescribed shall
constitute preliminary major approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant. Said certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval herein required and shall be accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(2) Site plans.
(a) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the
preliminary major site plan which involves 10 acres of land or
less or 10 dwelling units or less within 45 days after the
application is certified complete unless the applicant shall
extend the period of time within which the Board may act.
(b) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the
preliminary major site plan of more than 10 acres or more than
10 dwelling units within 95 days after the application is
certified complete unless the applicant shall extend the period
of time within which the Board may act.
(c) If a preliminary site plan application is being considered by the
Board of Adjustment simultaneously with an application for a
use variance, the Board of Adjustment shall act on the
application within 120 days after the application has been
certified complete unless the applicant shall extend the period
of time within which the Board may act. If the applicant elects
to bifurcate the application for approval of the variance and the
§ 195-22 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22
191:715
subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision and/or site plan, the one-hundred-twenty-day limit
shall apply only to the variance. The subdivision and/or site
plan application shall be denied or approved in accordance
with the applicable time limits.
(d) Failure of the Board to act within the time prescribed shall
constitute preliminary major site plan approval, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. Said
certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement
or other evidence of approval herein required.
F. Effect of preliminary approval.
(1) If the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approves the
preliminary plat or site plan, a resolution shall be adopted setting
forth the approval and any conditions of approval.
(2) Extensions. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision and site
plan, except as provided in Subsection F(2)(d) of this section, shall
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period from the date of the preliminary approval as specified by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot sizes; yard dimensions and offtract
improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as
related to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site
plan, as the case may be.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extension on such preliminary approval for additional periods
of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two
years, provided that, if the design and improvement standards
have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may
govern.
(d) In the case of a subdivision or a site plan for an area of 50 acres
or more, the appropriate Board may grant the rights referred
to in Subsection F(2)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period of
time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the
§ 195-22 MADISON CODE § 195-22
191:716
appropriate Board to be reasonable taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or
sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions, and the
comprehensiveness of the development; provided that, if the
design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
(e) Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection F(2)(c) or (d) above and
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension was granted, the extension shall begin on what
would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may
apply for an extension either before or after what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
(f) The Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year
from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The
developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval or
the 91st day after the developer received the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever
is later. An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not
preclude the Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection F(2)(c) or (d) above.
(3) In all cases, the recommendations of the County Planning Board
shall be given careful consideration in the final decision. If the
County Planning Board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.1, its action shall be noted on the plat or plan, and if
disapproved, two copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be
returned with the plat or plan to the applicant. If either the
Borough Board or the County Planning Board disapproves a plat or
plan, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration.
G. Conditions of approval. Whenever review or approval of the application
by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 and
40:27-6.7.
§ 195-22 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22
191:717
§ 195-22.1. Final approval of major subdivision and site plan.
H. Signatures required. If the Board favorably acts on a preliminary plat or
plan, the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board shall affix their
signatures to the plat or plan with a notation that it has received
preliminary approval and shall return the same to the applicant for
compliance with final approval requirements. Where approval is
conditioned upon revisions to the preliminary plat or plan, the
Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board shall not affix their
signatures to the plat or plan until all such revisions are made.
I. Filing with the County Planning Board. Any plats and forms required to
be filed with the Morris County Planning Board shall be prepared by the
applicant and filed by the Secretary of the Borough Board. The
Secretary shall collect from the applicant any fees required by the
County Planning Board.
J. Simultaneous preliminary and final site plan approval. Combined
preliminary and final site plan approval may be granted, provided that
all submission requirements for both applications are met. The time
limit within which the Board shall act shall be the longest time
permitted for either of the two approvals.
A. Application. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
(1) The applicant shall submit a final plat or final plan to the Secretary
of the Board within three years after the date of the preliminary
approval or any authorized extension thereof.
(2) Upon determination by the administrative official that the
application is complete, the applicant shall submit 15 additional
copies of all plans, and the Secretary of the Board will place the
item on the agenda.
B. Submission requirements. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
(1) Submission requirements for final subdivision and site plan
approval are provided in Checklist D in Schedule III.146
(2) The Board Secretary, within five business days of the certification
of completeness of an application for final approval, shall forward
copies of the plan or plat to the following officials for review and
comment where appropriate:
(a) Environmental Commission.
(b) Borough Fire Department.
(c) Borough Police Department.
146. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-22 MADISON CODE § 195-22.1
191:718
(d) Borough Water Department.
(e) Borough Electric Department.
(f) Borough Public Works Department.
(g) Borough Historic Preservation Commission.
(h) Sign and Facade Committee of the Downtown Development
Commission.
(3) The Board shall also have the authority to refer any plan or plat to
other agencies or individuals for comment or recommendations. In
the case of signage, the time periods for review as established in
§ 195-33.1B shall apply.
C. Review. The officials and agencies shall forward their comments and
recommendations in writing to the Board within 30 days from the
receipt of the final plat or site plan or by the date of the scheduled
public hearing.
D. Notice of public hearing. At the time that the application is deemed
complete, the Board Secretary shall set a date for the public hearing
and notify the applicant of said date. After such notification, the
applicant shall follow the procedures established in this chapter with
respect to the notice of hearing.
E. Action.
(1) The Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final
approval, the conditions for preliminary approval and, in the case
of a major subdivision, the standards prescribed in the Map Filing
Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141.147 In the case of a planned unit development,
planned unit residential development or residential cluster, the
Board may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of
preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond
the control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval
without the developer being required to submit another application
for development for preliminary approval.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Board
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. Said certificate
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval, herein required, and, in the case of
147. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 195-22.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22.1
191:719
subdivision plans, shall be so accepted by the county recording
officer for purposes of filing.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required, the Board shall condition its approval
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
F. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval was adopted; provided that, in the case of major
subdivision, the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the
plat has not been duly recorded within the required time period. If
the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat with the county recording
officer, the Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting
of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
pursuant to this article. Final approval shall entitle the applicant to
apply for a building permit.
(2) Extension of final approval.
(a) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned
development of 50 acres or more, conventional subdivision for
150 acres or more or site plan for the development of a
nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more, the
Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection F(1) of
this section for such period of time, longer than two years, as
shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval.
[2] Economic conditions.
[3] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(b) The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the following:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval.
§ 195-22.1 MADISON CODE § 195-22.1
191:720
[2] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed.
[3] Economic conditions.
[4] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(3) Whenever the Board grants any extension of final approval and
final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the extension date.
(4) The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with
the development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued these approvals. A
developer shall apply for an extension before what would otherwise
be the expiration date of final approval or the 91st day after the
developer receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension
granted pursuant to this section shall not preclude the Board from
granting an extension pursuant to Subsection F(1) or (2) above.
G. Conditions of final approval.
(1) Conditions of final approval. The Board may, as a condition of final
approval:
(a) Enter into a developer's agreement.
(b) Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of
the development, where development is to be phased.
(c) Grant final approval for certain work, but require resubmission
for final approval for designated elements, such as, but not
limited to, landscaping, signs and street structure, and require
approval of these elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of
occupancy or zoning permit.
(d) Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit subject to the applicant or developer or subsequent
heirs or assignees meeting certain requirements within a
designated period of time, not to exceed one year, from the
date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit. This may include, but is not limited to, the installation
of landscaping, erection of signs, installation of minor
improvements, meeting performance standards and similar
§ 195-22.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22.1
191:721
items. A performance guaranty assuring the meeting of
conditions shall be posted by the applicant at the Board's
request.
(2) Conditions binding.
(a) All conditions of any preliminary and final approval shall be
binding upon all present and future owners, tenants,
occupants, lessors, lessees, heirs, assignees, developers,
contractors and subcontractors; and
(b) The same shall be set forth in a developer's agreement in
recordable form and approved by the Borough Council.
(3) Failure to maintain.
(a) All persons receiving development approval for property or
their successors in title shall be responsible for installing,
maintaining and properly utilizing on-site, off-site and off-tract
improvements required by the Board, including but not limited
to parking arrangements, buffer zones, landscaping, drainage
facilities, exterior lighting plans and other requirements of the
Board as reflected on the plans and in the Board minutes.
(b) Failure of the property owner to install, maintain and/or utilize
improvements as provided by the site plan approval shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures set forth herein.
H. Notification to tax assessor of municipality. Upon the filing of a plat
showing the subdivision or resubdivision of land, the county recording
officer shall send a copy of such notification to the Borough Tax
Assessor at the same time that notification is given to the Borough
Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
I. Signatures required. If the Board favorably acts on a final plat or plan,
the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board shall affix their
signatures subject to § 195-22H to the plat or plan with a notation that
it has received final approval and shall return same to the applicant for
compliance with final approval requirements and payment of all fees.
J. Filing with the County Planning Board. Any plats and forms required to
be filed with the Morris County Planning Board shall be prepared by the
applicant and filed by the Secretary of the Borough Board. The
Secretary shall collect from the applicant any fees required by the
County Planning Board.
K. Filing with county recording officer.
(1) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the applicant with the county recording
officer. The Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
§ 195-22.1 MADISON CODE § 195-22.1
191:722
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the
date of signing of the plat. The Board may extend the ninety-fiveday
or one-hundred-ninety-day period if the applicant proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the applicant was barred
or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental
or quasi-governmental entities and that the applicant applied
promptly for and diligently pursued required approvals. The length
of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by
the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Board.
The developer may apply for an extension either before or after the
original expiration date.
(2) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer until it has been approved by the Board as
indicated on the instrument by the signature of the Chairperson
and Secretary of the Board. The signatures of the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Board shall not be affixed until the developer has
posted the guaranties required by this chapter. If the county
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be
deemed null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the
plat shall be expunged from the official records.
(3) If shall be the duty of the county recording officer to notify the
Board, in writing, within seven days of the filing of any plat,
identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing and official
number.
L. Distribution of copies.
(1) After the approval of a final major subdivision or site plan, copies of
the final plat or plan shall be filed by the Board with the following:
(a) Borough Clerk.
(b) Construction Official.
(c) Borough Engineer.
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Borough Water Department.
(f) Borough Electric Department.
(g) Board of Health.
(h) County Planning Board.
(i) Shade Tree Authority.
(j) Such other Borough, county or state agencies as directed by
the Board.
§ 195-22.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22.1
191:723
§ 195-22.2. Amended site plan.
§ 195-22.3. Variances.
(2) In addition, duplicate Mylars of any final subdivision plat shall be
filed with the Board.
M. Site plan and subdivision approval by Board of Adjustment. Applications
for site plan and/or subdivision approval heard by the Board of
Adjustment in connection with a variance request pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76 shall be governed by the relevant provisions of this section.
In the case of such applications, all references in this section to the
"Planning Board" shall be deemed to refer instead to the "Board of
Adjustment."
A. An applicant may file for amended site plan in connection with a prior
approved site plan.
B. The applicant shall submit the required fee, eight copies each of the
application, the amended site plan and the adopted resolution of
approval in connection with the prior approved site plan to the
Secretary of the Board for review by the TCC at least 10 days prior to
the regular meeting of the TCC.
C. Upon determination by the TCC that the application is complete, the
applicant shall submit 15 additional copies of all plans, and the Board
Secretary will place the item on the agenda.
D. Provisions of § 195-22B through I shall apply.
A. Application. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
(1) An applicant may apply for variances concurrently with a
subdivision or site plan application or file for a variance with the
Board of Adjustment where no subdivision or site plan application
is required.
(2) The applicant shall submit the required fee and requisite copies
each of the application and required submission materials to the
Board Secretary for review by the administrative official for
completeness.
(3) Upon determination by the administrative official that the
application is complete, the applicant shall submit additional copies
of all plans as directed by the administrative official, and the Board
Secretary will place the item on the agenda.
B. Submission requirements. Submission requirements for variances are
provided in Schedule III.148
148. Editor's Note: Schedule III appears at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-22.1 MADISON CODE § 195-22.3
191:724
§ 195-22.4. Conditional use approval.
§ 195-22.5. Checklists. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
No application for development shall be deemed complete unless the items,
information and documentation listed for each application checklist are
submitted to the administrative official for the approving Board. A complete
application form must all be submitted with all required signatures. If any
of the required items is not submitted, the applicant must request a waiver
and state the reasons for such request in writing. Such written requests
for waivers are required for an application to be deemed administratively
complete.
C. Notice of public hearing. At the time when the application is deemed
complete, the Board Secretary shall set a date for the public hearing
and notify the applicant of said date. After such notification, the
applicant shall follow the procedures established with respect to notice
of hearing.
D. Action.
(1) The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a variance
within 120 days of the certification that the application is complete
unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which
the Board may act.
(2) Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Board to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant. The certificate shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be accepted by the county recording
officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats or deeds.
A. All conditional uses shall be subject to site plan approval in accordance
with §§ 195-22 and 195-22.1. The Planning Board shall grant or deny
the application for a conditional use within 95 days of submission of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to approve or deny conditional
uses simultaneously with subdivision and site plan applications without
the applicant being required to make further application to the
Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board,
whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall
apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the
applicant, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to
the request for conditional use.
§ 195-22.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-22.5
191:725

ARTICLE IV
Development Requirements and Standards
[Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 20-91; 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94;
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 21-94; 4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96; 3-9-1998
by Ord. No. 4-98; 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
§ 195-23. Plat and plan details.
A. Minor subdivision plats. The plat shall be designed and drawn by a
licensed New Jersey land surveyor and shall be based on tax map
information or some other similarly accurate base at a scale of not less
than 50 feet to one inch, or as approved by the Borough Engineer, so as
to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet. The plat shall show
or include the following information:
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures within the portion to be subdivided and
within 60 feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent tax records.
(4) The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streams within or bordering upon the subdivision.
(6) The zone of the tract and all zone district boundary lines within 100
feet thereof.
(7) The accurate location of storm drains, sanitary sewers, water lines,
gas lines, telephone conduits, utility easements and bridges.
(8) Front, side and rear setback lines.
(9) Plans and profiles of any proposed improvements.
(10) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way within or bordering the
subdivision, land to be dedicated to or reserved for public use, all
lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, radii arc and central angles of all curves.
(11) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use and the proposed use of lots other than residential, if
known.
(12) The zoning requirements for the zone and what is proposed.
B. Plats and plans for preliminary approval. The following information
shall accompany any proposed subdivision or site plan submitted for
preliminary approval:
§ 195-23 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-23
191:727
(1) The preliminary plat or plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than 50 feet to one inch or as
approved by the Borough Engineer and shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
(a) A title block showing the following information:
[1] Title.
[2] Date of original preparation and date(s) of modification(s).
[3] North arrow and reference meridian.
[4] Ratio scale and graphic scale.
[5] Tax map block, lot numbers and zone.
[6] Name, address and license number of the person
preparing the plat or plan.
[7] Name and address of the owner of record and the
applicant, if different from the owner.
(b) Where more than one sheet is required, the above information
shall appear on each sheet and all sheets shall be appropriately
labeled, numbered and bound.
(2) The plat or first sheet of the series of plats submitted for
preliminary approval shall contain, in addition to the above, the
following:
(a) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet or less.
(b) The names and addresses, lot and block numbers of all
properties within 200 feet of the tract boundary line.
(c) Signature blocks for the Board Chairman, Board Secretary and
Borough Engineer.
(d) The location of all structures within 200 feet of the property.
(e) The zoning requirements for the zone and what is proposed.
(3) For subdivisions, contour lines at vertical intervals not greater than
five feet for land with natural slopes of 10% or greater and at
vertical intervals of not greater than two feet for land with natural
slopes of less than 10%.
(4) For site plans, a topographical map showing, at two-foot contour
intervals, existing elevations and proposed grading changes.
(5) The location of existing watercourses and any natural features,
such as wooded areas and rock formations. For site plans of five
acres or more, the following additional information must be shown
on the topographical map: general hype and location of existing
§ 195-23 MADISON CODE § 195-23
191:728
vegetation, waterways and water bodies, unique natural features
and soil types and delineations based on the Morris County Soil
Conservation District maps.
(6) The area of the tract to be subdivided or developed in square
footage and the location, lot area, width and depth of any existing
lots or lots proposed to be subdivided.
(7) Location of all existing and proposed buildings, with building
setbacks, side and rear yard distances.
(8) A stormwater management plan meeting the requirements of
Article VI and showing the location, type and size of any existing
and proposed bridges, culverts, drainpipes, catch basins and other
storm drainage facilities.
(9) A soil erosion and sediment control plan prepared in conjunction
with Article VII.
(10) A circulation plan showing proposed vehicle, bicycle and
pedestrian circulation systems. The plan shall include the locations,
typical cross sections, centerline profiles and type of paving for all
proposed new streets and paths.
(11) Plans of proposed potable water and sanitary sewer utility systems
showing feasible connections to an existing or any proposed
system. If a public water supply or sanitary sewer system is
available, the owner shall show appropriate connections thereto on
the plat or plan. When a public sewage disposal system is not
available, the developer shall have percolation tests made and shall
submit the results, approved by the Borough Board of Health, with
the preliminary plat or plan.
(12) Location of any proposed off-street parking areas with dimensions
showing parking spaces, loading docks and access drives and a
traffic circulation pattern showing all ingress and egress to the site.
(13) A Master Signing Plan meeting the requirements of
§ 195-25L(4)(b).
(14) Provision for storage and disposal of solid wastes.
(15) For site plans, the preliminary floor plans and preliminary building
elevation drawings showing all sides of any proposed building or
buildings. The final floor plans and building elevation drawings
submitted to the Construction Code Official for issuance of a
building permit shall conform to the preliminary plans and
drawings approved by the Board. No change, deletion or addition
shall be made to said final plans and drawings without
resubmission and reapproval by the Board.
§ 195-23 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-23
191:729
(16) All proposed landscaping, fences, walls, hedges or similar facilities.
The landscaping plan shall show in detail the location, size and type
of all plant material, including ground cover, to be used on the site.
(17) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided or developed and a notation on the plat
or plan of any easements required by the Board. Said easements
may include, but are not necessarily limited to, utility lines, public
improvements and ingress and egress for emergency vehicles.
(18) A copy of such guaranties, covenants, master deed or other
document which shall satisfy the requirements of the Board for the
construction and maintenance of any proposed common areas,
landscaping, recreational areas, public improvements and
buildings.
(19) Where appropriate, the plat or plan shall indicate provisions for
energy conservation.
(20) A list of all licenses, permits or other approvals required by law.
(21) For any subdivision of six or more lots, or for a variance to
construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more dwelling units, or for
site plan approval of any nonresidential use, a corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders
or individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class
or at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may
be.
(22) If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation or ten-percent-or-greater interest in a partnership,
subject to disclosure pursuant to Subsection B(21), that
corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses of its
stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or of ten-percent-orgreater
interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and this
requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of the
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the
ten-percent ownership criterion have been listed.
C. Environmental impact assessment. The Board may require the
applicant to submit an environmental impact assessment as part of
preliminary approval if, in the opinion of the Board, the development
could have an adverse effect on the environment. Where an
environmental impact assessment is required, in whole or in part, the
Planning Board shall submit the environmental impact report, together
with the site plan and any other pertinent documents to the Madison
Environmental Commission for review. The Environmental Commission
shall make a report thereon to the Planning Board within 30 days
following the transmittal of the report and exhibits to the
Environmental Commission. The environmental impact assessment
shall address the following:
§ 195-23 MADISON CODE § 195-23
191:730
(1) A project description, which shall specify what is to be done and
how it is to be done during construction and operation.
(2) An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project
site and in the surrounding region which shall describe air quality,
water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils and properties
thereof, including capabilities and limitations, sewerage systems,
topography, vegetation, wildlife habitat, aquatic organisms, noise
characteristics and levels, demography, land use, aesthetics,
history and archaeology. Air and water quality shall be described
with reference to standards promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey, and soils shall
be described with reference to criteria contained in the Morris
County Soil Conservation District Standards and Specifications.
(3) An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
set forth in Subsection C(2) above.
(4) A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts which
cannot be avoided, with particular emphasis upon air and water
pollution, including sedimentation and siltation, increase in noise,
damage to plant, tree and wildlife systems; damage to natural
resources; displacement of people and businesses; increase in
municipal services and consequences to the municipal tax
structure. Off-site and off-tract impact shall also be set forth and
evaluated.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation, both at
the project site and in the surrounding region. Such description
shall be accompanied by necessary maps, schedules and other
explanatory data as may be needed to clarify and explain the
actions to be taken.
(6) A statement concerning any irreversible and irretrievable
commitment of resources which would be involved in the proposed
action, should it be implemented.
(7) For government projects, a statement of alternatives to the
proposed project which might avoid some or all of the adverse
environmental effects, including a no-action alternative.
D. (Reserved)
E. Plats and plans for final approval.
(1) The final plat or plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 50
feet to one inch, or as approved by the Borough Engineer, and in
compliance with the provisions of the Map Filing Law.149 The size of
the map shall be in accordance with the Map Filing Act but
149. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 195-23 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-23
191:731
preferably 24 by 36 inches. The final plat or plan shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
(a) All information required in Subsection B(1) for a preliminary
plat or plan.
(b) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved
or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii arcs
and central angles of all curves.
(c) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use and the proposed use of sites other than residential.
(d) The front, side and rear building setback lines.
(e) Improvement plans in accordance with the Borough standards
for roads and water and sewer improvements.
(f) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
(g) All additional information, changes or modifications required
by the Board at the time of preliminary approval.
(2) The application for final approval of a major subdivision or site plan
shall also be accompanied by:
(a) A statement from the Borough Engineer that all improvements
required by the Board on preliminary approval have been
installed in compliance with all applicable laws.
(b) If the improvements have not been installed, then a statement
from the Borough Clerk shall accompany the application or
final approval stating that:
[1] A recordable developer's agreement with the Borough has
been executed.
[2] A satisfactory performance guaranty has been posted.
(c) Proof that all taxes and assessments for local improvements on
the property have been paid.
(d) If the required improvements have been installed, the
application for final approval shall be accompanied by a
statement from the Borough Clerk that a satisfactory
maintenance bond has been posted.
§ 195-23 MADISON CODE § 195-24
191:732
§ 195-24. General design standards.
In reviewing any application for development, the Board shall consider the
following standards. Where applicable, the residential site improvement
standards (RSIS), as amended from time to time, shall apply.
§ 195-24.1. Circulation.
§ 195-24.2. Design and building layout.
A. The Board shall consider pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement
within and adjacent to a lot or tract with particular emphasis on the
provision and layout of parking areas, off-street loading and unloading,
movement of people, goods and vehicles from access roads, within the
lot or tract, between buildings and between buildings and vehicles. In
site plans, the Board shall determine which roads shall be public and
which shall remain private.
B. The Board shall ensure that all parking areas are landscaped and
spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. Access to a
lot or tract from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to interfere as
little as possible with traffic flow and to permit vehicles a safe ingress to
and egress from the lot or tract.
C. The circulation plan of each development shall reflect the Master Plan's
circulation plan element. Private and public transit facilities shall be
clearly defined and delineated. Major access improvements in critical
environmental areas shall be discouraged. The location and provision of
bikeways, sidewalks and other pedestrian linkages shall be encouraged
and clearly indicated.
D. Applicants shall be encouraged to develop and implement mass transit
programs and to minimize the use of private automobiles wherever
possible. These programs may include the use of company buses to
connect tracts with rail and other public transit, use of vans, carpooling,
construction of bike paths and bike storage areas and
construction of convenient bus pickup and drop-off points. In order to
minimize peak-hour traffic impacts, applicants shall encourage
staggered starting and quitting times and changes in work hours where
appropriate and include the details within the application to the Board.
A. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
aesthetically pleasing and provide for efficient arrangement. Particular
attention shall be given to energy conservation, safety and fire
protection and impact on surrounding development. Architectural
design shall be compatible with the environmental and natural
characteristics of the tract and the surrounding neighborhood.
B. In order to promote the general welfare and with a view of encouraging
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough of Madison,
no permit shall be issued by the Construction Official for the
§ 195-24 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:733
construction or alteration of a building, structure or addition thereto, or
for any use of land when such construction or use will adversely affect
the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property or the health and
welfare of residents in the Borough.
C. Fire escapes shall be constructed only against the side or rear wall of a
building and shall be located and/or screened so as not to detract from
the appearance of such buildings.
D. Layout of a single-family or multifamily dwelling not requiring Board
approval shall still be required to submit an individual lot grading plan
to the Borough Engineer for purposes of calculating building height and
compliance with other standards regarding general protection and
welfare of the public. The plan must include information concerning
grades, building location, building height, first-floor elevation, coverage
and such other information as may be required, not limited to decks,
driveways, patios, walls, drainage, drywells, accessory structures,
equipment, screening, etc.
E. Guidelines for development in the GVRSU District, Sub-Zone II. [Added
12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 57-2010]
(1) Purpose and intent.
(a) The purpose of these standards and guidelines is to ensure that
all development within the district gives due consideration to
the historic, physical, visual and spatial character and scale of
the area in which it is located.
(b) These standards and guidelines are intended to preserve and
enhance the district's unique setting and context, to maintain
or improve upon pedestrian access and circulation, and to
guide and encourage rehabilitation and new construction that
is compatible with traditional form and scale.
(c) The physical, visual and spatial characteristics of the district
context shall be maintained and reinforced through the
consistent use of compatible urban design and architectural
design elements. Such elements shall relate the design
characteristics of an individual structure or development to
other existing and planned structures or developments in a
harmonious and integrated manner, resulting in a coherent
overall development pattern and streetscape.
(2) Applicability.
(a) These standards and guidelines shall be applicable to any
project requiring subdivision, variance and/or site plan
approval. The design standards and guidelines shall be applied
concomitantly with the applicable use and bulk regulations of
the district, as well as with other standards within this chapter.
Where the standards conflict, the more restrictive requirement
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:734
shall govern. These standards are not, however, a substitute
for any required review or approval by Madison's Historic
Preservation Commission in any historic district.
(b) The scope of the standards and guidelines includes exterior
aspects of the rehabilitation of existing structures, additions to
existing structures, and construction of new buildings, as well
as site design and improvements.
(c) These standards and guidelines shall be used by the reviewing
board in reviewing the materials provided as part of any site
plan, variance or subdivision approval request.
(3) Modifications and exceptions.
(a) Modifications or exceptions to the design guidelines and
standards contained in this section may be approved by the
Board, provided the applicant has met the criteria for
exceptions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 and can provide
testimony that the resulting change will conform to all of the
following:
[1] Generally satisfy the purpose and intent of this section.
[2] Generally enhance the development plan.
[3] Generally enhance the streetscape and neighborhood.
(4) District design standards and guidelines.
(a) Context, continuity, massing and scale.
[1] Individual development plans shall be evaluated in relation
to the surrounding physical context, including the existing
design features of the streetscape or neighborhood.
[2] Individual development plans shall reflect a sense of
continuity with the dominant design features of their
physical context. Continuity can be achieved through
scale, through careful facade composition, (e.g.,
fenestration, cornice or soffit line, or floor-to-floor
elevation), through the use of related materials, through
site details (e.g., street trees, decorative lamp posts,
textured sidewalk) or by other means.
[3] In those cases where there is no consistent pattern of
streetscape or buildings abutting a development
application or where that pattern is inconsistent with
these guidelines, the applicant is encouraged to view its
application as an opportunity to establish the future
context for the area.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:735
[4] Buildings located at the borders or edges of the district
shall mark the transition into and out of the district in a
distinct fashion, using massing, height extensions,
contrasting materials and/or architectural embellishments
to obtain this effect.
[5] Individual development plans shall be designed to
facilitate pedestrian circulation, both external and
internal, in particular between parking facilities and
sidewalks. Safe and attractive mid-block linkages are also
encouraged, as are barrier-free connections.
[6] Focal points, or points of visual termination, shall
generally be occupied by structures with distinctive
architectural treatments. Applicants may also submit
plans in which building voids or natural features, such as a
plaza or a park, act as points of visual termination.
[7] The layout, materials and details used in the treatment of
exterior spaces shall be selected to enhance their
immediate surroundings. Exterior spaces shall be
functional and provide visual and/or physical amenities for
their users, including, but not limited to, textured paving,
landscaping, lighting, street trees, benches, bicycle racks,
trash receptacles and other items of street furniture, as
appropriate.
[8] Structures shall be considered in terms of their
relationship to the height and massing of surrounding
structures, as well as in relation to the human scale.
Structures shall maintain an appropriate scale in relation
to neighboring structures and implement external
architectural details that maintain a human scale.
(b) Building orientation, design and architectural treatment.
[1] Orientation and spacing.
[a] Buildings' principal orientation shall be towards and
relate to public streets, both functionally and visually.
Buildings shall not be oriented to front parking lots.
[b] In a sequence of structures along a street, the spacing
between them (sidewall to sidewall) is an important
element in defining the observer's perception of
rhythm. New structures shall reflect the existing
rhythm or, in the absence of a clear rhythm, shall
better define it. In new development, a sequence of
structures shall seek to establish a spacing rhythm
that is related to the scale of the individual buildings,
their height, the composition of the facade and the
width of the street.
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:736
[2] Architectural style.
[a] A diversity of architectural styles adds interest to a
streetscape or district. No particular architectural
style is preferred outside of local historic districts, and
both contemporary contributions and
reinterpretations of older architectural styles with a
contemporary flavor may be acceptable. However, a
diversity of appearance in facades shall be
counterbalanced with continuity in massing, wall line,
verticality and spacing.
[b] In rehabilitations of older buildings in the district,
distinctive stylistic features or characteristic
examples of skilled craftsmanship shall be treated
with sensitivity. If deteriorated, these architectural
features shall be restored rather than replaced,
wherever possible. In the event replacement is
necessary, the new material shall match that being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and
other visual qualities, to the maximum extent possible.
[c] The surface cleaning of older structures shall be
undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that damage
original material are prohibited.
[d] A contemporary flair in alteration and additions to
existing properties shall not be discouraged, provided
respect for the significant features of the original
structure is demonstrated, as well as compatibility.
[3] Multiple uses, ground floor retail emphasis and/or
storefronts.
[a] Storefronts, display windows and other ground floor
openings shall be accentuated through fenestration
and architectural treatment. Storefronts shall
maintain consistency with upper floors in terms of
composition, materials, style and detailing.
[b] Ground floor display windows shall be oriented to the
public street rather than designed with an inward,
internal orientation.
[c] In the rehabilitation of older buildings, the traditional
storefront elements such as entrances, transoms,
kickplates, corner posts, signs and display windows
shall be maintained, whenever possible, and
replicated in new buildings that are seeking to echo
the area's historic context.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:737
[d] Retail sales and service uses shall have large pane
display windows on the ground level. Such windows
shall be framed by the surrounding wall.
[e] The maximum size of a ground floor retail trade, retail
service or food service establishment shall not exceed
6,500 square feet of gross floor area.
[4] Massing and scale.
[a] Buildings shall avoid long, uninterrupted wall or roof
planes. Building wall offsets, including both
projections and recesses, shall be required, in order to
provide architectural interest and variety and relieve
the visual effect of a single, long wall on large
buildings. Similarly, roofline offsets shall be provided,
in order to provide architectural interest and variety
to the massing of a building and relieve the effect of a
single, long roof.
[b] Larger buildings shall reduce the appearance of bulk
through recesses, offsets, changes of plane, stepped
terraces or other devices which break up and
articulate building mass. Vertical design components
should also be considered.
[c] Buildings shall be massed to reinforce street space
and shall exhibit a continuity of facade lines, building
heights sensitive to adjacent structures and a scale of
design features consistent with surrounding buildings.
[d] Infill and additions.
[i] Infill development in the district shall consider the
height of the existing, surrounding buildings.
[ii] Extensions of existing buildings, particularly
those with architectural character, shall require
careful attention. Additions that overpower or
conflict with the original architecture shall not be
permitted. Additions which maintain a sense of
continuity, through setbacks, compatible colors
and materials and similar geometric
relationships, are encouraged.
[5] Facades.
[a] All visible facades of a building shall be architecturally
emphasized through manipulation of the elements of
modulation and composition. The architectural
treatment of the front facade shall be continued
around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:738
[b] All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed
to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors
and details.
[c] Facades shall be balanced and proportional in
including both vertical and horizontal design elements
that relate to the human scale.
[d] Solid metal security gates or solid roll-down metal
windows are prohibited.
[6] Fenestration.
[a] Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with
the style, materials, colors and detail of a building.
Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever
possible. To the extent possible, the location of
windows on the upper stories of a building shall be
vertically aligned with the location of windows and
doors on the ground level, including storefronts or
display windows.
[b] In buildings designed in an architectural style that
normally has windows with muntins or divided lights,
these shall be required, and they must be externally
attached on both sides on the ground floor level.
[c] In the rehabilitation of older buildings, original
windows and doors shall be maintained both in
number, size, location and expression. In particular,
the expression defined by lintel, frame, sill and head
shall be maintained if the original window is replaced
by one of modern design.
[d] Windows shall be required at ground floor level with
total fenestration at ground level a minimum of 60%
along all exposed facades.
[e] Blank wall or service area treatment of side and/or
rear elevations visible from the public viewshed shall
not be permitted.
[7] Materials, colors and details.
[a] All materials, colors and architectural details used on
the exterior of a building shall be compatible with the
building's style, as well as with each other. A building
designed in an architectural style that normally
includes certain integral materials, colors and/or
details shall incorporate them into its design.
[b] Exterior building materials shall be selected to convey
a sense of dignity and permanence to the building.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:739
Natural materials and natural colors are preferred
except in cases where architectural style dictates a
more varied color scheme.
[c] The use of metal or glazed curtain walls, Dryvit
panels, mirrored and/or heavily tinted glass, plastic
panels, thin veneers, exposed concrete block,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other artificial materials
as exterior building materials is prohibited.
[d] In renovations, the original materials should be
retained and repaired, if possible, or replaced with
matching materials, if beyond repair. Unpainted brick
should not be disturbed, and masonry facades should
not be covered or replaced with artificial siding or
panels. In cases where the original facade has been
modified, these materials should be replaced to match
the original materials, where possible.
[8] Roofs.
[a] The type, shape, pitch, texture and color of a roof shall
be considered as an integral part of the design of a
building and shall be architecturally compatible with
the building's style, materials, colors and details.
[b] Roof pitch shall be considered as a function of context
and building height. Roof pitch shall be a minimum of
8/12 for gable roofs and 6/12 for hip roofs. Flat roofs
are permitted on buildings of a minimum of two
stories in height, provided all visibly exposed walls
have an articulated cornice that projects out
horizontally from the vertical building wall plane. Hip
or gable roofs are permitted where appropriate to the
building type and compatible with the surrounding
area. Other types of roofs are permitted if appropriate
to the building's architecture.
[c] Architectural embellishments that add visual interest
to roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry
chimneys, cupolas, clock towers and other similar
elements are encouraged, provided they are
architecturally compatible with the building.
[d] In the rehabilitation of older buildings, the design and
pitch of the original roof shall be maintained, along
with other functional and/or decorative elements such
as cornices, dormers, gutters, cupolas and flashing.
Replacements shall match as closely as possible the
original element in color, material, size and design.
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:740
[e] Green or vegetative roofs are strongly encouraged as
is the incorporation of any type of rooftop landscaping
features.
[9] Awnings and canopies.
[a] Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at ground
floor level, and on upper levels where appropriate,
provided they complement a building's architectural
style and are compatible with its materials, colors and
details.
[b] Canvas is the preferred material, although other
waterproofed fabrics may be considered. Metal,
aluminum or vinyl awnings are prohibited.
[c] Awnings shall not be placed so as to conceal any
significant architectural feature or detail.
[d] Waterfall-type awnings are prohibited.
[e] Particular attention shall be taken with selection of
the appropriate supporting structure and hardware,
as well as with the location and method by which it is
attached to the building facade. Ground-mounted
supports are prohibited.
[f] In buildings with multiple storefronts, compatible
awnings should be used as a means of unifying the
structure.
(c) Parking and access.
[1] Location and access.
[a] Parking shall be provided along curbs, in structures or
in surface lots, preferably interconnected and shared.
[b] Surface parking lots shall be located to the rear of
buildings to the maximum extent possible and shall be
prohibited in any front yard area. The visual impact to
adjacent properties and to the public right-of-way
shall be minimized.
[c] Vehicular access shall, to the extent feasible, be
obtained from side streets and curb cuts minimized
along major streets.
[d] Shared access and connections between parking areas
are encouraged to facilitate traffic flows between
adjacent developments and to minimize access points
along major streets.
[2] Parking lot design and landscaping.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:741
[a] Site plans shall balance the functional requirements of
parking with the provision of pedestrian amenities.
Transition areas between parking and commercial or
residential uses shall be designed with textured
paving, appropriate pedestrian walkways and
crosswalk treatment, landscaping and street furniture
to clearly demarcate pedestrian flows and to protect
pedestrian safety.
[b] Parking lot layout and orientation of parking with
respect to proposed buildings shall reflect pedestrian
needs, accessibility and safety.
[c] Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering and
screening shall prevent direct views of parked
vehicles by the public, minimize spill-over light, glare,
noise or exhaust fumes onto adjacent properties, in
particular residential properties, and provide the
parking area with a reasonable measure of shade.
[d] The interior of all parking lots shall be landscaped to
provide shade and visual relief. This is best achieved
by protected planting islands or peninsulas within the
parking lot. A minimum of one deciduous shade tree
shall be planted for every 10 parking spaces.
[3] Parking structures.
[a] The exterior of parking structures shall follow these
design standards for composition and respect for
context. Brick or other masonry materials are
recommended for the exterior walls. Long, blank
expanses of walls shall not be permitted. Parking
structure facades shall present at least 80% solid wall
area. Use of architectural details and landscaping to
screen the structure are encouraged. If part of a
larger building, a parking structure shall be fully
integrated in terms of materials, colors, style and
openings.
[b] In order to enhance the continuity of the streetscape
and minimize blank walls, parking structures are
strongly encouraged to incorporate ground floor retail
and service uses along any frontage facing onto a
public right-of-way, including pedestrian walkways. If
a parking structure is set back from the property line,
landscaping with trees, shrubs and/or climbing plants
shall be provided. Planters and green vegetative walls
are encouraged, both along ground floor and upper
levels, in order to soften the edges and openings.
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:742
[c] Vehicular access to parking structures shall be
achieved from side streets, although direct pedestrian
connections to the primary street shall be provided;
vehicular entrances and exits shall not be overly
emphasized, shall be architecturally integrated into
the building and shall protect pedestrian traffic at
street level.
(d) Landscaping, lighting and signage.
[1] Landscaping.
[a] Landscaping shall be required in accordance with a
plan conceived for each site as a whole. All areas of a
site not occupied by buildings, parking lots, other
improvements or textured paving shall be planted
with trees, shrubs, hedges, ground covers and/or
grasses. Perennials and annuals are encouraged.
Landscaping shall be integrated with other functional
and ornamental site design elements, where
appropriate, such as recreational facilities, ground
paving materials, paths and walkways, trellises,
pergolas and gazebos, fences and walls, street
furniture, art and sculpture.
[b] Plant suitability, including use of native plants, regular
maintenance programs, including replacement as
needed, and compatibility with site and construction
features shall be required in the design of
landscaping.
[c] Shade trees shall be provided along each side of all
streets, public or private, existing or proposed. On
streets where healthy and mature shade trees
currently exist they shall be protected and preserved,
and the requirements for providing new trees may be
waived or modified.
[d] Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of 3.50
inches at time of planting and a maximum spacing of
30 feet on center, with exact spacing to be evaluated
on a site-specific basis.
[e] Shade tree species shall be reviewed and approved by
the Shade Tree Management Board.
[f] Landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified
landscape architect or certified professional in the
field for building additions/renovations or new
construction of 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or
more.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:743
[g] See §§ 195-25.3, 195-25.4 and 195-24.5 for additional
design standards.
[2] Lighting.
[a] Streets and sites shall provide adequate lighting,
while minimizing adverse impacts, such as glare and
overhead sky glow, on adjacent properties and the
public right-of-way.
[b] The exterior of a site, as well as parking areas,
driveways and interior walkways, shall provide
pedestrian-scale decorative lamp posts, spaced at
regular intervals.
[c] Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
building's style.
[d] Lights shall be concealed through shielding or
installed behind features to eliminate glare and
spillage.
[e] See § 195-25.6 for additional standards.
[3] Signage.
[a] Master signage plans are required per § 195-34B(2).
Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, composition,
materials, colors and details of the building, as well as
with other signs used on the building or in its vicinity.
[b] Signs shall fit within the existing facade features and
shall not interfere with door and window openings,
conceal any architectural details or obscure the
composition of the facade where they are located.
[c] In older buildings, signs shall be placed on a facade
only in an historically appropriate fashion. Signs
applied to masonry surfaces should be mechanically
fastened to mortar joints only and not directly into
brick or stone.
[d] Wood and painted metal are the preferred materials
for signs. Flat signs should be framed with raised
edges. Signs using wood shall use only high-quality
exterior grade finishes.
[e] Sign colors should be limited in number and
compatible with the colors of the building facade and
of nearby signs.
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.2
191:744
[f] Internally illuminated signs, including backlit channel
lettering affixed directly to a building facade, are
discouraged.
[g] See § 195-34 and Schedule IV for additional
requirements.
(e) Other standards.
[1] Street furniture and utility boxes.
[a] Elements of street furniture, such as benches, waste
containers, planters, bicycle racks and bollards should
be carefully selected to ensure compatibility with the
character of the area and the site. Consistency in the
location of the various elements of street furniture is
critical for maximum effect and functional usage.
[b] Utilitarian elements such as utility boxes should be
concealed and screened from public view.
[2] Pedestrian circulation, sidewalks and walkways.
[a] Walkway design shall promote pedestrian activity and
safety within each site and throughout the district;
walkways shall be separate and distinct from motor
vehicle circulation to the greatest extent possible,
provide a pleasant route for users and promote
pedestrian safety.
[b] Walkways shall be constructed of brick, slate, colored/
textured concrete pavers or slabs, or some
combination thereof that is compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the surrounding
buildings as well as with the public sidewalks.
[3] Walls and fences.
[a] Walls and fences shall be designed to create visual
interest, define space, differentiate public, semi-public
and private space, provide a sense of enclosure and
guide pedestrian circulation, as well as for ornamental
functions
[b] Walls and fences shall be made of durable materials
and shall be compatible in style, materials and color
with the surrounding buildings. Brick walls with a
stone or cast stone cap are encouraged. Board-onboard-
type wooden fences, with reinforced corners
and entrance poles, are permitted in rear and side
yards only. Chain-link, split rail, highway-style guard
rail, stockade or contemporary security fencing such
as barbed wire or razor wire are prohibited.
§ 195-24.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.2
191:745
§ 195-24.3. Environmental considerations.
§ 195-24.4. Historic preservation.
§ 195-24.5. Landscaping.
Landscaping and creative use of materials are
encouraged to improve the appearance of walls.
[4] Design and screening of loading areas and mechanical
equipment.
[a] Loading areas and their driveways shall be effectively
screened from adjacent properties and from the public
right-of-way through a combination of walls, fences
and landscaping. Screening and landscaping shall also
mitigate spill-over glare, noise or exhaust fumes
generated by loading activities.
[b] All air-conditioning units, HVAC components,
mechanical systems exhaust pipes or stacks, elevator
or stair bulkheads and other similar appurtenances
shall be thoroughly screened from public view by
using walls, roof elements, penthouse-type screening
devices or landscaping that are architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of the building.
A. Environmental elements relating to prevention of soil erosion,
protection of significant vistas or views, preservation of trees and
protection of watercourses, resources, topography, soil and animal life
shall be reviewed, and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse
impact on these elements.
B. Madison's Natural Resource Inventory's data and environmental impact
information shall be used in reviewing the design of the development in
areas having critical environmental constraints.
A. Continued use of historic sites through adaptive reuse should be
encouraged.
B. Appropriate alterations of historic sites and improvements within
historic districts shall be encouraged, while new construction which is
not in keeping with the character of historic districts and sites shall be
discouraged.
C. Properties falling within the Historic District shall comply with the
provisions of the Borough Code Chapter 112, § 112-1 et seq.
A. Landscaping shall be provided as part of any overall site plan design
and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and
buffering requirements. Landscaping includes trees, bushes, shrubs,
§ 195-24.2 MADISON CODE § 195-24.5
191:746
§ 195-24.6. Buffering.
§ 195-24.7. Open space.
§ 195-24.8. General design standards for signs.
§ 195-24.9. Utilities.
ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and/or the use
of building and paving materials in an imaginative manner.
B. The existing sense and appearance of any natural scenic qualities on a
tract shall be retained by the careful placement of buildings and
improvements.
A. Buffering shall be located to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise,
light from structures, the movement of people and vehicles and to
shield activities from adjacent properties when necessary. Buffering
may include but not be limited to fencing, walls, evergreens, shrubs,
landscaping, berms, rocks, boulders, open space, ponds, steep slopes,
deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
B. Extensive buffering shall be required where intensive land uses abut
less intensive uses. Existing natural vegetation, if appropriate for the
above stated purposes, shall be retained.
A. Open space shall be provided as part of a site plan and shall serve as a
buffer and/or help integrate buildings and uses. Undeveloped open
space should have as a prime objective the preservation of a tract's
natural amenities and vistas. Ponds, rock outcroppings, wooded areas,
steep slopes, ravines and streambeds are prime lands recommended for
undeveloped open space.
B. Open spaces shall be so located as to provide for maximum usability
and to create a harmonious relationship between buildings.
A. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, coordinated
with other signs on the site through a master signage plan and located
so as to achieve their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles
and pedestrians.
B. Design theme. There should be a coordinated graphics design theme
throughout any site plan. The design theme shall include style and size
of lettering, construction materials, colors, location, type of pole or
standard, size and lighting. Color of letters and background should be
carefully considered in relation to the color of the material or buildings
or where the signs are proposed to be located.
C. Location. Signs should be located so as not to create a hazard. The
location of signs should be selected in terms of visibility.
§ 195-24.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-24.9
191:747
§ 195-24.10. Street furniture.
The site plan shall provide for those elements of street furniture made of the
same or similar materials to ensure design continuity and be appropriate
to the particular use. These may include, but not be limited to, phone
booths, benches, bike racks, trash receptacles, bus shelters, tree planters
and directories.
§ 195-24.11. Topsoil protection.
To the extent practicable, no topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil stripped and stockpiled during the course of construction
shall be redistributed so as to provide equal cover to all areas of the
subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
§ 195-24.12. Conformance with Master Plan or Official Map.
§ 195-25. Specific design standards.
In reviewing any application for development, the Board shall consider the
following standards. Where applicable, the residential site improvement
standards (RSIS), as amended from time to time, shall apply.
A. The storm drainage system, sanitary waste disposal system, water
supply system, solid and wet waste collection and disposal plan and
electrical and other distribution systems shall be reviewed and
approved.
B. The requirements for underground utilities shall apply to all new
developments.
C. Particular emphasis shall be given to the protection of delineated
floodplains, preservation of stream corridors, establishment of drainage
rights-of-way, analysis of the adequacy of existing systems and the need
for improvements, both on-site and off-site, to adequately control the
rate, volume and velocity of storm drainage, provide for treatment of
effluent and to maintain an adequate supply of potable water at
sufficient pressure.
D. In such event that they cannot be installed underground, facilities such
as pumping stations or transformers shall be enclosed in buildings or
effectively screened with landscaping and/or buffering as approved by
the Board.
A. All developments shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
upon the Master Plan or Official Map.
B. Streets, public drainageways, flood control basins and other public
areas shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be shown on the
plan of a proposed development in locations and sizes suitable to their
intended uses. The Board may reserve the locations and extent of such
public areas in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
§ 195-24.9 MADISON CODE § 195-25.1
191:748
§ 195-25.1. Blocks.
§ 195-25.2. Lots.
§ 195-25.3. Buffers.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lots required in the area by this chapter
and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Board. The width and routing of
such walkways shall be determined on an individual project basis.
A. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
B. Where extra width has been dedicated for the widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra line and setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
C. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as but not limited to wetlands, rock
formations or flood conditions, the Board may withhold approval of
such lots.
A. General.
(1) Visual screens provided through landscaping shall be designed in
such a manner as to provide a barrier on a year-round basis around
the view of the area to be screened.
(2) Existing vegetation within the buffer shall be preserved, where
possible, and supplemented with plantings and other buffer devices
to provide screening of residences.
(3) Buffer dimensions shall be measured from property lines.
(4) Within any buffer area, utilities, driveways and streets may be
permitted to cross at right angles to the buffer.
(5) No buildings, signs (other than directional signs), structures,
storage of materials or parking shall be permitted within the buffer
area.
(6) All plantings shall be installed according to accepted horticultural
standards.
B. Evergreens. Evergreens used as buffers shall be planted in at least two
rows of staggered plantings to achieve overlapping coverage and of
such size as to constitute an adequate screen as determined by the
Board.
§ 195-25.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.3
191:749
§ 195-25.4. Landscaping.
C. Berms. Berms used as part of a buffer or screen must be designed as
follows:
(1) Vertically and horizontally meandering berms shall be used to
achieve a natural rolling park-like landscape.
(2) Berms shall be overlapping where drainage swales are required to
pass through them. The final design must be reflected upon the
drainage plan.
D. Reverse frontage buffers.
(1) Reverse frontage buffers shall be required where residential units
and/or lots back onto any street.
(2) The buffer shall be situated adjacent to the property line.
(3) Any landscaped buffer shall be not less than 20 feet in width. For
lots backing up on arterial streets or highways, the landscape
buffer shall not be less than 30 feet.
(4) The buffer area shall be used for no purpose other than
landscaping, underground utilities or for any required sidewalk.
A. All lots, regardless of the type of use (except for lots in the CBD-1
Zone), shall have a minimum of 15% of the lot landscaped. All areas not
occupied by buildings, parking areas, patios, walkways and/or any
other impervious surface shall be suitably landscaped. No landscaping
shall interfere with required sight triangles.
B. Deciduous trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper at planting, and
evergreen trees shall be at least four feet tall. All trees shall be balled
and burlapped and be of specimen quality as established by the
American Association of Nurserymen.
C. Any landscaping which, within two years of planting, dies, for any
reason, shall be replaced by the developer(s) at their expense by means
of an agreement.
D. The following principles shall be considered:
(1) Landscaping shall be located to provide for climate control.
(2) Landscaping shall be used to accent and complement buildings.
(3) Landscaping shall be provided in public areas, parking areas,
recreation sites and adjacent to buildings.
(4) Vines and climbing plants shall be considered for large expanses of
wall.
(5) Massing trees shall be considered at critical points.
§ 195-25.3 MADISON CODE § 195-25.4
191:750
§ 195-25.5. Fences and walls, including retaining walls. [Amended
1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004; 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 71-2007]
Fences or walls in excess of 18 inches in height shall be considered as
structures accessory to a principal permitted use and shall be permitted in
accordance with the standards set forth below:
(6) Smaller trees shall be used on narrow streets.
(7) Ground cover shall be used to prevent erosion.
(8) A variety and mixture of landscaping shall be provided.
Consideration shall be given to susceptibility to disease, colors,
season, textures, shapes, blossom and foliage in selecting species.
(9) Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in
the choice of landscaping.
(10) Existing trees located within 10 feet of any street right-of-way shall
be maintained unless shown to be removed as part of an approved
plan. The existing grade within that space shall not be disturbed
without such approval.
(11) Entrances to nonresidential lots shall be given special landscaping
treatment.
(12) The impact of any proposed landscaping plan at various time
intervals shall be considered. Shrubs may grow and eventually
block sight distances. Foundation plants may block out buildings.
(13) Existing large trees shall be saved by not varying the grade around
the trees by more than six to 12 inches, by construction of tree
wells and by erecting protective fences. Clumps or masses of trees
shall be protected.
(14) Certain trees shall be avoided because of problems.
(15) Trees that can stand an urban environment shall be used.
(16) Landscaping in parking areas shall be provided in accordance with
this article.
(17) Impervious materials shall not be used in any landscape area.
Weed-retardant mulch, porous non-woven synthetic landscape
fabric or other materials shall be used.
E. The applicant shall consult with the recommended tree listing
established by the Shade Tree Management Board.
A. Maximum height and location in residential zones. All fences and walls
in residential zones shall comply with the standards in Schedule A:
Fence and Wall Diagram.150
150. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-25.4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.5
191:751
§ 195-25.6. Exterior lighting. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No.
46-2010]
B. General regulations for fences and walls, including retaining walls.
(1) No fence or wall shall be constructed or installed so as to constitute
a hazard to traffic or safety.
(2) No fence or wall in a residential zone shall be greater than six feet
in height except in the case of tennis court and similar sports court
facilities.
(3) In all nonresidential zones no fence shall exceed six feet in height.
On properties with nonresidential uses which abut residential uses,
any open fencing shall be buffered with evergreen landscaping.
(4) Except for locations within sight triangles, hedges and other
landscaping shall be exempt from the height limitations of this
subsection but shall not be located so as to constitute a hazard to
traffic or safety.
(5) The face or finished side of a fence or wall shall face the adjacent
property or street.
(6) No fence or wall shall be constructed with barbed wire, metal
spikes or other such dangerous material or constructed in such
manner as to be dangerous to animals or humans.
(7) No fence or wall shall be constructed without the issuance of a
zoning permit or a building permit.
(8) All fences and walls shall be contained within the property lines of
the parcel containing the principal use.
(9) Retaining walls over 18 inches in height shall be set back from any
property line by at least two feet or set back a distance equal to the
height of the retaining wall or retaining wall series, whichever is
greater.
C. Swimming pool fences. Every private swimming pool shall have a fence
enclosure which complies with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
D. Retaining walls. Any retaining wall 48 inches or greater in height, or a
series of retaining walls along the same ground slope which together
total 48 inches or greater in height, shall require a building permit.
A. Purpose. Regulation of outdoor lighting is necessary to permit
reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security
and enjoyment while preserving the ambiance of the night. It is
necessary to prevent light trespass, to reduce unnecessary glare caused
by inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures and to prevent the cause of
unnecessary skyglow. These standards are intended to protect adjacent
§ 195-25.5 MADISON CODE § 195-25.6
191:752
residential neighborhoods from unnecessary lighting impacts, to
encourage energy efficiency, to discourage the waste of electricity and
to improve or maintain nighttime public safety, utility and security.
B. All outdoor lighting fixtures (luminaires) shall be installed in
conformance with this section and with the provisions of the Building
Code, the Electrical Code and the Sign Code, as applicable and under
permit and inspection, if such is required.
C. Standards. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter
maintained, other than those serving one- and two-family dwellings,
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Illumination levels shall not exceed those recommended in the:
(a) IESNA Lighting Handbook, 9th Edition, as amended from time
to time.
(b) IESNA publication RP-33-99, Lighting for Exterior
Environments, as amended from time to time.
(c) IESNA publication RP-08, Roadway Lighting, as amended from
time to time.
(d) IESNA publication, RP-6-01, Reaffirmed 2009, Sports and
Recreational Area Lighting, as amended from time to time.
(2) Light trespass (nuisance light). All light fixtures, except street
lighting maintained by a governmental authority, and those used on
one- or two-family dwellings, shall be designed, installed and
maintained to prevent light trespass, as specified below:
(a) The maximum illumination at property lines shall be 0.1
footcandle at grade.
(b) Illumination occurring above a height of five feet above the
property line of the subject property shall not exceed 0.1
footcandle in a vertical plane on residentially zoned property.
(c) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter
maintained shall be directed so that there will not be any direct
glare source visible from any property.
(3) Outdoor lighting energy conservation.
(a) All exterior lighting shall be designed so as not to exceed the
exterior lighting unit power allowances of ASHRAE/IESNA
Standard 90.1-2004, or the version currently adopted by the
New Jersey Department of Energy.
(b) All outdoor lighting not essential for safety and security
purposes or to illustrate changes in grade or material shall be
activated by automatic control devices and turned off during
§ 195-25.6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.6
191:753
nonoperating hours. Illuminated signs are excluded from this
requirement.
(c) Exterior retail and merchandise display lighting shall not
remain on after 10:00 p.m. Reduced levels of lighting in
interior show or display windows may remain on for security
purposes; provided, however, that these levels shall not exceed
25% of the normal artificial lighting levels in the interior
display or show windows.
(d) Exterior lighting for recreational areas, athletic fields and
courts shall not remain on after 10:00 p.m., except as
necessary for completion of scheduled games as may occur
from time to time.
(e) Exterior lighting serving accredited educational institutions,
not including recreational areas, athletic fields and courts,
shall not remain on after 11:00 p.m.
(4) Only shielded light fixtures shall be used. Any fixture mounted
above 10 feet shall have no more than 10% of its light distribution
at a vertical angle of 80° above nadir and 2.5% at an angle of 90°
above nadir.
(5) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or other objects
mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform shall have their
candlepower curve plotted such that 100% of the beam angle used
is not greater than the size of the object to be illuminated.
(6) Other upward-directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct-light emissions shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated structure.
(7) Description of outdoor lamp/luminaire combinations, including
component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of
cutoff, supports, poles and including manufacturer's catalog cuts.
(8) Submission of plans. Except for detached single-family and
detached two-family dwellings, plans and evidence of compliance
shall include the following:
(a) Locations and description of every outdoor enclosed light
fixture and hours of operation, their aiming angles and
mounting heights.
(b) Foundation details for light poles.
(c) Lighting calculations for site lighting and general exterior
applications shall be provided that identify the following
elements (See Subsection D(3)(c) below for lighting calculation
requirements for recreational and sports lighting.):
§ 195-25.6 MADISON CODE § 195-25.6
191:754
[1] Initial horizontal illuminances at grade and vertical
illuminances where vertical surfaces are being illuminated
such as building facades. Illuminances shall be illustrated
in footcandles (before depreciation).
[a] Average footcandles, during operating and nonoperating
hours.
[b] Maximum footcandles.
[c] Minimum footcandles.
[d] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
[e] Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio.
[2] Average maintained horizontal illuminances at grade and
vertical illuminances where vertical surfaces are being
illuminated such as building facades. Illuminances shall be
illustrated in footcandles. Define relamping and cleaning
cycles to illustrate light loss factors to account for lumen
depreciation and reduced optical system performance over
time to arrive at maintained values of illumination.
[a] Average footcandles during operating and
nonoperating hours.
[b] Maximum footcandles.
[c] Minimum footcandles.
[d] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
[e] Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio
[3] Computer-generated photometric grid showing
maintained footcandle readings every 10 feet and the
average maintained footcandles, depending upon the
design application, for both vertical and horizontal
illumination levels. Illustrate the initial and maintained
horizontal and vertical illuminances at five feet above
grade at any adjacent residential property line.
D. Lighting applications.
(1) Where used for roadways and parking lots and walkways or
security purposes.
(a) Average maintained illuminances shall not exceed IESNA
recommendations.
(b) Only outdoor enclosed light fixtures shielded from public view
and having the performance characteristics of a cutoff light
fixture shall be used.
§ 195-25.6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.6
191:755
(c) For parking lots, light poles that are visible to the public shall
not exceed 20 feet in height (base plus pole).
(d) For walkways and other pedestrian areas, light poles that are
visible to the public shall not exceed 12 feet in height (base
plus pole).
(e) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid
being damaged by vehicles. Foundations supporting lighting
poles installed less than four feet behind the curb shall not be
less than 24 inches above the ground.
(f) The style of the light and light standards shall be consistent
with the architectural style of the principal building or
surrounding area.
(g) Floodlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be
prohibited.
(h) All wiring shall be laid underground.
(2) Where used for private, commercial and industrial purposes such
as in merchandise display areas, work areas, platforms, signs,
architectural, landscape or sports or recreational facilities:
(a) All light fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing
devices and shall comply with the following.
(b) Externally illuminated signs, including building identification
or other similar illuminated signs, shall comply with the
following:
[1] Top-mounted light fixtures shall have illumination levels
plotted such that 100% of the beam angle used is not
greater than the size of the externally illuminated sign and
are preferred over any other positioned light fixtures.
[2] When top-mounted light fixtures are not feasible for good
cause shown, illumination from other positioned light
fixtures shall continue to be restricted to the sign area.
Visors or other directional control devices shall be used to
eliminate any spill light. Furthermore, when any signage is
viewed from the opposite side of that being illuminated,
luminous portions of light fixtures, and stray light, shall
not be visible.
[3] Detailed plans are to be provided to illustrate floodlight
distribution patterns. Once properly installed, the fixtures
are to be aimed, permanently affixed and maintained in the
approved position according to the terms of approval
outlined in the approving resolution.
§ 195-25.6 MADISON CODE § 195-25.6
191:756
(c) Outdoor light shall not be attached or mounted to public
property (i.e., public buildings, utility poles, telephone poles,
streetlights, road/street signs). Furthermore, these fixtures
shall not tap or extend power from sources servicing public
lighting and/or power devices. Temporary holiday lighting shall
be exempt.
(d) All outdoor lighting, during nonoperating hours of the business
on site, not necessary for safety and security purposes shall
have reduced light levels, activated by motion sensors,
photocells, timers or other lighting control devices, or be
turned off.
(3) Where used for sports and recreational lighting.
(a) Design considerations. Nighttime sports and recreational
lighting is proliferating and controls must be place to minimize
the negative impact on the community environment and to
minimize the utility power demand.
[1] Outdoor lighting systems. Outdoor lighting systems
primarily consist of direct distribution floodlights aimed at
the playing surface.
[a] Light sources. Metal halide (MH) high-intensity
discharge (HID) is the preferred source. Highpressure
sodium (HPS) should be used only in
conjunction with metal halide.
[b] Luminaires. General purpose or heavy duty luminaires
with full cutoff optical systems to provide superior
visibility for the players and to reduce off-site impacts.
[c] Poles. The location and height of poles have a major
impact on lighting system effectiveness and quality
and off-site impact. Contrary to public understanding,
the lower the mounting height, the higher the aiming
angle and the more light that is delivered off site. The
higher the pole (with limits), the lower the aiming
angle, and less light is delivered off site.
[d] Design factors. Outdoor lighting is generally visible
far beyond facility boundaries and careful
consideration should be given to:
[i] Spill light encroaching on neighboring properties.
[ii] Light that contributes to skyglow.
[iii] Durability of equipment and wiring subject to
continuous outdoor exposure.
[iv] Electrical power, voltage and system selection.
§ 195-25.6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.6
191:757
[v] Controls for multiple sports and energy
conservation.
(b) Standards. All outdoor sports and recreational lighting shall
comply with the following requirements:
[1] Only light fixtures shielded with internal and/or external
shields shall be used. The upper limit of the defined beam
should be no more than 80° above nadir and no more than
5% of the luminaires used should violate this rule.
[2] Illumination levels shall not exceed those recommended in
the IESNA Lighting Handbook, 9th Edition, as amended
from time to time, and IESNA publication RP-6-01
(reaffirmed 2009), Recommended Practice for Sports and
Recreational Area Lighting, as amended from time to time.
[3] Where used for sports or recreational facilities, all lighting
fixtures shall comply with the following:
[a] For field sports such as football, soccer, baseball and
track and field, a minimum pole height shall be 70 feet
and a maximum pole height shall be 85 feet.
[b] The minimum distance of the pole to any property line
shall be twice the height of the pole. For example, an
eighty-foot pole must be a minimum of 160 feet from
any property line.
[c] Trespass lighting shall not be more than 0.1
footcandle at any adjacent residential property line at
grade.
[d] A natural landscape buffer shall be required to
sufficiently screen the source of light and the lit object
from any adjacent residences. The buffer areas shall
consist of a planted berm with a mix of deciduous and
coniferous plants sufficient to provide year-round
screening and with plants at least six feet in height/2.5
DBH at time of planting.
[e] When not in use or, under any circumstance, not later
than 10:00 p.m., all lighting shall be turned off.
[4] Light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained
shall be directed so that there will not be any direct glare
source visible from any other property.
(c) Lighting calculations for recreational and sports lighting shall
be provided that identify the following elements:
[1] The class of play for each playing area.
§ 195-25.6 MADISON CODE § 195-25.6
191:758
[2] Initial horizontal and vertical illuminances for primary
playing areas, secondary playing areas and boundary
areas (where applicable). Illuminances shall be illustrated
in footcandles (before depreciation).
[a] Average footcandles during operating and
nonoperating hours.
[b] Maximum footcandles.
[c] Minimum footcandles.
[d] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
[e] Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio.
[3] Average maintained horizontal and vertical illuminances
for primary playing areas, secondary playing areas, and
boundary areas (where applicable). Illuminances shall be
illustrated in footcandles. Define relamping and cleaning
cycles to illustrate light loss factors to account for lumen
depreciation and reduced optical system performance over
time to arrive at maintained values of illumination.
[a] Average footcandles during operating and
nonoperating hours.
[b] Maximum footcandles.
[c] Minimum footcandles.
[d] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
[e] Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio.
[4] Illustrate recommended levels sited in the IESNA Lighting
Handbook, 9th Edition and IESNA publication RP-6-01
(reaffirmed 2009), Recommended Practice for Sports and
Recreational Area Lighting.
[a] Average footcandles, during operating and nonoperating
hours.
[b] Maximum footcandles.
[c] Minimum footcandles.
[d] Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
[e] Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio.
[5] Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet and the average footcandles,
depending upon the design application, for both vertical
and horizontal illumination levels. Illustrate the initial and
§ 195-25.6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.6
191:759
§ 195-25.7. Screening of exterior mechanical equipment.
§ 195-25.8. Monuments.
Monuments shall be installed in compliance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11q (the Map Filing Law). Monuments may be required
delineating critical area easements and conservation easements at the
discretion of the Board.
§ 195-25.9. Storage and disposal of waste.
maintained horizontal and vertical illuminances at five feet
above grade at any adjacent residential property line.
(4) Where used for new single- and two-family residential homes.
(a) All residential outdoor light fixtures shall comply with the
requirements as specified below:
[1] Light distributions generated by light fixtures shall be
confined to the property on which they are installed.
[2] Light fixtures installed within any setback area, including
front, rear or side yard setbacks, shall minimize light
spillage and glare upward and onto adjacent properties.
[3] Shall be properly installed and maintained.
[4] Holiday lights on residential properties shall be exempt
from these standards.
A. Electrical and mechanical equipment shall be located within the
interior of a building wherever possible. When an interior location is not
practical, such equipment shall be placed in a location where it can be
substantially screened from public view. Roof-mounted equipment shall
be located so as to not be visible from the public road and shall be
hidden with parapets or screens of materials which are in harmony with
the building's architecture.
B. Process equipment such as stacks, hoppers, compactors, bins, storage
vessels, blowers, compressors, piping, ducting, conveyors and the like
shall be located and screened so as to minimize the visual impact on
adjacent properties.
C. Ground-level utilities shall be screened so as to be unobtrusive when
viewed from the public rights-of-way and adjacent uses.
A. Outdoor refuse and recycling containers shall be visually screened
within a durable enclosure, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots or
sites, neighboring properties or streets.
B. No refuse and recycling storage areas shall be permitted between a
street and the front of a building, and refuse and recycling storage
§ 195-25.6 MADISON CODE § 195-25.9
191:760
§ 195-25.10. Recycling facilities for new multifamily housing
developments.
areas shall conform to all yard requirements imposed by the Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough upon the principal buildings in
the zone.
C. No refuse and recycling storage area shall be located so as to prevent
natural runoff from such areas or impair the existing water quality of
any stream, watercourse or aquifer.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes, dust, odor or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in sealed
and covered containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
E. Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be effectively designed to
contain all refuse generated on site and deposited between collections.
F. Refuse and recycling collection enclosures shall be designed of durable
materials with finishes and colors which are unified and harmonious
with the overall architectural theme.
G. Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be located to provide clear
and convenient access to refuse collection vehicles.
H. Medical, hazardous or other regulated waste shall meet the state and
federal standards for such materials.
A. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the disposition of
source-separated recyclable materials by residents of the multifamily
housing development, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a
refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area
§ 195-25.9 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.10
191:761
§ 195-25.11. Streets.
shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
A. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough's road
standards. Where applicable, the residential site improvement
standards, as amended from time to time, shall apply.
B. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets. New road systems shall be in
accordance with the Master Plan and Official Map.
C. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
D. Developments abutting through-traffic streets may be required to
provide a marginal service road or some other means of separation of
through and local traffic as the Board may determine. Major arterial
streets shall not be entered by new streets other than major collector
streets.
E. Developments which adjoin or include existing streets and the streets
do not conform to widths, as shown on the Master Plan, or the street
width requirements of this chapter, shall dedicate, by deed, additional
width along either one or both sides of said street. If the development is
along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
Minimum street standards shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Pavement Width
(feet)
Arterial 66 48
Collector 50 30 to 36
Minor 50 22 to 30
F. Grades of through-traffic streets and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. Streets shall have a
minimum grade of 1%.
G. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
§ 195-25.10 MADISON CODE § 195-25.11
191:762
§ 195-25.12. Street names and appurtenances.
shall be rounded at the property line with a curve radius of not less than
25 feet.
H. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
I. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on through traffic and collector streets.
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a center-line radius of not less than 100 feet for minor
streets and 300 feet for through traffic and collector streets.
K. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall provide a turnaround at the end
with a radius of not less than 50 feet and tangent, whenever possible, to
the right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature,
a similar turnaround shall be provided, and provisions shall be made for
future extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to
the adjoining properties.
A. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
B. Guardrails shall be designed to prevent cars from leaving the road.
They shall be installed where danger exists to the traveling public due
to steep topography, narrow roadways, location of drainage ditches or
other similar conditions.
C. Granite block curbs shall be required on all streets.
D. Streetlights shall be installed at street intersections, along vertical and
horizontal curves and at the end of dead-end streets. Lights shall be
spaced approximately 300 feet apart. Light output shall be appropriate
for the specific location in accordance with standards recommended in
the current edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society, IES
Lighting Handbook.
E. Sidewalks shall be concrete, are required on all streets and shall have a
minimum width of four feet. Sidewalk areas shall be landscaped and
durably paved and shall be properly illuminated with adequate lighting
as per this section.
F. Traffic signs and control devices. These improvements, such as "Stop,"
"Yield" and "One-Way" signs, etc., shall be designed and installed in
accordance with applicable federal, state, county and municipal
§ 195-25.11 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.12
191:763
§ 195-25.13. Obstructions and sight triangles.
§ 195-25.14. Utilities and facilities.
regulations. Recommendation as to their installation may be made by
the Police Department or other competent agency.
G. Street trees shall be required on all development applications. Trees
shall be approximately 40 feet apart and located between the setback
line and the street right-of-way line if possible (including the side street
on corner lots) and not closer than 25 feet to any existing or proposed
streetlight or street intersection.
(1) The trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities,
roadways or sidewalks.
(2) Trees shall be nursery-grown stock of not less than 2 1/2 inches in
caliper at breast height (dbh), with branches commencing not less
than eight feet above grade when planted and staked in an
approved manner. Where there is adequate existing growth, the
Borough may waive this requirement.
H. Street furniture. The site plan shall provide for those elements of street
furniture made of the same or similar materials to ensure design
continuity and be appropriate to the particular use. They may include
phone booths, benches, bike racks, trash receptacles, bus shelters and
landscaping planters. All trash receptacles shall be adequately secured,
enclosed and screened on all sides by landscaping or other types of
attractive materials.
A. On a corner lot in any district, sight triangles shall be required in which
no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained more
than three feet above the street center line or lower than 12 feet above
the street center line. Traffic control devices, street name poles and
utility poles shall be permitted in sight triangle areas.
B. Sight triangles shall be provided and shown at all street intersections to
assure full visibility of approaching traffic. The sight triangle shall be
triangular with the street sides being at least the following lengths:
along a county road, as required by the County Planning Board; along
an existing municipal street crossing an intersection, 50 feet; and along
an existing street ending at an intersection, 30 feet.
A. Underground utilities.
(1) For all major subdivision and site plans, the applicant shall arrange
with the Borough Water and Light Department for the underground
installation of the utilities distribution supply lines and service
connections in accordance with applicable law and regulations. The
applicant shall submit to the Board, prior to the granting of
preliminary approval, written certification from the Borough Water
and Light Department of compliance. In such subdivisions which
§ 195-25.12 MADISON CODE § 195-25.14
191:764
§ 195-25.15. Off-street parking.
abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines have been installed on any portion of the
streets involved, such subdivisions may be supplied with electric
and telephone service from such overhead lines or extensions
thereof, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead
lines shall be installed underground.
(2) The location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the
proposed subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as
part of the complete subdivision plan.
(3) In all developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installations may be required. Such easements
shall be at least 20 feet in width and located in consultation with
the utility companies and municipal departments concerned.
(4) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for the purpose.
(5) The Planning Board may waive the requirement for the installation
of underground utilities or any other requirement in this
subsection, if there are special reasons to warrant such waiver. The
Planning Board, in making such determination of waiver, upon the
request of the applicant or at the instance of the Planning Board on
its own initiative, shall take into consideration the design features
of the plan, the character of the area and all other factors which
bear on the feasibility of underground utility installations within
the subdivision, so as to achieve a harmonious subdivision tract.
B. Potable water and sanitary sewer plans. All development shall be
served by public water and sewers. All water and sewer plans shall be
approved by the appropriate local, county or state agency having
jurisdiction over the specific utility.
C. Electricity. All electrical plans shall be approved by the Borough Water
and Light Department.
D. Stormwater. All stormwater management and drainage plans shall be
approved by the Borough Engineer.
A. Where applicable, the residential site improvement standards, as
amended from time to time, shall apply.
B. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be coordinated with the
public street system serving the area in order to avoid conflicts with
through traffic, obstruction to pedestrian walkways and vehicular
thoroughfares. Shared parking among mixed uses shall be encouraged.
§ 195-25.14 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.15
191:765
C. A minimum of 10% of any surface parking facility shall be landscaped
and shall include one shade tree for every 20 parking spaces.
D. All parking and loading areas abutting mixed-use/residential areas shall
be buffered about their periphery with landscaping and/or fencing.
E. All parking and loading areas for nonresidential uses shall be graded
and paved and shall be adequately drained.
F. Dimension of parking spaces. Every such space provided shall measure
at least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length, exclusive of access
drives and aisles. Hairpin striping shall be provided, where appropriate.
End-to-end parking spaces shall measure not less than eight feet in
width by 23 feet in length. [Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
22-2005]
G. Size of aisles. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements
set forth below. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving
parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (end-to-end parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 24
H. Maximum grade of parking areas.
Areas Maximum Grade
Parking spaces and service aisles 5%
Main approach walkways to buildings 4%
Collector or other service walkways 6%
Swales 10%
Principal circulation aisles 6%
Driveway entrances and exits up to 25
feet from right-of-way line
2%
Driveway entrances and exits beyond 25
feet from right-of-way line
10%
I. Access.
(1) There shall be adequate provisions for safe and convenient ingress
to and egress from all parking areas.
§ 195-25.15 MADISON CODE § 195-25.15
191:766
(2) Curb cuts for one-way traffic shall not be less than 12 feet nor more
than 15 feet wide.
(3) Every parking area shall have direct access to a street or alley and
shall conform with the following:
(a) Surface parking. Driveways shall have a minimum width of 10
feet for one-way traffic and 30 feet for two-way traffic.
J. Acceleration and deceleration lanes.
(1) The Board, at its discretion, may require roadway widening or
other street improvements, including acceleration and deceleration
lanes, to assure safe ingress and egress where minimum sight
distances cannot be obtained. The following minimum standards
are recommended:
Acceleration Lanes
(feet)
Deceleration Lanes
(feet)
Legal
Speed
Limit
(mph)
Full
Length Taper Full Length Taper
25 to 39 200 150 150 200
40 to 49 350 200 200 250
50 or more 450 250 250 300
(2) The area behind the taper shall be cleared of all obstructions for an
appropriate distance from the center line of the road to eliminate
any hazardous conditions.
K. All off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles, and no commercial repair work, service or
storage of new or used motor vehicles, materials or merchandise of any
kind shall be conducted on such parking area.
L. Sidewalks in parking areas. Sidewalks shall be required between
parking areas and principal structures, along aisles and driveways and
wherever pedestrian traffic occurs. They shall have a minimum of four
feet of passable width and shall be raised a maximum of six inches
above the parking area, except when crossing streets or driveways.
Guardrails and wheel stops permanently anchored to the ground shall
be provided in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional sidewalk
width of two feet is provided to accommodate such overhang.
M. Landscaping, paving and drainage for parking areas.
§ 195-25.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.15
191:767
(1) In outdoor parking lots with 10 or more spaces, not less than 10%
of the parking area shall be suitably landscaped to minimize noise,
glare and other nuisance characteristics, as well as to enhance the
aesthetics, environment and ecology of the site and surrounding
area. Waived required parking areas which are landscaped shall
not be included in the required 10%.
(2) The landscaping shall be located at the entrance of the lots, in
protected areas along walkways, center islands and at the end of
bays. In narrow islands, low-spreading plants, such as creeping
juniper, English ivy, myrtle and pachysandra, are appropriate.
(3) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct sight distance.
(4) Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened where
required by the Board by a berm, fence or wall not less than four
nor more than six feet in height, maintained in good condition;
provided, however, that a screening hedge or other natural
landscaping may be substituted for the required fence or wall if
approved by the Board. The screening, as required by this
subsection, may be waived by the Board if, in its judgment, because
of topographic or other unusual conditions, said fence is not
necessary to buffer adjoining property.
(5) Parking areas, loading areas and driveways, except for one- or twofamily
residences, shall be curbed with granite block and paved.
(6) The first 10 feet of the driveway of a one- and two-family residence
shall be paved.
(7) All parking areas shall be adequately drained in accordance with a
drainage plan to be approved by the Borough Engineer.
N. Location of parking.
(1) Required off-street parking shall be located only in those locations
as set forth below and shall meet all setback requirements set forth
in that subsection.
(2) In all residence zones or for any residence, not more than one of
the required off-street spaces for each dwelling unit may be on the
driveway in the front yard.
(3) Off-street parking facilities as accessory to any use permitted in a
residential zone shall be provided on the same lot with the
permitted principal building.
(4) Off-street parking facilities as required by this article in
nonresidential zones shall be provided on the same lot as the
principal building or use or on other property or properties owned
by the applicant in the same or other nonresidential zone, provided
§ 195-25.15 MADISON CODE § 195-25.15
191:768
§ 195-25.16. Off-street loading.
that all such property so used is within 400 feet, measured in a
straight line, of any entranceway to the principal building or use.
(5) Access to or egress from any property situated in a nonresidential
zone through the use of a driveway located on property in a
residential zone is prohibited.
(6) Bicycle racks. Bicycle racks shall be provided for all multifamily
and nonresidential developments at the ratio of one bicycle space
for each dwelling unit or one bicycle space for each 20 off-street
parking spaces or fraction thereof over 20 spaces.
(7) Minimum setbacks and required locations for parking areas and
driveways:
Zone
Minimum
Distance From
Property Line (a)
(feet) Location
R-1 through R-6 5 Side and rear yards
only, except as
permitted by this
subsection
P 5 Side and rear yards
only
CBD 5 Side and rear yards
only
CC 5 Side and rear yards
only
U 50, except 100 to
public street
In all yards
OR 10 Side and rear yards
only
PCD-O As set forth in
Article V
NOTES:
(a) In other than R-1 through R-6 zones, where parking abuts
a residential zone or residence, the minimum setback from any
property line shall be 10 feet.
A. Application. In any building or building group or part thereof hereafter
erected and having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more of
nonresidential space, there shall be provided and maintained on the
same zone lot with such building off-street loading berths.
§ 195-25.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-25.16
191:769
§ 195-26. Performance standards.
B. Required off-street loading facilities.
(1) Location of loading berths. All loading areas shall be on the same
lot as the use which is to be served. Such areas shall be located
only in a side or rear yard. Such areas shall not encroach upon any
required open space, accessway, off-street parking area or public
right-of-way. Where located adjacent to any residential district,
they shall be set back a minimum of five feet from such property
line.
(2) Access. All required off-street loading areas shall provide sufficient
turning spaces and access.
(3) Calculation of required spaces. The number of off-street loading
berths required for any use shall be determined by application of
the standards set forth below.
Principal Building Size
(square feet)
Required Number of
Loading Berths
Up to 20,000 1
20,000 to 50,000 2
Each additional 100,000 1 additional space
A. General applications.
(1) As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use,
occupancy of any structure and operation of any process or
equipment, the applicant shall certify compliance with the
performance standards contained herein. Permits and certificates
required by other government agencies shall be submitted to the
Board as proof of compliance with applicable codes.
(2) The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to one- and
two-family dwellings, but shall apply to any home occupations
contained therein.
(3) All the requirements of this section shall be items covered in the
developer's agreement.
B. Temporary certificates of occupancy.
(1) In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of
application that a proposed use, process or equipment will meet the
standards established in this section, the Board may recommend
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. The temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be based on submission of evidence
(e.g., bond) that the proposed use, process or equipment will meet
§ 195-25.16 MADISON CODE § 195-26
191:770
the standards established herein after completion or installation
and operation.
(2) Within 60 days after a temporary certificate of occupancy is
granted, satisfactory evidence shall be submitted to the
Construction Official that all standards established by this section
have been met. Upon such submission, a final certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
C. Regulation of nuisance elements.
(1) The determination of the existence of nuisance elements shall be
made to the following locations:
Nuisance Characteristic Location of Test
Smoke Vent or smokestack
Air pollution, including solid
particles or fly ash
Vent or smokestack
Odors Property line
Liquid waste Property line
Solid waste Property line
Noise Property line
Vibration Building wall
Glare Property line
Trespass lighting Property line
Temperature change:
Gas Vent or smokestack
Liquid or solid Property line
(2) Continued compliance with the performance standards stated
herein shall be a requirement for the continued occupancy of any
structure or the operation of any process or equipment.
D. Standards to be enforced.
(1) Air pollution.
(a) General. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or
to property or which interferes unreasonably with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the
Borough. All provisions of Title 7, Chapter 27 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.), or the regulations contained in
this section, whichever shall be more stringent, shall apply.
(b) Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
§ 195-26 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-26
191:771
Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into the open air from any fuelburning
equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted
during the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new
fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No.
2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a
period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes
in any 15 consecutive minutes. Smoke emissions from the
combustion of fuel and mobile sources and from stationary
internal combustion engines shall not exceed the limits set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:27.
(c) No open burning shall be permitted in any district.
(d) Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into
the atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected.
(2) Wastes.
(a) Liquid wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any
watercourse in the Borough without all necessary permits from
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP). No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public
sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate
Borough official shall have first investigated the character and
volume of such wastes and shall have certified that the
Borough will accept the discharge of such waste material into
the system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements
of said officials, including the pretreating of such wastes, the
installation of processing methods, separation or screening of
wastes, control of pH and other methods of improving such
wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of approval of such
facilities.
(b) Solid waste. Each property owner shall be responsible for:
[1] Adequate and regular collection and removal of all refuse,
except where the Borough assumes such responsibility.
[2] Compliance with all applicable provisions of the NJDEP.
[3] Compliance with all provisions of Title 7, Chapter 26 of the
N.J.A.C., where applicable.
[4] No accumulation on the property of any junk or other
objectionable materials except in designated trash
receptacles.
(3) Noise. All applications shall comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
7:29.
(4) Vibration. In any zone, vibrations discernible without instruments
at the measuring location shall not be permitted.
§ 195-26 MADISON CODE § 195-26
191:772
§ 195-27. Construction requirements.
(5) Glare. No single standard for glare is promulgated in this chapter
due to the impracticality of establishing such standards. It is the
intent of these performance standards to ensure that both direct
and indirect glare, to the extent possible, are eliminated or that
activities producing such glare are carried on within a structure.
Necessary glare-producing devices such as glazing, roadway and
walkway lighting shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
such a manner as not to be a nuisance to surrounding uses.
(6) Trespass lighting. All applications shall comply with the provisions
of this article.
(7) Temperature change. No use or process shall produce a
temperature change greater than 3° C. at the measuring location.
(8) Fire and explosive hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a
fire or explosion hazard, the Board may require the applicant to
supply proof of:
(a) Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or
material from the State Department of Labor indicating that
adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have been
taken or installed.
(b) Approval from the Borough of Madison Fire Department that
the applicant has complied with all applicable Borough fire
prevention regulations.
A. Borough standards. All standards and specifications of the Borough as
now or hereafter adopted, if any, shall govern the design, construction
and installation of all required improvements. Failure of the developer,
his contractor or agent to conform to said specifications shall be just
cause for the suspension of the work being performed. No developer
shall have the right to demand or claim damages from the Borough, its
officers, agents or servants by reason of said suspension.
B. Other standards. In the event that the Borough has not adopted
standards for a specific type of improvement, then generally accepted
engineering standards, as set forth in current engineering and
construction manuals as may be approved and modified by the Borough
Engineer for a specific situation, shall be used.
C. Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by or under the
supervision of a licensed land surveyor. One copy of all cut sheets shall
be filed with the Borough Engineer prior to the commencement of any
construction.
D. Approved plans. Prior to commencement of construction of required
improvements, the Borough Engineer shall have received and approved
§ 195-26 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-27
191:773
the complete plans and profiles of all improvements to be installed or
constructed. No improvements shall be accepted by the governing body
and no performance guaranties released until the Borough Engineer
has received and approved drawings showing the plans, grades and
profiles of all improvements as finally constructed.
E. Site conditions. During construction, the site shall be maintained and
left each day in a safe, clean and orderly manner, and any condition
which could lead to personal injury or property damage shall be
immediately corrected by the developer or upon an order by the
Construction Official or other authorized personnel.
F. Disposal of dead trees, litter and building materials. All stumps, litter,
rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, debris and excess or scrap
building materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the
request of and to the satisfaction of the Construction Official prior to
issuing an occupancy permit. No such refuse shall be buried on the site.
G. Changes in elevation.
(1) No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or
site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than as
shown on an approved preliminary plan.
(2) Minimal changes in elevation or contours necessitated by field
conditions may be made only after approval by the Borough
Engineer. All said changes shall be shown on the final plan and
indicated as a change from the preliminary, or if final approval has
been granted, all changes shall be shown on the as-built plans.
(3) Immediately following the installation of the foundation for any
new principal structure and prior to the commencement of the
framing of the building, a foundation location and elevation survey
shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer, Zoning Officer and
Construction Official for purposes of establishing (a) compliance
with applicable zoning setback and yard requirements and (b)
compliance with the individual lot grading plan approved by the
municipality for the development. The survey shall show the
elevation of the top of the foundation wall at each corner of the
foundation wall with reference to the approved grade elevation and
building height and the horizontal dimensions and distances from
lot lines with reference to approved setback distances. Every
foundation survey shall be certified by a New Jersey licensed land
surveyor. [Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 5-2019]
H. Excavations. No excavation shall be created or maintained, except
when required for the foundations of structures or in connection with
and during the installation of facilities for permitted uses. Such
excavation shall be used for the intended purpose or shall be refilled to
the average surrounding ground level, in such a manner as to prevent
the collection of water, erosion of earth or collapse or sliding of banks,
§ 195-27 MADISON CODE § 195-27
191:774
§ 195-28. Installation of improvements; required guarantees.
[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 12-2018]
The following payments, contributions, and requirements shall be
applicable to all site plans and subdivisions in addition to other applicable
ordinances for any such development as follows:
within six months from the date of commencement of such excavation.
All open excavations of greater than four feet in depth shall be fully
encircled with durable and stable four-foot-high construction fence (or
six-foot-high chain link fence if required elsewhere in the Code due to
excavation depth or proximity to public facilities). Topsoils must have
an approved stockpile location. Subsoils can not function as screened,
well-graded organic topsoils. Subsoils can only be used for structural
backfills where suitable engineered properties can be demonstrated.
Tree root systems must be protected from grading cuts and fills. Excess
excavation subsoils must be removed from the site entirely in
conjunction with soil movement ordinances. Individual lot grading
plans are required wherever new grades are to be established on a
property. [Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 50-2006]
I. Topsoil removal. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits.
J. Preconstruction meeting. Prior to the commencement of construction,
the developer shall arrange for and attend a preconstruction meeting in
conformance with the requirements of the Borough Engineer.
A. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to Subsection d of Section 52
of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65), the Borough will require and
shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by ordinance
and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c.68
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of certain on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a
performance guarantee and provision for a maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Subsection A(1) and (2) of this subsection. In
accordance with the Borough ordinance requiring a successor
developer to furnish a replacement performance guarantee, as a
condition to the approval of a permit update under the State Uniform
Construction Code, for the purpose of updating the name and address
of the owner of property on a construction permit, the governing body
may require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted
by ordinance and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L.
1999, c.68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of certain on-tract improvements, the
furnishing of a performance guarantee and provision for a maintenance
guarantee, in accordance with Subsection A(1) and (2) of this
subsection.
(1) Performance guarantee.
§ 195-27 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-28
191:775
(a) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor
of the Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to
be dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer, according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4), for the
following improvements as shown on the approved plans or
plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, water
mains, sanitary sewers, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space, any grading necessitated by the
preceding improvements or as otherwise described in
§ 195-28.1 of the Borough ordinance. The Borough Engineer
shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost
estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee
posted by the obligor.
(b) The Borough may also require a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by
local ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval. At the
developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may be
posted for the privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(c) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building,
or phase of development, as a condition of the issuance
thereof, the developer shall furnish a separate guarantee,
referred to herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee," in favor of the municipality in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of installation of only those improvements or
items which remain to be completed or installed under the
terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which are
required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent
to the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for
the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development
and which are not covered by an existing performance
guarantee. Upon posting of a temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee, all sums remaining under a performance
guarantee, required pursuant to Subsection A(1)(a) of this
section, which relate to the development, unit, lot, building, or
phase of development for which the temporary certificate of
occupancy is sought, shall be released. The scope and amount
of the temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be
determined by the Zoning Officer, Municipal Engineer, or other
municipal official designated by ordinance. At no time will the
Borough hold more than one guarantee or bond of any type
§ 195-28 MADISON CODE § 195-28
191:776
with respect to the same line item. The temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee shall be released by the Zoning Officer,
Municipal Engineer, or other municipal official designated by
ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent certificate of
occupancy with regard to the development, unit, lot, building,
or phase as to which the temporary certificate of occupancy
relates.
(d) Safety and stabilization guarantee.
[1] In addition to a performance guarantee required by the
Borough ordinance, a developer shall furnish to the
municipality a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a
"safety and stabilization guarantee," in favor of the
municipality, to be available to the municipality solely for
the purpose of returning property that has been disturbed
to a safe and stable condition or otherwise implementing
measures to protect the public from access to an unsafe or
unstable condition, only in the circumstance that:
[a] Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all
work on the development has ceased for a period of at
least 60 consecutive days following such
commencement for reasons other than force majeure;
and
[b] Work has not recommenced within 30 days following
the provision of written notice by the Borough to the
developer of the Borough's intent to claim payment
under the guarantee. The Borough shall not provide
notice of its intent to claim payment under a safety
and stabilization guarantee until a period of at least 60
days has elapsed during which all work on the
development has ceased for reasons other than force
majeure. The Borough shall provide written notice to a
developer by certified mail or other form of delivery
providing evidence of receipt.
[2] The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
[3] The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for a
development with bonded improvements exceeding
$100,000 shall be calculated as a percentage of the
bonded improvement costs of the development or phase of
development as follows:
[a] $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs; plus
§ 195-28 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-28
191:777
§ 195-28.1. Specific improvements to be constructed or installed.
[b] Two-and-one-half percent of bonded improvement
costs in excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
[c] One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
(2) Maintenance guarantee.
(a) The developer shall post with the municipality, prior to the
release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
Subsection A(1), Subsection A(2), or both Subsection A(1) and
(2) of this subsection, a maintenance guarantee in an amount
not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
improvements which are being released.
(b) If required, the developer shall post with the municipality,
upon the inspection and issuance of final approval of the
following private site improvements by the Municipal
Engineer, a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed
15% of the cost of the installation of the following private site
improvements: stormwater management basins, inflow and
water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if
any, which cost shall be determined according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4).
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
(d) The Borough shall not require that a maintenance guarantee
required pursuant to this section be in cash or that more than
10% of a performance guarantee pursuant to this section be in
cash. A developer may, however, provide at his option some or
all of the maintenance guarantee in cash, or more than 10% of
a performance guarantee in cash (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.3).
A. Stormwater. The on-site stormwater disposal system shall be in
accordance with this chapter.151
B. Sewage disposal. Provisions shall be made to convey effluent from each
lot through laterals and interceptors of adequate size, material and
capacity to collectors and then to trunk sewers to public treatment
facilities.
C. Water. Provision shall be made to provide each lot with an adequate and
continuous supply of potable water.
151. Editor's Note: See Art. VI, Stormwater and Flood Control.
§ 195-28 MADISON CODE § 195-28.1
191:778
D. Utilities. Gas lines, telephone lines, electrical service, cable television
and dissimilar utilities shall consist of those improvements required by
the applicable utility or federal or state law.
E. Vehicular and pedestrian improvements. Such improvements shall
include paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveways,
lighting, traffic signs, traffic control devices and guardrails.
F. Other improvements. These improvements shall include but are not
limited to the following: street trees, topsoil, earth removal, borrow and
fill and improvements to prevent damage to adjacent property.
G. Monuments. Monuments shall be of such size, shape and location as
required by the Map Filing Law.
H. Temporary improvements. During construction, the Borough Engineer
may require the installation or construction of improvements to prevent
or correct temporary conditions on the site which could cause personal
injury, damage to property or constitute a health hazard. These
conditions may result from flooding, heavy construction traffic and
pollution. Improvements may include grading, planting, retaining walls,
culverts, pipes, guardrails, temporary roads and others appropriate to
the specific conditions.
§ 195-28.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-28.1
191:779

ARTICLE V
Zoning
[Amended 5-14-1984; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 50-85; 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 7-86; 5-14-1986; 7-14-1986; 7-28-1986; 9-14-1987;
8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 27-93; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 21-94;
12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 40-94; 10-16-1996 by Ord. No. 19-96;
3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98; 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000; 4-23-2001
by Ord. No. 14-2001; 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
§ 195-29. Establishment of zones. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No.
11-2009]
For the purposes of this article, the Borough is hereby divided into 18 zones
as follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residence Zone
R-2 Single-Family Residence Zone
R-3 Single-Family Residence Zone
R-4 Two-Family Residence Zone
R-5 Multiple-Family Residential Zone
R-5A Multifamily Residential Zone
R-6 Single-Family Attached and Patio Homes Residence Zone
RC Single-Family Residential Cluster Zone
P Professional Office Zone/Residential
CBD-1 Central Business District Zone
CBD-2 Central Business District Zone
CC Community Commercial Zone
U University Zone
OR Office-Research Zone
PCD-O Planned Commercial Development-Office Zone
R-SH Senior Citizen Housing Zone
OSGU Open Space/Government Use Zone
POR Private Outdoor Recreation Zone
R-PH Residential-Public Housing
§ 195-29.1. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the above districts are hereby established
on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Madison in Morris County which is
filed in the office of the Borough Clerk. Said map or maps and all notations,
references and designations shown thereon shall be part of this article as if
the same were all fully described and set forth therein.
§ 195-29 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-29.2
191:781
§ 195-29.2. Interpretation of zone boundaries.
Whenever an uncertainty or ambiguity exists as to the true location of any
boundary line of any zone shown on the map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 195-29.3. Schedule of area, yard and building requirements.
The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is contained in
Schedule I at the end of this chapter and is hereby made part of this chapter.
§ 195-29.4. Permitted uses.
This zoning article shall be viewed as permissive. After the adoption of this
chapter, no uses or structure shall be permitted in the Borough which is not
listed as a permitted, accessory or conditional use or unless permitted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 195-29.5. Conditional uses.
Notwithstanding compliance with specific conditional use standards
hereinafter set forth, conditional uses shall require site plan approval by the
appropriate board.
§ 195-30. Supplementary regulations.
A. The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow street center
lines, existing lot lines, center lines of railroad rights-of-way,
waterways, sewer and utility easements or as otherwise indicated on
the Zoning Map. Where a zone boundary line does not coincide with any
such line as above set forth, its location or relation to another boundary
line shall be as designated on said Zoning Map by means of figures or
dimensions expressing distance in feet from a street side line or other
boundary line. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true
location of any zone boundary line, the determination thereof shall be
with the Board of Adjustment.
B. In the event that a zone boundary line divides one or more lots, then the
zone boundary line shall be considered the lot limit for computing all
area, bulk, yard buffer and any other dimension requirements specified
in this article.
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land or building be designed, used or intended to be used for any
purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses listed
as permitted, accessory or conditional in the district in which such
building or land is located.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, restructured, or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit designated in the district in which
such building or structure is located. [Amended 5-30-2018 by Ord.
No. 26-2018]
§ 195-29.2 MADISON CODE § 195-30
191:782
§ 195-30.1. Yard regulations.
(Note: Where applicable below, the regulations for off-street parking
improvements in Article IV, § 195-25.15 are hereby incorporated by
reference.)
C. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing buildings or
structures shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area and building
location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which
such building or open space is located.
D. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall
not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this article; and if
already less than the minimum required by this chapter, said area or
dimension shall not be further reduced.
E. Upon issuance of any demolition permit, the site grading, particularly
open foundation areas, shall be filled, stabilized and regraded within
one week after initiating said demolition work, weather permitting, in
such a manner as to prevent the collection of water, increase of erosion,
damage to shade tree root systems, or any slope-related hazards
associated with open excavation in residential areas. Alternatively,
demolition permits are not encouraged to be sought until all related
applications for permits under the local development regulations
(zoning, site, environmental or special regulated features) are
submitted as complete and approved. [Added 10-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 50-2006152]
F. The provisions and restrictions contained in this article shall not apply
to or be binding upon the Borough of Madison.
A. Required yards.
(1) Every lot shall include front, side and rear yards having the areas
and dimensions required within the particular zone in which said
lot is located.
(2) No yard or other open space provided for any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this article shall be
considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other
building on any other lot.
(3) No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space,
minimum areas, minimum yard and setback requirements, parking
or other similar requirements for uses in nonresidential zones.
B. Front yards.
152. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 195-30 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.1
191:783
(1) Yards fronting on streets less than 50 feet wide. Where any lot
abuts a street right-of-way which is less than 50 feet in width, the
front yard setback required for such lot shall be increased in depth
by 1/2 the difference between the width of the street and 50 feet.
(2) Yards fronting on streets 50 feet or more in width, as shown on the
Master Plan. Where any lot abuts a street with a proposed right-ofway
50 feet or more in width, as shown on the Borough Master
Plan, the building setback distance shall be measured from the
nearest line of the proposed street right-of-way on said Master
Plan.
C. Front yards on corner lots. Every yard of a corner lot which abuts a
street shall be considered a front yard, and the front yard setback
requirements for the zone in which the lot is situated shall be complied
with on every street frontage, except in the Community Commercial
Zone, where the side yard shall be 1/2 of the corner front yard setback.
D. Front yards of through lots. In the case of a lot running through from
one street to another, the frontage of such a lot, for the purpose of this
article, shall be considered that frontage upon which the majority of the
buildings in the same block front, but in case there has been no clearly
defined frontage established, the front lot line shall be the line upon
which the primary entrance of the principal building faces, or will face
when constructed.
E. Front yards in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones. In the R-2, R-3 and R-4
Zones, the front yard requirement shall be as set forth in Schedule I,153
except that where the existing principal buildings on the same side of
the street and within 200 feet of any subject lot create an established
setback, new buildings shall conform to such established setback or, if
none is established, to the average of the setbacks of the principal
buildings within 200 feet, provided that no new building may be
situated nearer than 25 feet to the front property line nor be required to
set back more than 60 feet from said front property line. The foregoing
established front setbacks shall also apply to existing buildings for the
purpose of determining whether front setback variance relief is
required for proposed additions. [Amended 10-16-2013 by Ord. No.
41-2013]
F. Projections and encroachments. Yards and courts required by this
article shall be free of buildings, structures or parts thereof, and no
building or structure shall project into any front, side or rear yard
required by this article, nor shall use be made of such yard, except as
follows:
(1) Unenclosed porches, including steps extending not more than 72
inches from the building line and not exceeding more than 20
square feet in size.
153. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-30.1 MADISON CODE § 195-30.1
191:784
§ 195-30.2. Lot frontage.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with the minimum required
frontage upon an approved street which shall be improved in accordance
(2) Window wells affording light and air to basement and cellar areas.
(3) Cornices and eaves may project not more than two feet into any
required yard.
(4) Chimneys may project not more than two feet into any required
yard.
(5) Driveways providing access to permitted garages or parking areas;
provided, however, that in residential zones, driveways used to
provide access to private garages shall not be wider than 20 feet.
(6) Sills, leaders and similar ornamental or structural features may
project not more than six inches into any required yard.
(7) Fences and retaining walls, where specifically permitted in this
chapter.
(8) Freestanding flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerial masts,
children's playground equipment, outdoor fireplaces and yard
clothes lines and posts, but they must be set back at least five feet
from any property line. Except for freestanding flagpoles, such
structures shall not be located in the front yard.
(9) Accessory buildings and uses, including swimming pools, where
specifically permitted in this chapter.
(10) Residential heating and cooling units, if located in the side yard,
shall be buffered from adjacent neighbors with evergreen plantings
to help mitigate visual appearance, noise and vibration.
(11) Front entry roofs with a maximum depth of 5 1/2 feet and a
maximum width of eight feet shall be exempt from front yard
setback requirements in residential zones, provided that the
distance between the proposed front entry roof and the front
property line is at least 75% of the required applicable front yard
setback. [Added 10-15-2008 by Ord. No. 65-2008]
G. Lots abutting municipal parking lots. Any nonresidential lot abutting a
municipal parking lot shall be required to meet only 1/2 of the minimum
yard requirements for the zone in which located for the yard abutting
the municipal parking lot.
H. Side and rear yards in residential zones. In all residential zones, the
area within five feet of all side and rear lot lines shall be free of all
driveways, parking areas, walkways, decks, patios and other paved
surfaces. [Added 10-16-2013 by Ord. No. 41-2013]
§ 195-30.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.2
191:785
with the street standards established by the Borough of Madison or the
residential site improvement standards (RSIS), as applicable.
§ 195-30.3. Principal buildings.
§ 195-30.4. Height exceptions.
§ 195-30.5. Accessory structures and uses.
(Note: Where applicable below, the fence regulations in Article IV,
§ 195-25.5 are hereby incorporated by reference.)
A. Only one principal building may be erected in the R-1 through the R-4
Zones. In all other zones, related compatible buildings under one
management may be erected, used or occupied, provided that all other
open space, setback and coverage requirements of this article are met.
B. No new building shall be constructed on or any existing building altered
or moved onto any lot for use as a dwelling when there exists on said lot
a building which is being used for dwelling purposes. No building other
than a structure permitted in and by this article shall be constructed in
front of or moved to the front of a principal building situated on the
same lot.
A. Appurtenances attached to principal structures. Church spires, belfries,
domes or antennas attached to buildings, penthouses (not for human
occupancy), chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads
and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above roof
level shall not be considered when determining the height of the
building, and are not subject to height limitations, except that such
features shall not exceed 20% of total roof area and shall not exceed a
height such as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they
are intended to serve.
B. Freestanding noncommercial accessory structures. Water towers and
radio and television antennas which are erected as freestanding
structures may be erected to a height which can be demonstrated to the
Board as necessary to accomplish their intended function. Federally
licensed amateur radio facilities shall be subject to Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules which govern the height of
licensed amateur operator radio antennas. The height of the tower or
antennas shall conform with U.S. Federal Communications Commission
Regulations governing licensed amateur radio operators and, if
required, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) notification and FCC
approval. All freestanding noncommercial accessory structures shall
not be located within any required front, side or rear yard setback areas
and shall be subject to the structural provisions of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
A. General requirements.
§ 195-30.2 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:786
(1) No accessory building shall be constructed on any lot on which
there is not a principal building structure.
(2) Any accessory structure attached to the principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building.
(3) On through lots, no accessory structure erected in the rear yard
shall be nearer to the "rear" street line than the minimum front
yard setback for the zone in which such lot is located.
B. The following requirements shall be complied with in all residential
zones:
(1) No accessory building shall be used for human habitation.
(2) No accessory building shall have floor or ground area in excess of
500 square feet or 1/3 of the floor or ground area of the principal
building, whichever is less. [Amended 4-8-2019 by Ord. No.
10-2019]
(3) Except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this article, no
accessory building or structure shall exceed 15 feet in height.
(4) No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front
yard.
(5) Accessory buildings built in a rear yard shall be no closer than five
feet to any side or rear property line of the lot containing said
accessory building; provided, however, that no accessory building
shall be located closer than 10 feet to said line on any lot which has
a rear lot line that serves as a side line of an adjoining property.
(6) No accessory building shall be erected on any corner lot closer to
any of the lines of the streets abutting said lot than the front yard
setback lines from said streets.
C. The following requirements shall be complied with in all nonresidential
zones:
(1) Except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this article, no
accessory building or structure shall exceed 15 feet or be more
than one story in height.
(2) No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front
yard.
(3) Accessory buildings may be built within the side yard if the
distance from any such accessory building to the side line of the lot
on which it is constructed is equal to or greater than the width of
the side yard required from the principal building on said lot.
D. Requirements for specific accessory structures and uses.
(1) Home occupations.
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:787
(a) Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses in all
residential zones and shall be exempt from approval by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment if the following
standards are satisfied:
[1] The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the
residence in which the home occupation is contained.
[2] The practitioner must reside in the home.
[3] There are no nonresidential employees working on the
premises.
[4] There is no external evidence of the home occupation.
[5] There are no retail sales conducted on the site.
[6] No clients will visit the site.
[7] There is no sign identifying the home occupation, and
there is no identification of such home occupation upon
any mailbox.
[8] There are no delivery vehicles other than those associated
with the residential use on site.
[9] The home occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. The maximum area devoted to the home
occupation shall be limited to not more than 25% of the
total area of the floor where located, excluding space used
for a private garage, or 400 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
[10]No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors,
electrical interference, medical waste or other nuisance
factors detectable to the normal sense or to radio,
telephone or television equipment off the lot.
(b) Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses in all
residential zones and shall require a zoning permit if the
following standards are satisfied:
[1] The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the
residence in which the home occupation is contained.
[2] The practitioner must reside in the home.
[3] The practitioner shall not engage the services of more than
one office employee. Use of the office by groups of other
persons shall not be permitted.
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:788
[4] The home occupation shall occupy less than 50% of the
total area of the floor where located, excluding space used
for a private garage, or 900 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
[5] No clients shall, in such relationship, remain on the
premises overnight.
[6] The residential character of the neighborhood and the
premises shall not be subordinated to the home occupation
use.
[7] Adequate parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the parking standards of this chapter so that no
parking related to the home occupation shall occur on the
street.
[8] No retail sales shall be conducted on the site.
[9] No more than one business visitor shall be permitted at
any one time.
[10]No sign identifying the home occupation shall be
permitted, and there shall be no identification of such
home occupation upon any mailbox.
[11]No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors,
electrical interference, medical waste or other nuisance
factors detectable to the normal senses or to radio,
telephone or television equipment off the lot.
(2) Amusement machines.
(a) Such machines shall be permitted in the CBD, CC and U Zones
as accessory uses to establishments where the primary use is a
recreational/entertainment use, such as bowling alleys,
theaters, the YMCA or similar establishments and
establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption only in accordance with the following limitations:
[1] There shall be 60 square feet of operating area for each
machine. The calculations of the operating areas shall
exclude any area of the premises which is used for other
purposes, but shall include access and walkways primarily
serving the machine.
[2] Not more than five such machines as accessory uses shall
be permitted in any single establishment.
[3] The maximum area devoted to such machines (60 square
feet x number of licensed machines) shall not constitute
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:789
more than 30% of the gross floor area of the
establishment.
(b) Premises wherein the operation of such machines is permitted
under this article are also subject to the licensing and
regulation provisions of Chapter 58 of the Code of Borough of
Madison, entitled "Amusement Devices."
(3) Boarders and roomers. In any residential structure, as an accessory
use, not more than three persons shall be permitted to occupy any
dwelling unit as boarders or roomers in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) Not more than one roomer or boarder may occupy a sleeping
room.
(b) Each sleeping room shall be at least 80 square feet in area.
(c) There shall be no cooking facilities in any sleeping room.
(4) Satellite earth stations.
(a) Permitted districts.
[1] A satellite earth station shall be permitted as an accessory
use in all zone districts. Satellite earth stations shall
require site plan approval from the Planning Board, except
where accessory to a one- or two-family residential use. In
the case of a one- or two-family residential use, the
application shall be determined by the Zoning Officer, or
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment whenever a request for
interpretation is necessary or variance is requested by the
applicant.
[2] Whenever an antenna is accessory to a one- or two-family
dwelling; whenever an applicant claims that any general
regulation standard must be modified because of inability
to obtain a reasonably satisfactory signal, impracticability,
under hardship or other criteria for modification or
whenever the adequacy of and/or reasonableness of
screening is in issue, such application shall be referred to
the Board of Adjustment for interpretation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
(b) Application. The plans of such antenna shall be submitted with
each application for a building permit, which shall include:
[1] A site plan drawn at a scale of no smaller than one inch
equals 20 feet indicating the diameter, location, setbacks,
and screening (if ground-mounted) and a mounting detail
drawn at a scale no smaller than 1/2 inch equals one foot
zero inches indicating height, color, style or type and
method of installation. The plans must be prepared by a
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:790
New Jersey professional engineer or other qualified expert
with a statement that the proposed installation complies
with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
[2] The name and address of the applicant and owner of the
property on which the satellite earth station is to be
located.
[3] The tax lot and block numbers and the property lines of the
property.
[4] All existing buildings and structures and all accessory
buildings and structures on the property.
[5] Such other information as required by development
procedures of this chapter.154
[6] Applications for the installation of satellite earth stations
capable of transmitting and receiving signals will
additionally be required to submit a report prepared by a
radio frequency engineer. The minimum requirements of
this report are as follows:
[a] The calculated levels of electromagnetic field
intensities (EMP-power densities) compared to
allowable residential environment continuous
exposure to levels as per accepted industry standards.
[b] An analysis of the findings and conclusion.
[c] Copies of data, sketches and specifications which are
the basis for the calculations and analysis. The
conclusions shall include an assessment of relative
health risk to people living or working near the
proposed facility.
[7] If a ground-mounted transmit/receive-type antenna is
proposed, the site plan shall additionally include the
proposed location of a protective fence surrounding the
antenna on all sides necessary to address all health and
safety issues.
(c) Performance standards.
[1] No satellite earth station may be placed in the front yard of
any lot in the Borough. A corner lot shall be deemed to
have a front yard facing each street.
[2] Receive-only satellite earth stations 36 inches in diameter
or less shall be located on the roof. Receive-only satellite
earth stations greater than 36 inches in diameter shall be
154. Editor's Note: See Art. IV, Development Requirements and Standards.
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:791
placed on a lot only in the rear yard; provided, however,
that on a clear and convincing showing by an applicant
that a reasonably satisfactory signal cannot be obtained
from a rear yard location, the Board may permit the
antenna to be located in the side yard, and if such signal
cannot be obtained in either rear or side yard, the Board
may permit the antenna to be located on the roof of any
principal or accessory building on the lot.
[3] A transmit/receive satellite earth station shall be placed on
the roof of the principal building of the lot; provided,
however, that on a clear and convincing showing by an
applicant that this requirement is impracticable or would
cause undue hardship or that installation elsewhere would
substantially further the purposes and objectives of this
subsection without substantial adverse impact on
adjoining properties, the Board may permit the antenna to
be located in the rear yard of the lot. If a ground-mounted
transmit/receive-type antenna is proposed, the site plan
shall include the proposed location of a protective fence, a
minimum of four feet in height, surrounding the antenna
on all sides. The proposed fence shall be constructed in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
[4] No satellite earth stations shall be closer to the side
property line than a distance equal to the diameter of said
antenna or side yard setback requirement for the principal
structure on the lot, whichever results in the greatest
setback.
[5] No satellite earth stations shall be closer to the rear
property line than a distance equal to the diameter of said
antenna or rear yard setback requirement for the principal
structure on the lot, whichever results in the greatest
setback.
[6] When mounted on the ground, the overall height from the
surrounding ground level to the lowest point of the
antenna shall not exceed two feet, except in instances
where additional clearance is needed to satisfactorily
receive and/or transmit signals. No ground-mounted
satellite earth station shall exceed 12 feet in height, as
measured from the average grade of the base of the
antenna to the highest point of the antenna.
[7] Roof-mounted antennas.
[a] Flat roofs and mansard-style roofs. No roof-mounted
satellite earth station may extend above the roofline
more than nine feet six inches when mounted on a flat
roof or mansard-style roof. However, upon a showing
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:792
that such a roof-mounted antenna will not receive
adequate reception under the restrictions of this
subsection, the minimum height necessary for
reasonable satisfactory reception my be allowed. Roofmounted
antennas on a flat roof shall be located in the
center of the roof structure to reduce visibility.
[b] All other style roofs. No roof-mounted satellite earth
stations may extend above the highest point of the
roof more than three feet when mounted on all other
style roofs, and the roof-mounted satellite earth
station must be located on the portion of the roof
facing the rear yard or, if this would unreasonable
limit signal reception, the side yard. However, upon a
showing that such a roof-mounted antenna will not
receive adequate reception under the restrictions of
this subsection, the minimum height necessary for
reasonably satisfactory reception may be allowed.
[8] The diameter of satellite earth stations shall not exceed 12
feet for C-band technology for receiving and shall not
exceed eight feet in diameter for Ku-band V Sat technology
for transmitting, subject to Subsection D(4)(c)[7]. All
satellite earth stations shall be of the mesh-type only, with
not more than 85% of the surface being solid.
[9] All satellite earth stations shall be painted a solid, dark,
nonmetallic, non-glossy color if ground-mounted. Roofmounted
antennas mounted on a flat roof or mansard-style
roof shall be painted a solid, dark, nonmetallic, non-glossy
light to medium gray. When mounted on all other style
roofs, the satellite antenna shall be painted the color of the
surface to which it is attached.
[10] The ability of the applicant to install a satellite earth
station in an unobtrusive location and to minimize the
visual and health impacts on neighboring properties shall
be a major factor in determining whether or not a permit is
issued.
[11] The number of allowable satellite earth stations is as
follows:
[a] For single-family and two-family dwellings: one per
building.
[b] For attached dwellings, patio homes and duplex,
townhouse and multifamily dwellings: one per
building.
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:793
[c] For all other uses permitted in residential zones not
specifically provided for otherwise (e.g., schools,
churches, nursing, homes, etc.): one per building.
[12] The satellite earth station may only be used for occupants
of the building located on the property.
[13] When the use of a satellite earth station is abandoned it
shall be removed.
[14] Satellite earth stations may not be mounted on a portable
or movable structure, such as a trailer.
[15] To the extent permitted by law, no satellite earth station
shall be located on or abutting any property which is
located in the National or State Register of Historic Places.
[16]No satellite earth station shall be erected on a public
utility easement without the consent of the easement
holder.
[17] The proposed earth satellite station shall be the smallest
commercially available equipment based on the current
technology so as to minimize the visual impact on the
surrounding areas.
[18] The satellite earth station may not be used as a sign.
[19] All wiring or connecting cables between the satellite earth
station and the principal building on the site shall be
buried underground.
[20] Screening. Ground-mounted antennas shall be screened as
to minimize visibility from public streets and adjoining
properties. Screening shall be accompanied by the
installation of landscaping and/or fencing or in the form of
a wall or structure enclosing the antenna. The species,
quantity, size and spacing of plant materials shall be
specified on the site plan. In order to reduce the height of
plant materials, soil berms may be used in conjunction
with the proposed landscaping. Any walls or structure
shall be constructed of plastic, fiberglass, or other
approved materials which will not impede the function and
operation of the antenna. Any walls or structures shall be
constructed to be consistent with the surrounding site
characteristics. The requirements of this subsection shall
not impose unreasonable limitations on, or prevent,
reception of satellite-delivered signals by satellite and
receiving/transmitting antennas or impose costs on the
users of such antennas that are excessive in light of the
purchase and installation cost of the equipment.
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:794
(d) Such satellite earth stations, appurtenances, landscaping and
fencing shall be kept and maintained in good condition.
(5) Outdoor storage.
(a) Outdoor storage of any kind is prohibited within the front yard.
(b) The outdoor storage of any items, materials and equipment,
other than those customarily placed in courtyards and yards,
incidental to authorized residential use and occupancy, is
prohibited in all residential zones.
(c) No outdoor vertical stacking of vehicles shall be permitted.
(d) Outdoor storage of garbage trucks in any zone is specifically
prohibited.
(e) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored above ground unless as otherwise required by
applicable federal, state or local regulations. Tanks or drums of
fuel directly connecting with heating devices or appliances
located on the same premises as the tanks or drums of fuel are
excluded from this provision.
(f) All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a fence or
wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents
thereof from adjacent property and shall meet all required
accessory building setbacks for the zone in which located. This
provision shall not apply to outdoor storage of new cars or
other vehicles on the premises of a dealer.
(g) No materials or wastes shall be stored on any premises in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises
by natural causes or forces such as wind or water.
(h) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
(6) Decks, patios and terraces over two feet in height must meet the
required yard setbacks for principal buildings.
(7) Swimming pools.
(a) No pool shall be closer than 15 feet to any side or rear lot line.
(b) On any corner lot, no part of any private swimming pool shall
be constructed within the front yard area required to be
provided on either street.
(c) Artificial lights used or maintained in connection with a private
swimming pool shall be so located and shielded that the
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:795
illumination therefrom is not directed upon any adjacent
property.
(d) No private swimming pool shall be used other than as an
accessory use of the premises whereon it is located.
(e) The fence requirement set forth in this section shall be
complied with.
(f) Any buildings or structures erected in conjunction with a
swimming pool shall comply with the provisions of accessory
structures.
(8) Commercial trailers, tractors and mechanized equipment in
residential zones. Except as permitted in this section, commercial
and industrial trailers, tractors, construction machinery and
equipment, commercial trucks and vehicles greater than 6,000
pounds, or any open trailer, shall not be kept, placed or stored in
any residence zone, except in the following instances:
(a) Equipment and machinery used in connection with the
construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of any
buildings or structure or the excavation of any land may be
permitted to stand upon the premises where such work is
being undertaken while the same is in progress.
(b) The equipment is stored in the garage.
(9) Mobile dwelling, trailer and recreational equipment. No mobile
dwelling, trailer or any recreational equipment shall be stored or
parked on any premises in any residential zone district within the
limits of the Borough of Madison, except as hereinafter provided.
(a) No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall be
stored or parked within any residential district other than that
lot upon which the principal residence structure of the actual
owner of the recreational equipment is located.
(b) No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall be
stored or parked at any time when said premises are not being
occupied, except for vacation absences.
(c) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be stored or parked to the rear of the rear building line of the
principal building and shall comply with accessory building
setbacks.
(d) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment must
be kept clean and in good repair at all times and shall carry a
current year's license or registration as required by law.
(e) All mobile dwellings, trailers or recreational equipment shall
be maintained in mobile condition.
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:796
(f) No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall be
used for sleeping or dwelling purposes while on said premises,
and no mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall
not be commercially stored or offered or displayed for sale.
Such recreational equipment shall not be connected with any
electric, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities.
(g) No mobile dwelling, trailer or recreational equipment shall be
stored, parked or maintained so as to create a dangerous or
unsafe condition on the premises where parked.
(10) Family day-care homes. Family day-care homes are permitted as
accessory uses in all residential zones.
(11) Automated teller machine (ATM). Outdoor ATM's are permitted in
association with on-site financial institutions, in accordance with
the bulk and design standards of this chapter. Measures to enhance
personal security at the ATM stations shall be provided. Other
commercial uses shall be permitted to contain indoor ATM's that
may operate during normal business hours and will be subject to
the sign ordinance requirements of this chapter, where applicable.
(12) Certain nonresidential accessory uses.
(a) Vending machines. In the CBD-1, CBD-2, CC and U Zone
Districts a nonresidential property is permitted to have two
outdoor vending machines in accordance with the following:
[1] The machine(s) shall be appropriately located so as not to
interfere with sight triangles, required setbacks, on-site
circulation, landscaping and parking.
[2] The machine(s) shall be accessory to an existing
nonresidential use.
[3] A zoning permit for outdoor vending machines shall be
required. The permit shall be granted when it is
determined by the Zoning Officer that the most
appropriate location for the machine(s) has been achieved.
(b) Used clothing bins. In the CC Zone District, a nonresidential
property is permitted to have up to four used clothing bins in
accordance with the following:
[1] The bin(s) shall be appropriately located so as not to
interfere with sight triangles, and on-site circulation,
required setbacks, landscaping and parking.
[2] The bin(s) shall be accessory to an existing nonresidential
use.
[3] A zoning permit for used clothing bins shall be required.
The permit shall be granted when it is determined by the
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:797
Zoning Officer that the most appropriate location for the
bin(s) has been achieved.
(c) Phone booths, mail and courier boxes and newspaper
distribution boxes. These items may not be located in required
sight triangles and should be located so as to not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular circulation and safety. These uses are
recommended to be aesthetically pleasing as possible, and to
incorporate a design theme where appropriate. Newspaper
distribution boxes shall also comply with Chapter 128,
Newspaper Distribution Boxes, of the Borough Code.
E. Requirements for temporary exterior storage units. [Added 11-8-2010
by Ord. No. 55-2010]
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms,
wherever used or referred to, shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context.
CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER — A roll off waste container
transported to and from the place of use by trucks or trailers and
positioned at a construction site for the collection and eventual
disposal of construction waste.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — A shipping container, or rolloff or
mobile trailer at a construction site utilized for storage,
construction management or residential sales offices purposes for
the duration of the construction activities associated with and in
sole support of an approved development.
MOBILE STORAGE TRAILER — Any nonhabitable, portable
enclosure without a permanent foundation, designed to be hitched
and/or attached to tucks, tractors or other vehicles for movement
from place to place with the purpose to store tangible property and
not for occupancy by persons. Mobile storage structures shall only
be allowed on commercial sites undergoing active construction
activities associated with and in sole support of an approved
development.
PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNIT — Portable sheds and/or
enclosures that are designed, constructed and commonly used for
nonpermanent placement on property for the purpose of temporary
storage of personal property on a residential property supporting
the principal permitted use.
TEMPORARY EXTERIOR STORAGE UNIT — A construction
dumpster, construction trailer, mobile storage trailer, portable
home storage unit or a portable sanitary restroom.
(2) Placement, duration, maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park, place or suffer placement of a temporary exterior
storage unit which:
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:798
(a) Is not secured or which is accessible to others not using the
unit.
(b) Is not in a state of good repair.
(c) Is in or upon any street, highway, roadway, designated fire lane
or sidewalk in the Borough.
(d) Interferes with sight lines for motorists on adjoining streets or
the driveways of adjacent properties.
(e) Obstructs safe means of access to or from any dwelling, use or
structure.
(f) Creates, in the opinion of the Fire Subcode official, a fire or
safety hazard.
(g) Displays advertising, other than the identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the unit.
(h) Has not received a zoning permit.
(3) Permitted temporary exterior storage units, commercial sites.
(a) A single construction trailer utilized for storage may be
allowed upon a site wherein there is active construction of a
nonresidential building, provided that:
[1] The location of the construction trailer is depicted on a soil
erosion and sediment control (SESC) plan approved by the
Morris County Soil Conservation District (MCSCD).
[2] The trailer shall be used only in connection with active
construction and shall not remain upon the premises for
longer than two weeks past the substantial completion of
said construction.
[3] In no event will any trailer used in connection with
nonresidential development remain on said premises for
more than two years from the date of initial construction.
(b) Mobile storage trailers shall be permitted, provided the
following conditions are satisfied:
[1] A list of the types of goods and materials to be stored shall
be provided to the Bureau of Fire Safety.
[2] The mobile storage trailer does not exceed eight feet in
height, 40 feet in length or 400 square feet.
[3] No more than one mobile storage trailer shall be permitted
at any one time on a site.
[4] Mobile storage trailers shall not be located within any
required parking space.
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:799
[5] Mobile storage trailers shall not be located within any
required setback.
[6] Mobile storage trailers shall be placed in the least
conspicuous location available to minimize disturbance
and visibility to any adjoining residential properties or
uses.
[7] The final location shall be determined by the Fire Safety
Official, Zoning Officer and Construction Code Official.
(c) On the expiration of the two-year permitted duration, any
temporary exterior storage unit remaining on the site shall be
removed or considered a proposed accessory structure, subject
to the zone district regulations for accessory structures and
will require an appearance before the appropriate board of
jurisdiction.
(4) Permitted temporary exterior storage units, residential sites.
(a) The use of construction dumpsters or alternatively portable
home storage units at residential construction sites for storage
of materials are permitted, provided that:
[1] A zoning permit is obtained for any use in excess of 48
hours.
[2] The use and placement shall be limited to a maximum of
six months.
[3] There shall be no more than three permit applications per
property, per calendar year.
[4] Its placement satisfies all other provisions of the Code.
(b) Portable home storage units shall be permitted in any
residential zone, provided the following conditions are
satisfied:
[1] No more than one portable home storage unit shall be
permitted on any property at one time.
[2] Portable home storage units shall be no closer than 10 feet
to any lot line.
[3] No portable home storage unit exceeds 130 square feet in
area, nor exceeds eight feet in height.
[4] No portable home storage unit shall be erected on any
corner lot closer to any of the lines of the street abutting
said lot than the front yard setback lines from said streets.
[5] Units must be kept on a paved or otherwise impervious
driveway at the furthest accessible point from the street.
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.5
191:800
(c) In an emergency wherein use of a portable home storage unit
is requested, the Borough Zoning Officer, upon application,
shall determine whether approval is granted for this portable
home storage unit. The Zoning Officer's approval will be
granted for a period of 30 days.
(d) On the expiration of the six-month permitted duration, any
temporary exterior storage unit remaining on the site shall be
removed or considered a proposed accessory structure, subject
to the zone district regulations for accessory structures, and
will require an appearance before the appropriate board of
jurisdiction.
(5) Permits and fees.
(a) No person shall park, place or suffer placement of a temporary
exterior storage unit without first obtaining a permit from the
Zoning Officer. The permit shall specify the time period during
which the unit may be kept on the property. The permit shall be
obtained prior to setting the unit on the property and shall be
displayed in a weatherproof manner on the unit.
(b) For temporary exterior storage units on commercial sites not
shown on an approved MCSCD SESC plan, the permit
application fee shall be $50.
(c) For temporary exterior storage units on residential sites, the
permit application fee shall be $50.
(d) The permit application fee for emergency use of temporary
exterior storage units shall be waived for the first 30 days.
Thereafter, the normal permit application fee of $50 shall
apply.
(6) Violations and enforcement.
(a) Any person, corporation or partnership that violates any
provision(s) of this Subsection E shall be subject to fines and
penalties, as follows:
[1] For the first violation, a fine of $100 per day, per violation.
[2] For the second violation, a fine of $200 per day, per
violation.
(b) In addition, any person, corporation or partnership found
guilty of a violation of this Subsection E shall be ordered to
abate the problem and pay the cost incurred by the Borough if
the Borough abated the problem.
(c) The Borough of Madison Construction Code Official, Fire
Official, Zoning Officer and the Madison Police Department
§ 195-30.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.5
191:801
§ 195-30.6. Yard modifications. [Amended 11-13-2002 by Ord. No.
33-2002]
In the case of lots upon which an existing structure is located, the side yard
requirement may be reduced by six inches for each foot by which a lot is
less than a minimum width requirement for the zone in which located. In
any case, the side yard width for either side yard shall not be reduced to
less than 50% of the requirement of the zone.
§ 195-30.7. Wellhead protection area (WHPA) district development
standards. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this
Subsection E.
A. In the event that new public water supply wells are installed in
locations outside the boundaries of the WHPA, a new wellhead
protection area must be established for each new well. Subsequently,
all of the regulations detailed in this section e applied to the new
wellhead protection area.
B. All major development, as defined in § 195-37, within the WHPA must
demonstrate conformance with the Borough's enhanced stormwater
management requirements pertaining to groundwater recharge and
runoff water quality, as described in § 195-37.3F and G of the Borough
Code, in order to eliminate the potential for degrading or contaminating
the surface water and groundwater within the WHPA.
C. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation shall be required for any new
major development or redevelopment within the WHPA. The
hydrogeological investigation should include site-specific discussions,
including:
(1) Introduction and background information (description, relation to
contaminated sites, etc).
(2) Water well records, if available.
(3) Water supply needs.
(4) General Geology/hydrogeology.
(5) Groundwater flow directions and gradients.
D. The following high risk uses that are potential major sources of
groundwater contamination are prohibited in both of the designated
areas of the WHPA:
(1) Building materials and contractor's yards.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Commercial fuel oil distributor.
§ 195-30.5 MADISON CODE § 195-30.7
191:802
(4) Commercial livestock operations.
(5) Dumps and open burning sites/pits.
(6) Junk or salvage yards.
(7) Land application of wastewater and/or sludge.
(8) Machine shops.
(9) Metal plating establishments.
(10) Motor vehicle sales (new and used).
(11) Motor vehicle service stations.
(12) Bulk storage operations involving liquids, hazardous substances or
wastes, or petroleum products (excluding residential/commercial
heating oil storage) in excess of de minimis quantities as defined by
N.J.S.A. 13:1D-1 et seq., 13:1K-6, 58:10B-1 et seq., and
58:10-23.11a et seq. (or most current), Industrial Site Recovery
Act.
(13) Recycling center.
(14) Sanitary landfill or solid waste transfer facility.
(15) Non-single-family sewage treatment/disposal pond.
(16)Radioactive materials operations or disposal.
(17) Quarries and mining operations.
(18) Unenclosed road salt stockpiles.
(19) (Reserved)
E. Any high-risk use located within the WHPA in existence prior to the date
of enactment of this section shall be exempted from compliance with
the requirements of this section.
F. Any material change or expansion of an existing high-risk use or
property that would, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer or other
applicable Borough official, result in a site plan or subdivision
application to the Planning or Zoning Board, or otherwise meet the
definition of a "major development," would require full compliance with
the contents of this section.
G. The owner/operator of any new commercial and industrial uses within
the WHPA shall submit his/her spill prevention control and
countermeasure (SPCC) plans and any other written emergency
procedures to the Borough, upon request.
§ 195-30.7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-30.7
191:803
§ 195-31. Certain permitted uses.
H. The owner/operator of any new commercial and industrial uses within
the WHPA shall submit to the Board of Health and Borough Engineer
the following information and reports:
(1) Copies of all federal, state and county operational applications,
approvals and permits; and reports and monitoring results that are
related to environmental, pollution control, hazardous substance,
hazardous waste and drinking water rules and regulations at the
time of submittal to the federal, state and county authorities.
(2) Copies of all notices, reports and documents that are filed with
federal, state and county authorities, in the event of any release of
a hazardous substance or contamination, at the time of filing.
(3) Copies of all notices, orders, rules, decisions, recommendations,
enforcement actions or similar documentation at the time of receipt
by or on behalf of the owner/operator from any federal, state of
county authorities in connection with enforcement of
environmental, pollution control, hazardous substance, hazardous
waste and drinking water rules and regulations.
I. All garbage dumpsters for residential, commercial or industrial land
uses within the wellhead protection area shall be operated in an
environmentally safe manner, including but not limited to the use of
watertight lids; covered, regularly emptied dumpsters, no outdoor
storage of solid waste, etc.
J. All new dumpster locations or relocations should be located as distant
from stormwater collection facilities as practicable. In no case shall
dumpster enclosures be located immediately upstream of any inlet,
catch basin or vegetated swale.
A. Child-care centers.
(1) Child-care centers are permitted uses in all nonresidential zones.
(2) The floor area occupied in any building or structure as a child care
center shall be excluded in calculating:
(a) Any parking requirement otherwise applicable to that number
of units or amount of floor space, as appropriate, under state or
local laws or regulations adopted thereunder; and
(b) The permitted density allowable for that building or structure.
(3) New buildings shall comply with Borough parking standards.
B. Essential services. Public utility lines for the transportation,
distribution and/or control of water, electricity, gas, oil, steam and
telegraph and telephone communications, and their supporting
members, other than buildings and structures, including pipes, shall
§ 195-30.7 MADISON CODE § 195-31
191:804
§ 195-32. R-1, R-2, R-3, Single-Family Residential Zones; R-4 Two-
Family Residential Zone regulations.
not be required to be located on a lot, nor shall this chapter be
interpreted to prohibit the use of a property in any zone for the above
uses. For purposes of this provision, wireless communications facilities
shall not be deemed an essential service.
C. Amusement events. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the following uses may be permitted only by the Borough
Council:
(1) Temporary circuses; pony rides; animal acts; carnivals; bazaars;
and educational sports, music or theatrical enterprises and
displays when held out of doors in any zone, provided that the same
are sponsored by a recreational, religious, charitable, social or
services organization located within the Borough of Madison.
(2) Cultural or athletic events which are part of a house of worship,
community house or school, college or university program and
which are held on the premises owned or leased by or otherwise
under the control of the institution conducting or sponsoring said
program.
(3) Bingo, raffles or other legalized games of chance, when properly
licensed in accordance with state and municipal requirements.
D. Temporary offices. Trailers or mobile structures used as temporary
offices, workshops or for the storage of equipment and materials in
connection with permitted construction of new buildings or structures
may be temporarily permitted on the same site during the actual period
of construction.
E. 155 Hours of business operations in certain areas. No retail
establishment located in any nonresidential zone, including CBD-1,
CBD-2 and CC Zones, that is located within 300 feet of any residential
zone shall conduct business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of each
day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The distance shall be measured
from any property line of the retail establishment to the closest
residential zone line. [Added 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 34-2010]
A. Purpose. The purpose of these zones is to preserve the integrity of
existing residential areas by preventing the intrusion of nonresidential
uses into residential neighborhoods and by maintaining existing
development intensity and population density consistent with
residential neighborhood patterns.
B. Principal permitted uses.
155. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Wireless telecommunications facilities, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002. See
now § 195-33B(10).
§ 195-31 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32
191:805
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Two-family dwellings (only in R-4 Residential Zone).
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein, including home occupations.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Institutional uses.
(4) Home occupations.
E. Supplemental bulk and design regulations. [Added 5-30-2018 by Ord.
No. 26-2018]
(1) In no event shall the maximum height for detached single- or twofamily
dwellings, as measured to the highest point of the ridgeline
of a roof, exceed 40 feet, measured from any point around the
building.
(2) In the R-1 and R-2 Districts, the minimum side yard setback shall
be 20 feet for one-story buildings up to 18 feet in height. The
minimum side yard setbacks for a second story, or any building
component greater than 18 feet in height, shall be increased by a
combined five feet across both side yards or at least 2.5 feet if an
addition affects one side yard.
(3) Attached garages.
(a) Attached garages facing and opening onto a public street shall
be prohibited in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zone Districts with
the exception of corner lots. On corner lots, the primary front
yard for purposes of this section shall be that yard upon which
the front door faces; garages facing the secondary front yard
shall be permitted. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
23-2019]
(b) Attached garages facing and/or opening onto a public street
shall be limited to 14 feet in width for single-family homes in
the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
(c) Not more than three attached residential garage spaces shall
be permitted in the R-1 or R-2 Districts, and no more than two
attached garage spaces shall be permitted per lot in the R-3
and R-4 Districts.
§ 195-32 MADISON CODE § 195-32
191:806
§ 195-32.1. R-5 Multiple-Family Residential Zone, R-6 Single-Family
Attached and Patio Homes Residence Zone regulations.
(d) Garages facing and opening onto a public street shall be set
back a minimum of an additional five feet from the front
building line for any garage greater than 12 feet in width, and
a minimum of three feet for any garage that is 12 feet in width
or less, unless an unenclosed front porch of at least five feet in
depth is proposed for the balance of the front facade.
(4) Where more than one single- or two-family home is proposed,
building plans and elevations shall show a variation in design to be
achieved by types of roofs, heights of eaves and peaks, building
materials, and architectural treatment of the building facades.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit multifamily residential
use at appropriate densities in locations accessible to major roadways,
commercial services, and public facilities.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings (only in R-5 Residential Zone).
(2) Patio homes.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Single-family attached dwellings.
(5) Single-family detached dwellings.
(6) Two-family dwellings (only in R-6 Residential Zone).
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein, including home occupations.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Institutional uses.
(4) Home occupations.
E. Supplementary requirements.
(1) Single- and two-family dwellings shall meet all area and bulk
controls set forth in the R-4 zone district in Schedule I156 for singleand
two-family dwellings, respectively.
156. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-32 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.1
191:807
(2) Multifamily, attached single-family and patio houses shall meet all
area and bulk controls established in Schedule I157 for such
dwellings and the following additional requirements:
(a) Density.
[1] Multifamily: maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.30.
[2] Attached single-family:
Square Footage
(excluding garages) Units Per Acre
2,500 or more 4
2,000 to 2,499 5
Under 2,000 6
[3] Patio home: four units per acre.
(b) Off-street parking: as set forth in RSIS.
[1] Multifamily: 50% shall be in garages.
[2] Attached single-family and patio homes: one per dwelling
unit shall be garaged.
(c) Maximum number of units in a structure:
[1] Multifamily: 20.
[2] Attached single-family: six.
(d) Storage areas: minimum of 1,000 cubic feet per dwelling unit,
exclusive of garages.
(e) Minimum floor area.
Type of Unit
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
1-bedroom 800
2-bedroom 1,000
3-bedroom 1,200
(f) Minimum setbacks: No structure containing a dwelling unit
shall be located closer than 60 feet to any abutting public
street or 40 feet from any private street or property line.
(g) Minimum distance between buildings.
157. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-32.1 MADISON CODE § 195-32.1
191:808
§ 195-32.2. RC Single-Family Residential Cluster Zone regulations.
Location Distance
Minimum
(feet)
End wall to end wall 1/2 height of highest
wall
12
Any window wall to end
wall
1 1/2 times height of
highest wall
30
Window wall to window
wall
3 times height of
highest wall
75
(h) Minimum common open space: 30%.
(i) Other requirements:
[1] No apartment shall be permitted in the basement or cellar
of multifamily structures.
[2] A minimum four-foot building offset shall be provided for
each two attached single-family units and every 50 feet of
multifamily structures.
[3] Accessory structures shall harmonize architecturally with
and be constructed of materials of like character to those
used in the principal structure.
[4] Open space to be deeded to a condominium or
homeowners' association shall meet the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
A. Purposes. The purpose of this zone is to:
(1) Encourage the continued use, maintenance and renovation of the
existing buildings and site improvements previously devoted to use
as Bayley Ellard High School. [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No.
6-2009]
(2) In the alternative, provide an environmentally sensitive residential
development by preserving, to the maximum extent possible, the
natural features of the site.
(3) Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of
residential developments.
(4) Provide for the preservation and maintenance of open land for
passive recreational use and for active public recreational use.
[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 53-2005]
(5) Maximize the preservation of historic resources. [Added
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 53-2005]
§ 195-32.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.2
191:809
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings in a cluster development.
[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 53-2005]
(2) Public parks and common open space.
(3) 158Religious and/or educational uses of the existing buildings and
suite improvements previously devoted to use as Bayley Ellard
High School. [Added 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009]
(4) Public uses. [Added 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein, including home occupations.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Institutional uses.
(2) Assisted-living residences.
(3) Long-term care facilities.
(4) Continuing care retirement communities (CCRC).
(5) Home occupations.
E. Supplementary requirements for high school. A Master Development
Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for an annual review at
the Board's third meeting of the year. The Master Development Plan
shall include the following:
(1) Graphic and, where appropriate, text explanation of all existing
structures and facilities, including building and parking areas and
improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation areas of the high
school.
(2) All contemplated future construction on the property, as best as can
be determined.
(3) Specific proposals to manage the internal circulation of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic within the site and parking adequacy and an
assessment of the impact on the surrounding area.
(4) The status of any environmental issues affecting the high school
(e.g., preservation and management of critical areas).
F. Supplementary requirements for cluster residential development.
[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 53-2005]
158. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Residential cluster development, was repealed
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 53-2005.
§ 195-32.2 MADISON CODE § 195-32.2
191:810
(1) Minimum tract size: 25 acres.
(2) Open space requirement. The following open space requirement
shall apply to any proposed development for single-family detached
dwellings:
(a) Amount. Except as provided for in § 195-32.2.F(5)(c) below, at
least 50% of any residential development tract shall be set
aside as permanently deed-restricted open space (as defined in
§ 195-5 of this chapter) for the benefit of the residents of the
development and/or general public. The open space calculation
shall not include any areas in individual residential lots and
areas devoted to public streets or rights-of-way.
(b) Location and suitability. The developer's open space proposal
shall be designed to preserve environmentally sensitive lands,
scenic features and existing outdoor recreational facilities and
shall further the purposes of this subsection. All open spaces
shall be located and sized in accordance with sound planning
and design principles. The Planning Board shall determine the
suitability of the open space proposal and in doing so shall
consider, among other factors, the relationship of the proposed
open space to its surroundings both within and outside of the
proposed development.
(c) The layout of the subdivision shall avoid and preserve historic
resources listed in the historic preservation element of the
Master Plan. The development shall incorporate creative
development techniques to conserve historic sites and
resources. The visual pattern of the historic resources on the
property and on adjoining properties shall be harmonized. New
construction shall strengthen the historic design features of
the property by, for example, framing views, enclosing open
space or continuing design features or statements. Historic
structures and resources shall be maintained within the
development and shall be designed with adequate buffers and
transition areas to preserve the integrity of the historic
structures.
(d) Structures built in open space areas. Any structure(s)
accessory to conservation open space (e.g., paths) may be
erected within the dedicated open space. These accessory
structures shall not exceed, in the aggregate, 1% of the
required open space area. A portion of the open space may also
be used for the construction of retention or detention facilities.
Easements shall be no larger than reasonably necessary, and
the Planning Board shall require reasonable assurances and
covenants that such facilities shall be maintained.
(e) Access to open space. Open space intended for use by the
public, if any, shall be easily accessible to pedestrians.
§ 195-32.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.2
191:811
(f) Pedestrian walks. A portion of the open space may be used for
ways serving as pedestrian walks if such a use, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, enhances better site and community
planning and the general purpose of the RC Zone and if the
Planning Board finds that adequate assurances and covenants
exist to ensure proper maintenance of such walks.
(g) Dedication of open space and historic resources. The developer
may dedicate any open space and historic resources as
required by this section to the Borough of Madison, and the
Borough Council may accept such a dedication in its discretion.
(h) Restrictive covenant. The developer shall prepare a restrictive
covenant, which shall embody the open space and historic
preservation restrictions where such open space and historic
resources are not dedicated to the Borough of Madison. The
restrictive covenant shall be recorded simultaneously with the
subdivision plat and shall be referred to therein. The form and
substance of the restrictive covenant shall be appropriate to
accomplish the purposes of this section and shall be
satisfactory to the Planning Board and Borough Attorney.
(i) Homeowners' association. If the proposed open space and/or
historic resources are not dedicated to and accepted by the
Borough, the developer shall establish a homeowners'
association for the purpose of owning and maintaining the
common open space and/or the historic resources within the
development for the benefit of its residents. Membership in the
homeowners' association shall be mandatory for the owners of
all lots within the development. The homeowners' association
shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open space
or historic resources without first offering to dedicate such
open space or historic resources to the Borough. In the event
that any homeowners' association organized pursuant to this
subsection fails to maintain its open space or historic
resources in reasonable order and condition, the Borough shall
have all rights and remedies provided by the Municipal Land
Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43). The certification of
incorporation or other document creating the homeowners'
association shall be prepared by the developer and submitted
to the Borough Attorney for review and approval of form and
substance.
(3) Design standards.
(a) Yards. Front and side yards may be staggered to provide a
variety in the size of such yards.
(b) Common open space shall include irreplaceable natural
features located on the parcel, such as but not limited to stands
§ 195-32.2 MADISON CODE § 195-32.2
191:812
of trees, individual trees of significant size, steep slopes and
wetlands.
(c) Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building
design shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible
relationship between development and the land.
(d) The construction of all roadways, interior streets, sidewalks,
curbing, street trees, stormwater control and utilities shall be
in accordance with the standards specified in the subdivision
regulations of this chapter. The Planning Board shall consider
allowing deviations from those sections of the subdivision
standards in the interest of good design if it determines that
adequate access will be provided to all lots in the development
by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel. While each
development proposal is unique, the Planning Board shall
consider allowing deviations from standards for cartway width,
curbing, right-of-way, cul-de-sac streets, street trees and
sidewalks and methods of stormwater removal, where the
deviation significantly minimizes or reduces land disturbance,
tree removal, cut and/or filling and impervious coverage or
sensitive or scenic natural features of the land, or otherwise
furthers the purposes of this subsection and is reasonable and
consistent with the purposes of this subsection without
resulting in a detriment to the public good and surrounding
neighborhood.
(4) Findings. The Planning Board shall not approve any residential
cluster development in the RC Zone unless the proposal meets all
applicable requirements for preliminary major subdivision
approval and the Planning Board makes all applicable findings and
conclusions as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(5) Development standards for residential clustering.
(a) The maximum number of residential lots in a cluster
development shall be determined by Planning Board approval
of a conceptual subdivision plan for conventional development
of the tract under the standards applicable to the R-1 Zone.
(b) Residential lots produced by clustering shall comply with the
standards of the R-2 Zone, except that a minimum lot size of
12,700 square feet shall be required.
(c) Where open space suitable for active recreation at the
discretion of the Planning Board and amounting to at least 40%
of the tract area is dedicated to the Borough of Madison, the
Planning Board may permit the maximum number of clustered
residential lots determined by way of a conceptual R-1
conventional development to be increased by 15%, the
required amount of open space shall be minimum of 40%,
including dedications to the Borough of Madison, and the
§ 195-32.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.2
191:813
§ 195-32.3. P Professional Zone regulations.
§ 195-32.4. CBD-1, CBD-2 Central Business District Zones
regulations.
dimensional standards of the R-2 Zone shall apply, except that
the minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet and the
minimum lot width for interior lots shall be 80 feet.
(6) Supplemental development standards for conditional uses.
Continuing care retirement communities shall be subject to a
maximum impervious coverage limit of 15% with the following
exceptions:
(a) Where at least 50% of the tract is reserved as open space, an
impervious coverage for the remainder of the tract of up to
30% shall be permitted.
(b) Where at least 40% of the tract which is suitable for active
recreation is dedicated to the Borough of Madison, an
impervious coverage for the remainder of the tract of up to
40% shall be permitted.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein, including home occupations.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Institutional uses.
(4) Home occupations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CBD zones is to promote a vital, mixed-use,
downtown core designed to encourage street-level pedestrian activity
through ground-level locally oriented retail uses and upper-floor offices
and residential uses. Preserving and maintaining a streetscape
consistent with downtown design principles, encouraging the reuse and
rehabilitation of historic structures, maintaining the character and
scale of buildings, sites, and uses to promote pedestrian accessibility
and safety, and encouraging locally oriented retail businesses and
§ 195-32.2 MADISON CODE § 195-32.4
191:814
services are central to the identity, health and vitality of the CBD.
[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 54-2009]
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Apartments over stores or offices.
(2) Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices.
(3) Theaters.
(4) Institutional uses.
(5) Off-street parking facilities.
(6) Public parks and playgrounds.
(7) Recreation facilities, commercial or private.
(8) Restaurants, non-drive through.
(9) Retail sales and service.
(10) Financial institutions, non-drive-up window.
(11) Two-family dwellings (only in CBD-2 Zone).
(12) Single-family detached dwellings (only in CBD-2 Zone).
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
(2) Home occupations.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Gasoline service stations.
(4) Outdoor dining. [Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
E. Prohibited uses. Drive-through windows associated with any use,
including, but not limited to, retail sales and services, business
services, restaurants, and financial institutions. [Added 9-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 59-2008]
F. Off-street parking. [Added 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 54-2009]
(1) Off-street parking requirements in the CBD-1 and CBD-2 Zones
shall meet the nonresidential parking requirements set forth in the
tables provided in Parking Schedule I in § 195-35, reduced by 20%,
as well as the parking requirements for residential use as per the
§ 195-32.4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.4
191:815
NJRSIS, except that on-street parking shall not be counted towards
the parking requirement. In evaluation of parking requirements,
the reviewing board may consider demand management
approaches, such as provision of carsharing, ridesharing and
shuttles, and may further reduce the required parking by up to
10% based on documentation provided by an applicant outlining
proposed demand management techniques.
(2) If there is a change in building occupancy (tenancy), but not use [as
defined by § 195-20B(2)], and no physical expansion is proposed,
additional parking above what is already provided (on site, off site,
or through a shared parking agreement) is not required and no
parking variance is necessary.
(3) If there is a change in building occupancy and use (but not physical
expansion), then the parking requirements are computed based on
the difference between the parking required for the legally existing
(prior) use versus the parking required for the new (proposed) use,
provided there shall be no reduction in the amount of any existing
on-site or designated off-site parking; however, further provided
that retail uses with incidental accessory sales of food or beverage
items (comprising less than 5% of total establishment revenue or
less than 15% of establishment floor area), as well as specialty food
establishments of less than 1,500 square feet that do not provide
full meals for on-site or off-site consumption, may include up to
eight seats for on-site consumption of such items without
generating any additional off-street parking requirements in the
CBD Zones. [Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 45-2016]
(4) Parking requirements may be addressed in the CBD Zones through
a shared parking approach between compatible uses either on or
off tract. The off-tract parking shall be located within five blocks or
1,000 feet of the subject property. Documentation shall be provided
to support the feasibility of shared parking, including an analysis of
the uses sharing the parking and the peak usage periods for each,
hours of operation of uses sharing the parking, and lot capacity
(number of spaces) based on existing and proposed usage of the lot.
A written contractual arrangement should be secured for a
minimum two-year period, with a renewable option between
parties.
(5) There shall be no minimum required off-street parking in the CBD-1
Zone for permitted ground-floor nonresidential uses with public
street frontage or frontage on a municipal alley or municipal
parking lot. [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 35-2017]
G. Supplemental requirements. [Added 11-9-2009 by Ord. No.
54-2009]
(1) Landscaped buffers.
§ 195-32.4 MADISON CODE § 195-32.4
191:816
§ 195-32.5. CC Community Commercial Zone regulations.
(a) Where a nonresidential or mixed-use development is
contiguous to a residential use or zone, there shall be a
landscaped buffer strip along the perimeter of the property
where it is contiguous to such residential property or zone.
Such buffer strip shall be at least 10 feet in depth measured
from the residential property line and shall be used as a
planting strip or developed as a planted berm, with plant
material (trees, shrubs, and plants, including a combination of
coniferous and deciduous varieties) a minimum of six feet in
height at time of planting. In addition, the reviewing body may
also require a solid, board-on-board fence in conjunction with
the plantings of at least five feet in height.
(2) Residential units permitted over first floor commercial space, with
the exception of units owned and/or operated by the Madison
Housing Authority, shall conform with the following minimum floor
area requirements: [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 17-2010]
(a) Studio/efficiency: 575 square feet.
(b) One bedroom: 750 square feet.
(c) Two bedrooms: 950 square feet.
(d) Three bedrooms: 1,200 square feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide community commercial
uses which will primarily serve the residents of the Borough. This zone
is not intended for the development of large, regional retail uses. The
development of small-scale office buildings and multifamily housing are
permitted uses which complement the community retail uses. The
standards of this zone are intended to create a visually pleasing
streetscape which establishes a positive aesthetic relationship between
the public spaces (e.g., roads and sidewalks) and the building facades
and layout of the sites.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Retail sales and service.
(2) Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices.
(3) Restaurants, non-drive-through.
(4) Institutional uses.
(5) Theaters.
(6) Apartments over retail and/or office uses. (Subject to § 195-32.5F.)
[Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 18-2005]
(7) Financial institutions, non-drive-up window.
§ 195-32.4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.5
191:817
(8) Any use permitted in any residential zone.
(9) Funeral homes.
(10) Recreational facilities, commercial or private.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Restaurants, drive-through.
(4) Gasoline service stations.
(5) Financial institutions, with drive-up window.
(6) Public garages.
(7) Outdoor dining. [Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
E. Supplemental requirements; design standards. All nonresidential uses
in the CC Zone shall meet the following design standards and those
applicable provisions of Article IV.
(1) Residential conversions. The conversion of an existing residential
structure to any nonresidential use shall maintain the character of
the existing structure and meet all off-street parking and other
requirements contained in this chapter. Any conversion of an
existing residential building shall be consistent with the existing
architecture.
(2) Access driveways for retail uses are permitted only from Main
Street unless there is no Main Street frontage or unless the
Planning Board determines that access from a local or collector
road is safer or results in a better circulation pattern.
(3) Parking.
(a) No parking shall be permitted in the required front yard nor
between any part of the front building facade and the street
right-of-way line.
(b) In appropriate cases, access driveways shall be encouraged to
be located so as to allow for a future common drive with the
adjacent parcel at one side yard line. Cross easements to
permit shared parking areas in the CC Zone shall be
encouraged in appropriate cases.
§ 195-32.5 MADISON CODE § 195-32.5
191:818
(c) Parking areas shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential zones, existing residential uses and public roads by
landscaping, fencing or a combination of these to create a
buffer at least four feet in height. Landscaping shall contain a
mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings sufficient to screen
the view of vehicles in all seasons.
(d) Parking areas located beneath a building shall be fully
screened by a mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings and be
physically enclosed from view by extension of the front facade
of the building to shield all such parking.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) A five-foot landscaped buffer shall be required along each side
yard, and a seven-foot landscaped buffer shall be required
along the rear property line. The nonimpervious areas in the
required front yard and/or between the front building facade
and the street right-of-way shall be fully planted and
maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with a
mix of deciduous and evergreen shrubbery and trees.
(b) Compliance with other regulations, specifically those for street
trees, shall be required.
(5) Building design and requirements.
(a) Large, horizontal buildings of limited height shall be broken
down into segments having vertical orientation, both
architecturally and structurally. One-story buildings are
discouraged.
(b) Roof forms such as gable, mansard and similar pitched roof
lines are required. Flat roofs are prohibited.
(c) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from public
view by architecturally compatible materials. Ground-level
mechanical equipment, such as air conditioning equipment,
utility boxes and meters, shall be screened from public view by
landscaping, walls or fencing.
(d) A minimum of one building entrance shall face the arterial road
where there is frontage on an arterial. Sidewalks along an
arterial road shall be provided within the front yard area for
access from the existing sidewalk system along the arterial
road and the entrance facing the arterial road.
(e) The visual character of buildings along street frontages and
entryways shall be "pedestrian friendly." Particular
consideration shall be given to shop fronts, including windows
and doors.
§ 195-32.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.5
191:819
(f) Fire escapes are prohibited on the principal facade of a
building.
(6) Street furniture.
(a) Security gates of any kind are prohibited. These include solid
or open gates and roll-up doors.
(b) The design of all new street furniture (e.g. benches, trash
receptacles, etc.) shall be consistent with the building design.
(7) Trash disposal.
(a) An area for trash disposal and recycling shall be provided. This
area shall be screened from the parking areas and adjacent
properties with fencing and/or landscaping.
(b) Trash disposal areas shall be located as far from residential
zone boundaries as possible, but in no case shall they be
located within seven feet of any residential zone or use.
(c) Trash disposal areas are prohibited anywhere in the required
front yard and/or between the front facade and the street rightof-
way.
(8) Residential development standards. Residential development shall
be in accordance with the standards and requirements of the R-5
Zone.
(9) Residential development, with the exception of units owned and/or
operated by the Madison Housing Authority, shall conform with the
following minimum floor area requirements: [Added 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 17-2010]
(a) Studio/efficiency: 575 square feet.
(b) One bedroom: 750 square feet.
(c) Two bedrooms: 950 square feet.
(d) Three bedrooms: 1,200 square feet.
F. Supplemental dimensional requirements for apartments over retail
and/or offices uses. The floor areas of apartments above the first floor of
buildings in the CC Zone which satisfy the following dimensional
requirements shall be exempt from the calculation of the maximum
permitted floor area ratio and shall be subject to all of the following
supplemental dimensional provisions: [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
18-2005]
(1) Lot frontage shall be on Main Street and be at least 125 feet.
(2) The lot size shall be at least two times the minimum required lot
size.
§ 195-32.5 MADISON CODE § 195-32.5
191:820
§ 195-32.6. U University Zone regulations.
(3) No more than eight dwelling units shall be on the property.
(4) Residential floors above the first floor shall be designed as an
extension of the front facade and in no case shall the residential
space extend beyond the limits of the first floor building footprint.
A. Purpose. To acknowledge and permit the continued use of lands within
the Borough of Drew University and Fairleigh Dickinson University.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Colleges and Universities.
(2) Institutional uses.
(3) Private recreational facilities.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Existing housing for faculty and employees of Drew University and
their families.
E. Supplementary requirements.
(1) Such uses shall provide housing and dining facilities for not less
than 200 students on a permanent basis throughout the school
year.
(2) Such uses shall include the erection, construction, alteration and
maintenance of buildings containing classrooms, auditoriums,
libraries, laboratories, workshops for teaching arts and crafts,
theaters (other than as commercial ventures solely for profit),
lecture rooms, museums, art and civic centers, dormitories,
residence halls, refectories, infirmaries or buildings for housing
and medical treatment of students, faculty members and other
college or university personnel who are ill or injured, gymnasiums,
swimming pools, athletic fields, tennis courts, grandstands, stands
and noncommercial parking areas for the use of persons attending,
visiting or connected with the college or university where such are
located; roads and drives, buildings and structures for the housing
of heat, power and refrigeration facilities and equipment for the
protection of life and property; noncommercial laundries for the
use of persons residents within said U Zone; and a bookstore
primarily for university use.
§ 195-32.5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.6
191:821
§ 195-32.7. OR Office-Research Zone regulations. [Amended
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 35-2010]
(3) A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be maintained from any exterior
property line. Said 50 feet shall serve as a buffer between the
resident college and university and surrounding residences.
F. Master development plan. A Master Development Plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for an annual review at the Board's
third meeting of the year. The Master Development Plan shall include
the following:
(1) Graphic and, where appropriate, text explanation of all existing
structures and facilities, including building and parking areas and
improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation areas of the
University.
(2) All contemplated future construction on the property, as best as can
be determined.
(3) Specific proposals for the internal circulation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic within the campus, and parking adequacy and
assessments of the impact on the surrounding area.
(4) All existing and proposed off-campus University facilities (e.g.,
housing, offices, classrooms).
(5) The status of any environmental issues affecting the University
(e.g., preservation and management of critical areas).
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit a wide range of office and
research and development uses in accordance with current best
practices of green building and sustainable site design to minimize
impacts on adjacent residential areas to the maximum extent possible.
This purpose encompasses the rehabilitation and reuse of existing site
improvements and infrastructure, as well as any future new
construction within the zone.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices.
(2) Institutional uses.
(3) Research and development uses.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal uses as permitted herein.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
§ 195-32.6 MADISON CODE § 195-32.7
191:822
(2) Long-term care facilities.
E. Supplemental requirements.
(1) All pervious areas in the required front yard and/or between the
front building facade and the street right-of-way shall be fully
planted and maintained in a combination of lawn area or ground
cover with a mix of native deciduous and evergreen shrubbery and
trees. Landscaping around any parking areas shall contain a mix of
deciduous and evergreen plantings sufficient to screen the view of
vehicles in all seasons from adjacent residential uses. The
landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect
and reviewed by the Madison Shade Tree Management Board.
(2) No chain-link or vinyl fencing shall be permitted along any public
street frontage nor adjacent to any residential use.
(3) The selection of building design elements, such as materials,
fenestration, color and texture, should balance the needs of the
proposed uses of the site with elements to achieve harmony with
the neighborhood and Borough.
(4) Site lighting should be harmonious with the building style and
design and shall use only downward-facing fixtures to minimize
spillage and glare. Lighting intensities shall be the minimum
required to adequately light the site and shall consider the
proximity and nature of adjoining uses. See also § 195-25.6 for
additional standards.
(5) All building facades shall be treated as front facades in terms of
architectural detailing and treatments.
(6) Buildings are required to incorporate vertical and horizontal
articulation through variations in build-to lines, incorporation of
entry treatments and pergolas, careful selection of materials, the
use of projections and fenestration, and/or similar architectural
treatments to improve the visual appearance of the buildings.
(7) Applicants for development in the OR Zone shall submit photo
simulations showing the massing, scale, materials and finishes
proposed for the project from various viewpoints in context with
surrounding properties. These simulations shall be submitted at
the time of the initial application for site plan approval.
(8) All proposals for development in this zone shall be required to
prepare a traffic impact statement in accordance with § 195-20G
that shall consider increases in cut-through traffic through
neighboring local streets.
(9) For the purpose of calculating impervious coverage and to
encourage the use of sustainable site design components that
increase groundwater recharge, all pervious pavement and
§ 195-32.7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.7
191:823
engineered green roof systems shall receive a credit towards the
calculation of impervious coverage. These areas, provided they
are designed and maintained in accordance with best engineering
practices, shall receive deductions for purposes of calculating
impervious coverage in the OR Zone, as follows:
(a) Green roof. Engineered green roofs may be considered for a
reduction in impervious coverage, provided they cover a
minimum of 500 square feet of contiguous roof area.
Deductions shall be as follows:
[1] A reduction of 20% in impervious coverage for systems
with unit weights of 10 to 25 pounds/square foot saturated
and vegetated;
[2] A reduction of 35% in impervious coverage for systems
with unit weights of 25 to 40 pounds/square foot saturated
and vegetated;
[3] A reduction of 50% in impervious coverage for systems
with unit weights of 40+ pounds/square foot saturated and
vegetated;
[4] Additional coverage reduction for system designed to
retain entire one-hundred-year design storm may be
granted based on review and determination by the Board
Engineer.
(b) Pervious paving systems. Pervious paving systems may be
considered for a reduction in impervious coverage, provided
they cover a minimum of 5% of all parking stalls or 2.5% of
total paved area of the site and provided they demonstrate
compliance with design criteria of Chapter 9.7 of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Best
Management Practices Manual, latest version, in order to
qualify for coverage credits. Deductions shall be as follows:
[1] Twenty percent reduction in impervious coverage for
impervious concrete pavers without storage bed;
[2] Forty percent reduction in impervious coverage for
impervious concrete pavers with stone storage bed;
[3] Fifty percent reduction in impervious coverage for porous
paving systems;
[4] Additional coverage reduction may be granted for storage
bed designed to retain the entire one-hundred-year design
storm based on review and determination by the Board
Engineer.
(10) Standards related to site design and layout, including, but not
limited to, landscaping, stormwater management, lighting,
§ 195-32.7 MADISON CODE § 195-32.7
191:824
§ 195-32.8. PCD-O Planned Commercial Development-Office Zone
regulations. [Amended 6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 49-2016]
parking, etc., outlined in other sections of Chapter 195, Land
Development, shall apply. In the event of inconsistencies between
standards elsewhere in Chapter 195 and in this section, the more
restrictive standard shall apply.
(11) Accessory uses, including shared conference rooms for use by
multiple tenants, cafeterias, fitness facilities, and similar amenities
designed for the sole use of building occupants shall not exceed
15% of a building's gross floor area.
(12) Laboratory floor area shall not exceed 25% of a building's gross
floor area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to:
(1) Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration
to the physical constraints of the land.
(2) Provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
(3) Provide for screening, landscaping, signing and lighting.
(4) To continue to maximize the economic benefits of Giralda Farms to
the community and region by retaining and attracting high quality
jobs and innovative businesses that value the unique setting and
environmental character of the campus.
(5) Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to
ensure adequate light and air, proper building arrangements and
minimum adverse effects on surrounding property.
(6) Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the
environment, including, but not limited to, minimizing soil erosion
and sedimentation, air and water pollution and noise levels.
(7) Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage and
stormwater management, sanitary facilities and other utilities and
services.
(8) Retain as much of the natural vegetative cover, particularly in
critical environmental areas, where it serves important functional
as well as aesthetic purposes.
(9) Implement the adopted policies of the Borough of Madison
Comprehensive Master Plan, as amended, dealing with proper land
development, site design and conservation.
(10) To recognize the unique environmental setting and design of
Giralda Farms and to continue to mitigate and balance the
environmental impacts of development with development
§ 195-32.7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.8
191:825
opportunities through incorporation of innovative, sustainable
design and low impact development techniques
(11) Advance and promote sound growth and the general welfare.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Business, administrative and professional offices.
(2) Up to 10% of any permitted office building may be used for any
combination of the following uses:
(a) Nonhazardous laboratories, research and development,
experimentation and testing;
(b) Facilities for higher education and/or partnerships between the
private sector and higher education; and
(c) High technology/innovation business incubator facility.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal uses, as permitted herein.
(2) One residential conference center within a single PCD-O complex.
(3) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities for use by PCD-O tenants,
owners and their guests.
(4) One hotel within the overall PCD-O Zoning District, in accordance
with the standards in § 195-32.8D(5).
(5) A full service, non-drive-through restaurant or private eating club
is permitted in existing (as of the date of adoption of this
amendment) accessory structures only.
D. Supplementary requirements.
(1) Size. No tract, parcel or lot to be used for a planned commercial
development-office shall contain less than 175 acres. Public or
private streets, roads or rights-of-way shall not be deemed to divide
acreage of a planned commercial development-office.
(2) Boundary line setback and perimeter buffer zone.
(a) Boundary line setback requirements. No building or structure
in a planned commercial development-office shall be erected
within 200 feet of the right-of-way of Woodland Avenue,
Madison Avenue or Treadwell Avenue, and no building or
structure in the PCD-O shall be erected within 250 feet of the
right-of-way of Loantaka Way.
(b) Buffer zone requirements. The applicant shall be required to
maintain a buffer zone area of at least 200 feet along the
§ 195-32.8 MADISON CODE § 195-32.8
191:826
perimeter of any PCD-O, except that no buffer area shall be
required along the interior periphery of any PCD-O site to
the extent that said boundary line also adjoins the Borough of
Madison and Township of Chatham municipal boundary line.
Said buffer zone shall be kept in its natural state where
wooded, and, when natural vegetation is sparse or nonexistent,
the Planning Board may require the applicant to supplement
the existing vegetation. Within said buffer zone, no structure or
off-street parking or loading areas shall be permitted, except
utility easements, gatehouses, fences and signs. Roads other
than circumference roads may be permitted to cross through
the buffer area. Said buffer zone may be included for the
purpose of computing the planned commercial developmentoffice
density requirements.
(c) Reduction in buffer zone requirements. The buffer zone
requirements may be reduced by the Planning Board where
existing or proposed vegetation and topographic features
accomplish the primary objective of preserving the vista from
adjoining and boundary streets.
(3) Utilities. All PCD-O developments shall be served by public water
and public sewers. All utility wiring shall be underground.
(4) Office/commercial building standards.
(a) Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.30 to
the tract, but in no event shall the gross floor area within any
PCD-O complex exceed 2,250,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot size. There shall be a minimum lot size of 20 acres
for each office building operation.
(c) Height. No building height or any part thereof or
appurtenances thereto shall exceed the lesser of 60 feet above
ground level or 50 feet above the center line of the nearest
point of Loantaka Way or Madison Avenue.
(d) Off-street parking. Every building shall be provided with offstreet
parking at a maximum ratio of 30 parking spaces for
each acre of PCD-O area. Not more than 15% of all parking
shall be surface, at-grade, uncovered parking. Off-street
parking shall be screened and integrated with natural grade
and environmental characteristics. Smaller footprint parking
structures that are not entirely subsurface are permitted in
accordance with the following design standards:
[1] The siting of such structures should take advantage of
natural grades to minimize soil disturbance and visual
impacts.
§ 195-32.8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.8
191:827
[2] The height of such structures should not exceed a
maximum of 20 feet above pre-development grade to the
highest point of the roof or parapet of the parking
structure.
[3] Any above grade part of a parking structure visible from a
public right-of-way should be effectively screened with
dense plantings, berms, and other landscape elements.
[4] Architectural elements should be incorporated to ensure
structure design compatibility with principal structures.
[5] Such structures should not intrude into any required
setbacks, with the exception of interior yards that do not
abut any public right-of-way.
[6] In cases where structures meet these standards, the
reviewing Board may exempt the parking provided in this
manner from the district's surface parking cap and overall
parking cap.
(e) Maximum impervious surface.
[1] Not more than 17.5% of the tract shall be developed with
buildings, parking areas, walks, roads or other materials,
including detention/retention basins less porous than
presently existing.
[2] For purposes of calculating impervious coverage only,
subsurface garages with a minimum average soil depth of
at least 1.5 feet shall not count toward the calculation of
impervious coverage; however, it should be noted that they
may be considered impervious for purposes of stormwater
management.
[3] The Planning Board may consider an increase in the
maximum impervious coverage, from 17.5 to 20%,
provided that there is no net increase in runoff volume and
that low-impact development techniques are incorporated
to provide enhanced water quality and groundwater
recharge.
(f) Open space organization. Open space shall be deeded to a
corporation, association or other legal entity consisting of one
or more of the property owners within the PCD-O for their use,
control, management and maintenance. Any agreement
providing for such ownership shall be reviewed and approved
by the Borough Attorney to ensure that adequate safeguards
are included guaranteeing the continuance of the agreement in
perpetuity and protecting the Borough from harm. In any
event, the agreement shall give the Borough the right to
perform maintenance and assess the cost to the property
§ 195-32.8 MADISON CODE § 195-32.8
191:828
owners in the event that the property owners fail to maintain
the property in accordance with the agreement. All provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 of the Municipal Land Use Law shall
govern the establishment of the open space organization.
(5) Additional standards for a hotel:
(a) A hotel in the PCD-O provides transient lodging
accommodations to the general public, and contains up to 200
rooms/suites, and may include additional facilities and
services, such as a full-service restaurant, meeting space/
private function areas, and a fitness center/private club for use
by hotel guests and the general public on a membership basis.
(b) One hotel may be permitted within the PCD-O District.
(c) At least one access driveway shall be provided directly from a
public right-of-way, if approved by all governmental authorities
with permitting authority.
(d) No more than one freestanding sign may be permitted for each
public street frontage abutting a hotel with a maximum of two
such signs in total. Each sign shall contain no more than 30
square feet and be no more than five feet in height. Such signs
shall be externally illuminated and attractively landscaped
along their base.
(e) All building signs for any hotel shall be limited to no more than
a total of 45 square feet, and shall be externally illuminated.
E. Findings for PCD-O. Prior to the preliminary approval of a PCD-O, the
Planning Board should find the following facts and conclusions:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning article standards and objectives pursuant to this section.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of open space
and buffers are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of
the open space is adequate for the objectives set forth in this
article.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned commercial development-office will not
have an unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
§ 195-32.8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.8
191:829
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the occupants
and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of
the development are adequate.
(6) That the proposed development will promote the PCD-O objectives.
F. Infrastructure.
(1) The Planning Board should not grant site plan approval and/or
should condition such approval upon finding that:
(a) The proposed stormwater management system is adequate to
meet the expected stormwater flows.
(b) The proposed sanitary sewage collection and treatment system
is adequate to meet the expected sanitary sewage demand.
(c) The proposed potable water system is adequate to meet
expected water demands.
(d) The proposed solid waste management plan can adequately
handle the proposed solid waste to be generated by the
project.
(e) The roadways and intersections surrounding the zone and
leading to and from the tract are capable of handling the
expected traffic demands generated by the proposed
development. In determining the capability of such roadways
and intersections to handle the expected traffic demands to be
generated by the proposed development, the Planning Board
should endeavor to apply, whenever feasible and appropriate,
"Level of Service C," as defined in ASHTO.
(f) The electric supply system is capable of handling the demand
required by the proposed development.
(g) The proposed landscape management plan shall limit the use
of pesticides and chemical fertilizers by following the
principles and practices of integrated pest management.
(2) In determining whether the systems are adequate, the Planning
Board should determine that the existing system and all proposed
improvements needed and necessary to accommodate the
proposed development are either in existence, being constructed,
bonded or included under any developer's agreement between the
developer and municipality or other agency responsible for the
system.
(3) Where appropriate, the Planning Board should make submission of
a developer's agreement to be approved by the Borough Council,
posting of bonds or actual installation of improvements to ensure
the adequacy of the systems a requirement for final approval.
§ 195-32.8 MADISON CODE § 195-32.8
191:830
§ 195-32.9. R SH Senior Citizen Housing Zone regulations.
§ 195-32.10. OSGU Open Space/Government Use regulations.
(4) As part of the application for site plan approval, Planning Board
may impose such reasonable and appropriate traffic controls and/
or monitoring of traffic conditions, including staggering of work
hours, staggering of ingress and egress or some use of mass
transport or van pooling, to the extent and for such reasonable time
periods as such controls may be required by the anticipated traffic
to be generated by the proposed development during peak hours.
However, where it appears that such controls or agreement
involves a capital contribution of public funds for any road,
intersection or other off-site improvements, then, to the extent of
such expenditure or public funds, the approval of the Borough
Council shall also be obtained.
(5) All developer's agreements required under this section shall be in
recordable form.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit senior citizen housing
owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing Authority built in
accordance with federal regulations for such housing and designed to
be occupied by persons 62 years of age and older.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Senior citizen housing.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use as permitted herein.
D. Supplementary requirements.
(1) Parking.
(a) Minimum parking requirements: 1/2 space for each dwelling
unit.
(b) Parking may be located in any required front, side, or rear
yard.
(2) Minimum apartment sizes.
(a) One-bedroom dwelling unit: 540 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom dwelling unit: 740 square feet.
(3) Storage requirement: minimum of 150 cubic feet of storage per
dwelling unit.
(4) Maximum density: 19 dwelling units per acre.
§ 195-32.8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.10
191:831
§ 195-32.11. POR Private Outdoor Recreation regulations.
§ 195-32.12. R-PH Residential-Public Housing regulations.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to acknowledge and preserve the
existing open space/parks and government-related uses throughout the
Borough.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Borough parking lots.
(2) Municipally-owned or operated buildings.
(3) Train stations.
(4) Rescue squad facilities.
(5) Senior citizen centers.
(6) Major public open space lands and recreation areas.
(7) Libraries.
(8) Schools.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses which are customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal uses as permitted herein.
D. Conditional uses.
(1) Assisted-living residences.
(2) Long-term care facilities.
(3) Commercial uses.
(4) Restaurants without drive-through.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to ensure the preservation of the
existing golf course in the Borough.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Golf course and clubhouse.
C. Accessory Uses.
(1) Existing accessory structures limited to maintenance building and
barn cart.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit scatter site housing
owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing Authority.
§ 195-32.10 MADISON CODE § 195-32.12
191:832
§ 195-32.13. Gateway Zone. [Added 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 20-2008]
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Housing owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing Authority
and occupied by households selected by the Housing Authority.
C. Supplementary requirements.
(1) The maximum number of housing units permitted shall be 12 units.
(2) The minimum parking requirements are two per unit.
(3) The maximum height shall be two and one-half stories in 35 feet.
(4) Setback: 50 feet from tract boundary.
(5) Minimum common open space: 30%.
(6) Maximum impervious ground coverage: 50%.
(7) Concrete patios and privacy fences in side and rear yards are
permitted.
(8) Window wall to window wall distance of 25 feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide reasonable agerestricted
and senior citizen multifamily housing and office uses and
development standards for properties strategically located at the
eastern gateway entrance to the Borough of Madison. The uses
permitted are those that complement and are supportive of existing
commercial uses in the remaining CC Community Commercial Zone and
are compatible with abutting residential uses. The standards of this
zone are intended to encourage superior building aesthetics and
streetscape enhancement at a scale appropriate to this unique area and
the Borough. To achieve these objectives, zoning standards are
introduced to encourage property agglomeration and redevelopment
that will promote implementation of the purposes of this zone and the
Borough Master Plan and Master Plan Reexamination.
B. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Age-restricted multifamily dwellings;
(2) Senior citizen multifamily dwellings;
(3) Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices;
and
(4) Institutional and public uses.
C. Accessory uses:
(1) Uses that are customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use.
§ 195-32.12 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.13
191:833
D. Gateway I area, height and bulk requirements.
(1) Area minimum: 50,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum height:
(a) Two and one-half stories or 35 feet for lots under 80,000
square feet.
(b) Three stories or 38 feet for lots greater than 80,000 square
feet.
(3) Setbacks:
(a) For buildings 2 1/2 stories or less or under 35 feet in height:
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Side yard: 15 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(b) For buildings in excess of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height:
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Rear and side yard: 25 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage for age-restricted and senior
citizen multifamily dwellings: 65%.
(5) Minimum number of buildings per tract or lot:
(a) For lots greater than 80,000 square feet: 2.
(b) For lots greater than 110,000 square feet: 3.
(6) Maximum impervious cover for age-restricted and senior citizen
multifamily dwellings: 65%.
(7) Maximum dwelling units per acre for age-restricted and senior
multifamily dwellings:
(a) For lots under 80,000 square feet: 16 units per acre.
(b) For lots greater than 80,000 square feet: 20 units per acre.
(c) For lots greater than 90,000 square feet: 22 units per acre.
(8) Age-restricted and senior citizen multifamily off-street parking: as
set forth in RSIS. Not less than half of required parking shall be
underground parking. Underground parking two feet above grade
shall be a story.
§ 195-32.13 MADISON CODE § 195-32.13
191:834
(9) Facade length-to-frontage ratio: the aggregate length of all
building facades fronting a street shall not exceed 0.55 of the
frontage width at the street right-of-way.
E. Gateway II area, height and bulk requirements.
(1) Area minimum: 120,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum height:
(a) Two and one-half stories or 35 feet for lots under 130,000
square feet.
(b) Three stories or 38 feet for lots greater than 130,000 square
feet.
(3) Setbacks:
(a) For buildings 2 1/2 stories or less or under 35 feet in height:
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Side yard: 25 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(b) For buildings in excess of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet:
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Rear and side yard: 25 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage for age-restricted and senior
citizen multifamily dwellings: 65%.
(5) Minimum number of buildings per tract or lot:
(a) For lots under 130,000 square feet: 3.
(b) For lots greater than 130,000 square feet: 4.
(6) Maximum impervious cover for age-restricted and senior citizen
multifamily dwellings: 65%.
(7) Maximum dwelling units per acre for age-restricted and senior
citizen multifamily dwellings:
(a) For lots under 130,000 square feet: 18 units per acre.
(b) For lots greater than 130,000 square feet: 22 units per acre.
(8) Age-restricted and senior citizen multifamily off-street parking: as
set forth in RSIS. Not less than half of required parking shall be
underground parking. Underground parking two feet above grade
lot shall be a story.
§ 195-32.13 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.13
191:835
(9) Facade length-to-frontage ratio: The aggregate length of building
facades fronting a street shall not exceed 0.55 of the frontage width
at the street right-of-way.
F. Business, medical, professional, executive or administrative offices,
institutional and public uses are governed by the following regulations
and requirements:
(1) Minimum area: 30,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories, 35 feet.
(3) Setbacks:
(a) Front yard: 30 feet.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
(5) Maximum FAR: 0.35.
G. The Zoning Map is amended to remove the following block and lots
from the CC Community Commercial Zone and place them in the
Gateway I and Gateway II Zones as follows:
(1) Gateway I: Block 5202, Lots 1. 5, 6, 7, 7.01, 8 and 19.
(2) Gateway II: Block 2302, Lots 1,2, 3, 22, 23.
H. Supplemental requirements; design standards for gateway uses.
(1) Parking.
(a) No parking shall be permitted in the required front yard, nor
between any parts of the building facade and the street rightof-
way line.
(b) Parking areas shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential zones, existing residential uses and public roads by
landscaping, fencing or a combination of these to create a
buffer at least four feet in height. Landscaping shall contain a
mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings sufficient to screen
the view of vehicles in all seasons.
(c) Parking areas located beneath a building shall be fully
screened from public view by a mix of deciduous and
evergreen plantings and be physically enclosed from view by
extension of the front facade of the building to shield all such
parking.
(d) Parking areas should provide safe access to and from the
vehicle for the driver and passengers.
§ 195-32.13 MADISON CODE § 195-32.13
191:836
(e) Access to parking beneath a building shall be by an elevator.
(2) Landscaping.
(a) A minimum five-foot landscaped buffer shall be required along
each side yard and a seven-foot landscaped buffer shall be
required along the rear property line. All pervious areas in the
required front yard and/or between the front building facade
and the street right-of-way shall be fully planted and
maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with a
mix of deciduous and evergreen shrubbery and trees. The
landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect.
(3) Vehicular access. Vehicular access to Main Street is limited to one
ingress-egress point.
(4) Building arrangement and design:
(a) When development consists of multiple structures, buildings
should be oriented around open space, courtyard or similar
landscape amenity.
(b) The selection of building design elements, such as materials,
fenestration, color and texture, should be compatible with that
in the Borough and neighborhood.
(c) Streetscape design should include landscaping, street trees,
pedestrian-scale streetlights, and similar features appropriate
to a gateway location.
(d) Site lighting should be harmonious with the building style and
design.
(e) The top third story, if any, shall be set back at least six feet, at
all facades facing a property line, a distance from the second
floor roof eave equal to its height above the second floor roof
surface.
(f) All building facades shall be treated as front facades.
(5) Development shall implement § 195-24, General design standards,
and § 195-25, Specific design standards, of the Borough Land
Development Ordinance.
(6) Applicants for development in the Gateway Zones are encouraged
to pursue creative design, LEED certifications and visual and
aesthetic excellence.
(7) Applicants for development in the Gateway Zones shall submit a
concept plan for Planning Board review prior to an application.
(8) Floor area requirements for senior housing units shall be
consistent with § 195-32.9D(2). All other residential units, with the
§ 195-32.13 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.13
191:837
§ 195-32.14. R-5A Multifamily Residential Zone regulations. [Added
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
exception of units owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing
Authority, shall conform with the following minimum floor area
requirements: [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 17-2010]
(a) Studio/efficiency: 575 square feet.
(b) One bedroom: 750 square feet.
(c) Two bedrooms: 950 square feet.
(d) Three bedrooms: 1,200 square feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide a range of housing
opportunities and appropriate development standards for properties
strategically located at the edge of the Central Business District and
adjacent to multifamily development. The uses permitted are those that
complement and are supportive of the downtown commercial core, are
compatible with abutting residential uses, and reflect the area's
accessibility to mass transit, public services and major roadways. The
standards of this zone are intended to encourage superior building
aesthetics, sustainable building practices, adaptive reuse of historic
resources, and streetscape enhancement at a scale appropriate to this
area and the Borough.
B. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings in accordance with the standards
of the R-4 Zone.
(2) Two-family dwellings, in accordance with the standards of the R-4
Zone.
(3) Attached single-family dwellings/townhouses and apartments,
whether attached to one another horizontally, vertically, or by some
combination of the two.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Uses that are customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use.
D. Area, height and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 65,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum height/stories.
(a) Three stories/35 feet along Ridgedale Avenue frontage as
measured from the top of the curb of Ridgedale Avenue to the
highest point of the roof surface exclusive of chimneys and
mechanical penthouses.
§ 195-32.13 MADISON CODE § 195-32.14
191:838
(b) For buildings located on Ridgedale Avenue that have the
majority of their frontage on Ridgedale Avenue and extend
along the Cook Avenue frontage, the height of the building
along Cook Avenue for the first 70 feet of linear building
frontage (measured from the Ridgedale Avenue front yard
setback line) may exceed 35 feet up to a maximum of 40 feet,
as measured from the top of the curb of Cook Avenue to the
highest point of the roof surface, only to allow for a section of
continuous roofline and enclosed parking level; otherwise, the
height of any buildings fronting Cook Avenue shall be as noted
in Subsection D(2)(c) below.
(c) Three stories/35 feet along Cook Avenue frontage as measured
from the top of the curb of Cook Avenue to the highest point of
the roof surface exclusive of chimneys and mechanical
penthouses.
(d) An overall maximum building height in the zoning district of
three stories/35 feet, measured as the average vertical
distance from grade to the level of the highest point of the roof
surface (exclusive of chimneys and mechanical penthouses
which cannot exceed five feet). The reference grade plane for
computing height shall be established by the lowest points
within the area between the structure and the property line as
determined by perpendicular offset from the structure wall, or,
where the property line is more than 10 perpendicular feet
from the structure, the lowest points between the structure
and within 10 feet, or, where a public road exists within 50 feet
of the structure, the top of the curb of the public road shall be
used. Ground levels are to be averaged at no more than sixtyfoot
intervals and shall include all building corners.
(e) Enclosed parking shall not count as a story if the exposure of
the parking level at the setback line of any public street is less
than 3.5 feet as measured from the proposed or existing grade
to the underside of the structure of the floor above.
(3) Minimum setbacks for principal buildings.
(a) Front yard: minimum of 18 feet along Cook Avenue and
minimum of 25 feet along Ridgedale Avenue.
(b) Side yard: 25 feet minimum.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
(d) Building separation: 20 feet minimum.
(4) Setbacks for accessory buildings: 15 feet to any side or rear yard;
no accessory buildings allowed in any front yard.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
§ 195-32.14 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.14
191:839
(6) Minimum number of buildings per tract or lot: two buildings
(exclusive of accessory structures); for lots greater than 85,000
square feet there shall be a minimum of three buildings exclusive of
accessory structures.
(7) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(8) Maximum dwelling units per acre: 12 units per acre base density,
with bonuses as follows:
(a) Incorporation of green building/design techniques to achieve
at least a Silver level LEED-certified project: bonus of 10%
over base density. (NOTE: The applicant shall demonstrate the
ability to achieve this standard prior to receiving preliminary
approval and shall commit to providing those systems, site
improvements and design features consistent with Silver LEED
certification.)
(b) Preservation, rehabilitation, and occupancy of one or more
historically significant structures within a designated historic
district on the site: bonus of 10% over base density and cannot
be combined with Subsection D(8)(c) below.
(c) Preservation and incorporation of one or more historic facades
into proposed development: bonus of 5% over base density and
cannot be combined with Subsection D(8)(b) above.
(d) Maximum cumulative density bonuses shall not exceed 20%
over base density of 12 units per acre.
(9) Off-street parking shall be as set forth in the RSIS; however, the
Board should encourage a waiver be requested from these
standards due to the location of any parcel within the zone relative
to available downtown parking resources and other opportunities
for shared parking.
(10) Facade length to frontage ratio: The aggregate length of all
building facades fronting a street shall not exceed 0.80 of the
frontage width at the street right-of-way.
E. The Zoning Map159 is amended to remove the following block and lots
from the R-4 District and place them in the R-5A Zone as follows:
(1) R-5A Zone: Block 1601, Lots 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32.
F. Supplemental requirements and design standards:
(1) Parking.
(a) At least 75% of the off-street parking shall be contained within
the principal structures. No parking garages shall be
159. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 195-32.14 MADISON CODE § 195-32.14
191:840
permitted in the required front yard, nor between any parts of
the building facade and the street right-of-way line. No garage
shall face a public street.
(b) An area for bicycle storage shall be provided within all parking
garages or designated storage areas.
(2) Landscaping and fencing.
(a) A minimum ten-foot landscaped buffer shall be required along
each side yard and along the rear property line. All pervious
areas in the required front yard and/or between the front
building facade and the street right-of-way shall be fully
planted and maintained in a combination of lawn area or
ground cover with a mix of native deciduous and evergreen
shrubbery and trees. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a
licensed landscape architect and reviewed by the Madison
Shade Tree Management Board.
(b) Parking areas, solid waste storage areas, sheds and all other
accessory structures shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential zones, existing residential uses and public roads by
landscaping, fencing or a combination of these to create a
buffer of at least six feet in height. Landscaping shall contain a
mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings sufficient to screen
the view of vehicles in all seasons.
(c) No fences or gates across access drives shall be permitted in
the front yard setback. Fencing along the perimeter of rear and
side yards shall not exceed six feet in height. No chain link
fencing shall be permitted.
(3) Vehicular access.
(a) Vehicular access is limited to one ingress-egress point along
Cook Avenue which shall be at least 125 feet from the
Ridgedale Avenue intersection.
(b) Curb cuts, circulation, and parking areas shall be located at
least five feet from the property line and shall be located only
in side and rear yards.
(4) Building arrangement and design.
(a) When development consists of multiple structures, buildings
shall be oriented around open space, courtyard or similar
landscape amenity with the overall design preserving existing
trees and vegetation to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The selection of building design elements, such as materials,
fenestration, color and texture, should be compatible with that
in the Borough and neighborhood. Either clapboard siding or
§ 195-32.14 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.14
191:841
brick exterior shall be the primary material to echo adjacent
streetscape elements.
(c) Streetscape design should include landscaping, street trees,
pedestrian-scale streetlights, and similar features appropriate
to the zone's context.
(d) Site lighting should be harmonious with the building style and
design and shall use only downward-facing fixtures to minimize
spillage and glare. Lighting intensities shall be the minimum
required to adequately light the site and shall consider the
proximity and nature of adjoining uses. See also § 195-25.6 for
additional standards.
(e) All building facades shall be treated as front facades.
(f) All buildings are required to incorporate frequent vertical and
horizontal articulation through slight variations in build-to
lines along all public street frontages, incorporation of front
entries and porches, variations in roof pitch, careful selection
of materials, the use of windowed projections, and similar
architectural treatments to improve the visual appearance of
the buildings.
(g) Vertical articulations shall be provided at least every 30 feet
along all public street frontages.
(5) Development shall implement § 195-24, General design standards,
and § 195-25, Specific design standards, of the Borough Land
Development Ordinance.
(6) Applicants for development in the R-5A Zone shall submit a concept
plan and an existing conditions survey with elevation/slope
information and existing vegetation for Planning Board review
prior to making a site plan application.
(7) Given the zone's location in an historic district, photo simulations
shall be provided showing the massing, scale, materials and
finishes proposed for the project from various viewpoints in context
with surrounding properties. These simulations shall be submitted
at the time of the initial application for site plan approval.
(8) Given the zone's location in an area designated as an historic
streetscape, all site plan applications shall undergo advisory review
by the Madison Historic Preservation Commission. A member of
the Madison HPC shall participate in TCC meetings and
recommendations by the HPC shall be provided to the reviewing
board throughout the review process.
(9) All proposals for development in this zone shall be required to
prepare an environmental impact assessment in accordance with
§ 195-32.14 MADISON CODE § 195-32.14
191:842
§ 195-32.15. Green Village Road Special Use District (GVRSU)
regulations. [Added 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 57-2010]
§ 195-20F and a traffic impact statement in accordance with
§ 195-20G.
(10) Multifamily residential development, consisting of any building or
structures with attached housing with three or more units, with the
exception of units owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing
Authority, shall conform with the following minimum floor area
requirements: [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 17-2010]
(a) Studio/efficiency: 575 square feet.
(b) One bedroom: 750 square feet.
(c) Two bedrooms: 950 square feet.
(d) Three bedrooms: 1,200 square feet.
G. Standards related to site design and layout, including but not limited to
landscaping, stormwater management, lighting, parking, etc., outlined
in other sections of Chapter 195, Land Development, shall apply. In the
event of inconsistencies between standards elsewhere in Chapter 195
and in this section, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
A. Purpose: to encourage development of the area, consistent with transitoriented
design and sustainable design principles, in a manner that is
context sensitive and that strengthens the connection between this area
of the Borough and the core of the downtown. Future development
should balance site development opportunities and positive economic
outcomes with impacts on surrounding properties. The standards of
this zone are intended to encourage superior building aesthetics,
sustainable site design and building practices and cohesive overall
design to effectively address circulation, site access, parking and other
shared infrastructure.
B. Sub-Zone I (See GVRSU District Map.).160 Principal permitted uses:
(1) Townhouse development in accordance with the standards of the
R-6 Zone.
(2) Multifamily development, whether attached to one another
horizontally, vertically or by some combination of the two, in
accordance with the standards of this section.
C. Sub-Zone I. Permitted conditional uses:
(1) Boutique hotel, with the following conditions:
160. Editor's Note: The Green Village Road Special Use District Map is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 195-32.14 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.15
191:843
(a) Must be an extension of a boutique hotel primarily located in
Sub-Zone II and shall be part of a comprehensively designed
plan for a boutique hotel.
(b) Buildings shall not exceed the maximum height/stories under
Subsection E(2)(a).
(c) No surface parking shall be located within 25 feet of any
property line, with the exception of an interior lot line between
Sub-Zones I and II which shall have no required setback.
D. Sub-Zone I. Accessory uses: uses that are customarily incidental and
accessory to the principal use.
E. Sub-Zone I. Area, height and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum height/stories:
(a) Maximum building heights shall be governed by a combination
of the sky exposure plane (as illustrated in Figure 1161 and
defined as the theoretical inclined plane connecting a point five
feet above grade plane elevation at the top of the curb of the
eastern side of Kings Road and traveling westward) and
elevation based on the Topographic Map of the Borough of
Madison, prepared by VEP Associates, dated April 13, 1993.
Buildings shall not project above the sky exposure plane as
noted in Figure 1 nor shall they exceed 323.5 feet in elevation,
based on the Topographic Map of the Borough of Madison,
prepared by VEP Associates, dated April 13, 1993. No building
shall contain more than four stories, without incentives.
(b) Up to one additional story of height may be permitted, but only
as provided for through incentives in § 195-32.15D(8),
provided that any fifth story shall not break the sky exposure
plane by more than 10 feet, nor shall any part of any fifth story
exceed 342 feet in elevation above sea level, based on the
Topographic Map of the Borough of Madison, prepared by VEP
Associates, dated April 13, 1993 and as illustrated below.162
(c) Any story above the third story shall not occupy more than 80%
of the building footprint of the floor below.
(d) Enclosed, fully or partially below grade parking shall not count
as a story if the exposure of the parking level (exclusive of any
entrance or exit) is less than four feet as measured from the
proposed or existing grade to the underside of the structure of
the floor above.
161. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-32.15 MADISON CODE § 195-32.15
191:844
(3) Minimum setbacks for all buildings:
(a) Setback along westerly property line: 100 feet.
(b) Perimeter setback (all other yards): 25 feet.
(c) Building separation: 25 feet minimum if both structures are
three stories or less; 35 feet if over three stories.
(d) Setback from Green Village Road: 175 feet.
(4) Setbacks for accessory buildings: 20 feet to any side or rear yard;
no accessory buildings allowed in any front yard.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
(6) Minimum number of buildings per tract or lot: two buildings
(exclusive of accessory structures).
(7) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(8) Maximum density: 20 units per base acre with the option for the
reviewing board to grant density/height bonuses based on the
following, provided that the applicant meets at least two of the
following standards:
(a) Incorporation of green building/design techniques to achieve
at least a LEED certified project under the LEED-ND Program
or provision of an engineered green roof occupying at least
50% of rooftop area or 6,000 square feet, whichever is greater:
bonus of 20% density over base density and 1/2 story of
additional height.
(b) Inclusion of an amenity or site design feature that clearly
benefits the public and/or the environment to an extent
reasonably related to the density incentive offered: up to 20%
bonus.
(c) Provision of all parking below grade: bonus of 20% of the base
density and 1/2 story of additional height.
(d) Maximum cumulative incentives shall not exceed 40% over the
base density nor shall additional heights exceed one story.
(9) Off-street parking shall be as set forth in the RSIS; however, the
Board should encourage a variance be requested from these
standards due to the location of any parcel within the zone relative
to available downtown parking resources and other opportunities
for shared parking.
F. Sub-Zone II. Principal permitted uses:
§ 195-32.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.15
191:845
(1) Permitted ground floor uses: retail sales and service, restaurants
(non-drive-through), boutique hotel, performing arts venue,
museum, theater, art galleries.
(a) Boutique hotel (the following definition to be placed in
§ 195-7): a facility offering transient lodging accommodations
to the general public with up to 100 rooms and which may
include additional facilities and services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
(2) In addition to the above, business, medical, administrative or
professional offices shall be permitted on the ground floor as part
of any rehabilitation/reuse of existing structures in place at time of
adoption of this section.
(3) Permitted upper floor uses: commercial, office, apartments, live/
work artist lofts, institutional/educational use not to exceed 15% of
gross floor area, performing arts venue, boutique hotel, museum,
theater, art galleries.
(a) Live/work loft (the following definition to be placed in § 195-7):
combined living/work spaces for visual arts, including artist
residences with studio space.
G. Sub-Zone II. Accessory uses: uses that are customarily incidental and
accessory to the principal use.
H. Sub-Zone II. Area, height, bulk and parking requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum and maximum height/stories:
(a) Maximum height: three stories/35 feet along Kings Road
measured from the top of curb to the highest part of the roof
surface.
(b) Based on incentives specified in § 195-32.15H(6), the
reviewing board may allow a partial or full fourth story (four
stories/45 feet as measured from the top of the curb of Kings
Road).
(c) Any story above the second story shall be set back an
additional eight feet from Kings Road.
(d) Enclosed, below grade parking levels shall not count as a story
if the exposure of the parking level at the street line (exclusive
of any entrance or exit to the parking) is less than four feet as
measured from the proposed or existing grade to the underside
of the structure of the floor above.
(e) Minimum height shall be two stories along the Kings Road
frontage.
§ 195-32.15 MADISON CODE § 195-32.15
191:846
(3) Minimum yards (setbacks):
(a) Minimum yards (setbacks) for all buildings shall conform to the
requirements of the CBD District.
(b) Building separation: 20 feet minimum if structures are three
stories or less; 30 feet if over three stories.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 85%.
(5) Minimum number of buildings per tract or lot: two buildings
(exclusive of accessory structures).
(6) Incentives/height bonus: The reviewing board may grant height
bonuses of up to one additional story of the building's footprint
based on the following standards:
(a) Incorporation of green building/design techniques to achieve
at least a LEED Silver-certified project or provision of an
engineered green roof occupying at least 50% of rooftop area
or 6,000 square feet, whichever is greater: bonus of 1/2 story
(i.e., a full story that occupies half of the building footprint) of
additional height.
(b) Provision of a public plaza (park) that is accessible via a
pedestrian path from Kings Road and encompasses at least
15,000 square feet: bonus of 1/2 story of additional height (i.e.,
a full story that occupies half of the building footprint).
(c) Provision of a community theater/performance space that
accommodates at least 150 people on the site: bonus of 1/2
story of additional height.
(d) Provision of at least 75% of the required parking below grade
and/or in a structure that is wrapped along public street
frontages with permitted ground floor uses: bonus of 1/2 story
of additional height.
(e) Maximum cumulative incentives shall not exceed one full story
with total building height of no more than four stories/50 feet
(and corresponding square footage for one additional story
based on the building's footprint).
(7) Off-street parking shall be as set forth in the RSIS for residential
uses; for nonresidential uses, the parking requirements of the CBD
shall apply; however, the Board should encourage a waiver be
requested from these standards due to the location of any parcel
within the zone relative to available downtown parking resources
and other opportunities for shared parking.
I. The Zoning Map is amended as follows:163
(1) GVRSU Zone I: Part of Block 3001, Lot 8. (See attached map.)
§ 195-32.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.15
191:847
(2) GVRSU Zone II: Block 3001, Lot 7 and the remainder of Lot 8. (See
attached map.).
J. Supplemental requirements and design standards for Sub-Zone I.
(1) Parking.
(a) At least 75% of the off-street parking shall be contained within
the principal structures. No parking garages shall be
permitted in the required front yard, nor face a public street.
No single-story accessory garages shall be permitted.
(b) Areas for bicycle storage shall be provided within all parking
garages or designated storage areas, as well as in any public
plaza or along the primary internal access drive serving the
site.
(2) Landscaping and fencing.
(a) A minimum twenty-five-foot landscaped buffer shall be
required along the western property line, and a ten-foot
planted buffer shall be required around the balance of the
perimeter of the site. All pervious areas in the required front
yard and/or between the building facade and the property line
or any internal circulation road shall be fully planted and
maintained in a combination of lawn area or ground cover with
a mix of native deciduous and evergreen shrubbery and trees.
The landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect and reviewed by the Madison Shade Tree
Management Board.
(b) Parking areas, solid waste storage areas, sheds and all other
accessory structures shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential zones, existing residential uses and public roads by
landscaping, fencing or a combination of these to create a
buffer of at least six feet in height. Landscaping shall contain a
mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings sufficient to screen
the view of vehicles in all seasons.
(c) No fences or gates across access drives shall be permitted.
Fencing along the perimeter of rear and side yards shall not
exceed six feet in height. No chain link fencing shall be
permitted.
(3) Vehicular access.
(a) Curb cuts, circulation and parking areas shall be located at
least 50 feet from the westerly property line and a minimum of
10 feet from all other property lines.
163. Editor's Note: See the Green Village Road Special Use District Map, included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 195-32.15 MADISON CODE § 195-32.15
191:848
(4) Building arrangement and design.
(a) When development consists of multiple structures, buildings
shall be oriented around open space, courtyard or similar
landscape amenity with the overall design preserving existing
trees, vegetation and grades to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The selection of building design elements, such as materials,
fenestration, color and texture, should be compatible with that
in the Borough and neighborhood. Clapboard siding, cedar
shingles, hardie plank, stone or brick shall be the primary
exterior material.
(c) Internal circulation should provide pedestrian access interior
to the site connecting through Sub-Zone II to Kings Road and
the CBD. Design of this pedestrian accessway should include
landscaping, street trees, pedestrian-scale street lights and
similar features appropriate to the zone's context.
(d) Site lighting should be harmonious with the building style and
design and shall use only downward-facing fixtures to minimize
spillage and glare. Lighting intensities shall be the minimum
required to adequately light the site and shall consider the
proximity and nature of adjoining uses. See also § 195-25.6 for
additional standards.
(e) All building facades shall be treated as front facades.
(f) All buildings are required to incorporate frequent vertical and
horizontal articulation through slight variations in build-to
lines along, incorporation of front entries and porches,
variations in roof pitch, careful selection of materials, the use
of windowed projections and similar architectural treatments
to improve the visual appearance of the buildings.
(g) Vertical articulations shall be provided at least every 30 feet
along all facades that exceed 60 feet in length or width.
(5) Development shall implement § 195-24, General design standards,
and § 195-25, Specific design standards, of the Borough Land
Development Ordinance.
(6) Affordable housing requirement: Provisions shall be made to meet
the required affordable housing obligation of at least 10% low and
moderate-income housing or as required by COAH/state statute
either on site, off site or through a payment in lieu addressed in a
developer's agreement.
(7) Applicants for development in the GVRSU Zone shall submit a
concept plan and an existing conditions survey with elevation/slope
information and existing vegetation both on site and within 50 feet
§ 195-32.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-32.15
191:849
of the property boundary for Planning Board review prior to
making a site plan application.
(8) Photo simulations shall be provided showing the massing, scale,
materials and finishes proposed for the project from various
viewpoints in context with surrounding properties. These
simulations shall be submitted at the time of the initial application
for site plan approval.
(9) All proposals for development in this zone shall be required to
prepare an environmental impact assessment in accordance with
§ 195-20F and a traffic impact statement in accordance with
§ 195-20G.
K. Supplemental requirements and design standards for Sub-Zone II.
(1) See guidelines for development in § 195-24.2E, entitled guidelines
for development in the GVRSU District, which shall apply to
development in Sub-Zone II.
(2) An area for bicycle storage shall be provided within all parking
garages or designated storage areas, as well as in any public plazas
and along the public street frontage.
(3) No fences or gates across access drives shall be permitted. Fencing
along the perimeter of rear and side yards shall not exceed six feet
in height. No chain-link fencing shall be permitted.
(4) Vehicular access is limited to two points of access along Kings Road
that minimize traffic conflicts.
(5) Internal circulation should provide pedestrian access interior to the
site connecting through Sub-Zone I. Design of this pedestrian
accessway should include landscaping, street trees, pedestrianscale
street lights and similar features appropriate to the zone's
context.
(6) Affordable housing requirement. Provisions shall be made to meet
the required affordable housing obligation of at least 10% low- and
moderate-income housing or as required by COAH/state statute
either on-site, off-site or through a payment in lieu addressed in a
developer's agreement.
(7) Applicants for development in the GVRSU Zone shall submit a
concept plan and an existing conditions survey with elevation/slope
information and existing vegetation both on site and within 50 feet
of the property boundary for Planning Board review prior to
making a site plan application.
(8) Photo simulations shall be provided showing the massing, scale,
materials and finishes proposed for the project from various
viewpoints in context with surrounding properties. These
§ 195-32.15 MADISON CODE § 195-32.15
191:850
§ 195-33. Conditional uses.
simulations shall be submitted at the time of the initial application
for site plan approval.
(9) All proposals for development in this zone shall be required to
prepare an environmental impact assessment in accordance with
§ 195-20F and a traffic impact statement in accordance with
§ 195-20G.
(10) A master signage plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan
review process, and signage requirements for the CBD-1 Zone shall
apply.
L. Standards related to site design and layout, including, but not limited
to, landscaping, stormwater management, lighting, parking, etc.,
outlined in other sections of Chapter 195, Land Development, shall
apply. In the event of inconsistencies between standards elsewhere in
Chapter 195 and in this section, the more restrictive standard shall
apply.
A. General. The Planning Board shall not approve a conditional use unless
it finds that the use meets all the requirements of this chapter, does not
substantially impair the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties
and does not substantially impair the character of the surrounding area
and does not have any adverse effect on surrounding properties.
B. Requirements for specific uses.
(1) Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses in all
residential zones and shall require site plan approval of the
Planning Board if the following standards are satisfied:
(a) The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the residence
in which the home occupation is contained.
(b) Said practitioner must reside in the home.
(c) Said practitioner shall not engage the services of more than
two office employees. Use of the office by groups of other
persons shall not be permitted.
(d) The home occupation shall not occupy more than 50% of the
total area of the floor where located, excluding space used for a
private garage or 900 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(e) No client shall, in such relationship, remain on the premises
overnight.
(f) Adequate parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the parking standards of this chapter so that no parking
related to the home occupation shall occur on the street.
§ 195-32.15 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:851
(g) The residential character of the neighborhood and the
premises shall not be subordinated to the home occupation
use.
(h) No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors, electrical
interference, medical waste or other nuisance factors
detectable to the normal senses or to radio, telephone or
television equipment off the lot.
(i) No retail sales shall be conducted on the site.
(2) Public garages; gasoline service stations. No building, structure or
premises shall be used as a public garage or gasoline service
station unless in conformance with the following conditions:
(a) Such use shall have a street frontage of at least 100 feet and an
average depth of at least 150 feet.
(b) The walls of any building or structure, other than gasoline or
oil filling devices, shall be set back at least seven feet from
every adjoining property line and at least 25 feet from any
street right-of-way line, unless the public garage or gasoline
service station abuts a residential zone, then the minimum side
or front yard setback for the residential zone shall apply.
(c) The entrance and exit driveway or driveways to and from any
public garage or gasoline service station shall be at least 18
feet wide but not more than 25 feet wide, located at least 10
feet from any adjoining property line and at least 20 feet from
the corner of any intersecting public streets. Driveways shall
be designed so that exiting vehicles do not have to back out
onto any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way.
(d) A curbed landscaped area, at least five feet wide, shall be
installed and maintained and shall extend across the front and
any other street line abutting the public sidewalk, and no sign
or other object or device shall be parked or placed thereupon.
A landscaped buffer of at least five feet shall be required along
all sides and property lines.
(e) All services or repairs to or for motor vehicles shall be
conducted within the confines of a building, except the sale
and supply of oil and gasoline and the filling of tires and
batteries and other services customarily incidental to the sale
of gasoline, oil and automobile supplies and accessories.
(f) In any public garage or gasoline service station, storage
facilities for gasoline, oil or other flammable materials in bulk
over 55 gallons shall be located wholly underground unless
otherwise required by law. No gasoline pump shall be located
or permitted within any enclosed or semi-enclosed building.
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:852
(g) Every gasoline or oil filling device shall be located at least 15
feet from any street right-of-way line. Side and rear line
setbacks of at least 10 feet are required when adjoining a
nonresidential use and at least 20 feet when adjoining a
residential use or zone.
(h) At any public garage or gasoline service station where motor
vehicles to be repaired will remain more than 24 hours, a solid
fence, at least six feet in height, made of a composition which
will effectively screen the property, shall be placed to
effectively screen views from the street.
(i) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
subsection, no motor vehicles or automobiles so in need of
repair as not to be readily operable under their own power or
which require substantial repair or which are not licensed or
which cannot reasonably be used for transportation shall be
permitted on any lot containing or used in connection with a
gasoline service station for more than 30 days from the date
when such motor vehicle was first parked, left standing or
otherwise placed upon said property.
(j) The following uses shall not be permitted as accessory uses
associated with a public garage or gasoline service station:
[1] Car washes.
[2] Convenience retail stores.
[3] Motor vehicles sales and display.
(k) Gas station sign requirements. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord.
No. 9-2013]
[1] Freestanding signs shall be limited to one sign with both
station identification and price information. Such sign
shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet, or a
maximum width of six feet, and shall have a minimum
setback of 10 feet for all new signs. The station
identification (brand) placard on the sign shall have a
maximum area of 16 square feet. In addition, the
freestanding sign shall also be permitted to contain up to
four price points for various grades of motor fuel based on
the following standards: a maximum of two square feet of
LED area allowed per price point for pricing and a
maximum of 4.25 square feet of non-LED sign area for
lettering corresponding to each grade of motor fuel
advertised.
[2] Wall signs: one nonilluminated building sign is permitted
per bay or entrance door with a maximum area of six
square feet per sign and no more than two total such signs.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:853
[3] Canopy signs: shall be limited to 20% of the facade area
with one sign permitted per facade and no more than two
canopy facades with such signage.
[4] LED gasoline price signs are prohibited in or adjacent to
any historic district.
[5] LED gasoline price signs located on lots adjacent to any
single-family or two-family residential district shall be
turned off after 10:00 p.m.
[6] LED gasoline price signs shall not blink, actively move,
flash, nor be combined with video and audio enhanced
components.
[7] LED gasoline price point signs shall be limited to no more
than two colors per establishment, in accordance with
industry standards, to distinguish between grades of
motor fuel.
[8] Gasoline station signage for all pricing and lettering shall
not exceed 12 inches in height.
[9] Any brightness or glare associated with LED gasoline price
point signs shall not impair the vision of drivers, nor
contribute to driver distraction, nor interfere with the
effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal.
[10]LED price point signs shall have a dimmer control a
photocell, capable of being dimmed in accordance with
ambient lighting conditions. Any "nit" levels that are
factory set for daytime and nighttime settings should be
the minimum levels required for visibility and clarity, and
to minimize glare, given site and ambient lighting
conditions.
[11] The difference between ambient lighting conditions with
and without any proposed LED signs shall not exceed 0.3
footcandle at night at a distance calculated by taking the
square root of the area of LED price points (in square feet)
times 100. All measurements taken to determine the
difference in illumination shall be taken perpendicular to
the face of the LED price points.
(3) Institutional uses or structures. Institutional uses, buildings and
structures, as defined in this chapter, exclusive of long-term care
facilities or vacant lands used for the purpose of such institutions,
may be located, when approved as conditional uses, in any zone
subject to the following:
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:854
(a) The property on which the structure or building is to be
constructed or the activities conducted must contain a
minimum of one acre.
(b) No building shall be closer than 50 feet to the side or rear line
of any adjacent property. These 50 feet shall be considered as a
buffer strip and shall be landscaped in accordance with the
standards set forth in this article.
(c) No building or structure shall be closer than 60 feet to any
front street property line nor less than 50 feet from any other
structure. Except as permitted in this article, no building or
structure shall be higher than 40 feet above the ground level.
(d) All buildings must be served by driveways to be approved as
part of the special exceptions as to size, curvature, grade and
surface to provide easy access for emergency vehicles, such as
police and fire equipment.
(e) No parking shall be permitted between the front building line
and the street right-of-way.
(4) Financial institutions with drive-up windows. No building,
structure or premises shall be used as a financial institution with
drive-up window facilities unless in conformance with the following
conditions:
(a) Such use shall be located on lots with street frontage of at least
100 feet.
(b) The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
(c) No transaction window or speaker system shall be located
closer than 50 feet to any property line of any residential use or
any residential zone line.
(d) Such use shall comply with the standards of Chapter 217,
Noise, of the Borough Code.
(e) Any transaction window or station shall be set back a minimum
of 25 feet from any property line.
(f) No drive-through window shall face any public right-of-way.
(5) Restaurants with drive-through windows. No building, structure or
premises shall be used as a restaurant with drive-through window
facilities unless in conformance with the following conditions:
[Amended 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 31-2014]
(a) Such use shall be located on lots with street frontage of at least
100 feet.
(b) The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:855
(c) No transaction window or speaker system shall be located
closer than 60 feet to any property line of any residential use or
any residential zone line.
(d) Such use shall comply with the standards of Chapter 217,
Noise, of the Borough Code.
(e) Any transaction window shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet
from any property line.
(f) No drive-through window shall face any public right-of-way,
nor shall any drive-through window be located within 50 feet of
the street right-of-way line from which vehicles using the drivethrough
window will enter or exit.
(g) There shall be no more than two one-way access driveways
serving the site. The minimum distance between the center
lines of such driveways shall be 125 feet. Driveways shall be
one-way.
(h) Internal circulation shall be such that stacked vehicles for the
drive-through window(s) shall not interfere with general
vehicular circulation and parking or pedestrian circulation on
the site. Drive-through window stacking lanes shall not be
located in parking aisles, nor shall they, in any manner,
interfere with vehicles entering or exiting the site or
pedestrian circulation.
(i) The perimeter of the site shall be fenced and/or landscaped in
a manner that will prevent litter from being blown across
property lines and to effectively screen adjacent
noncommercial properties on a year-round basis. Such
screening shall consist of both a board-on-board fence and
dense landscaping along any adjoining noncommercial
property lines.
(j) Trash receptacles of an attractive design, consistent with
Borough standards and without any advertising or branding,
shall be maintained around outdoor eating areas, along
pedestrian walkways and at points of egress from the site.
(k) Any outdoor eating areas shall be clearly delineated with
curbing, shall be attractively landscaped, and shall be so
located that patrons can walk directly from the building to the
eating area without crossing a driveway or parking lot.
Outdoor seats shall count toward the parking requirements for
the establishment.
(l) Odor reduction devices shall be employed to minimize the
effect of odor production from cooking and frying activities.
The applicant shall demonstrate that proposed techniques
shall keep the odors on site, to the maximum extent feasible.
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:856
(m) Signage shall be limited to one, noninternally illuminated
building sign not exceeding 30 square feet and one,
noninternally illuminated monument sign, not exceeding six
feet in height (including base plus sign area) and 20 square
feet in area.
(n) Site lighting shall be the minimum necessary to adequately
light the building, outdoor seating area and parking lot with a
fixture height (pole plus base) not exceeding 15 feet; only
downward-facing fixtures are permitted. Timers shall be
required to turn off all nonsecurity lighting after business
closing.
(o) There shall be no parking in the front yard setback on any front
yard. All front yards, with the exception of pedestrian access
and other improvements, shall be fully planted with a mix of
deciduous and coniferous trees, shrubs and ground cover.
(p) Any awning shall be canvas, with a maximum of six square feet
of signage area on awning valances.
(q) No drive-through or fast-food restaurant shall be located
within 500 feet of any elementary, middle, or high school.
(r) On any lot adjoining within 250 feet of a residential use or
district or within 250 feet of the Central Business District, the
primary building material shall be masonry (stone or brick),
wood, hardie plank, or some combination thereof.
(6) College housing. Housing for faculty and employees of Drew
University and their families and housing owned and/or operated
by the Madison Housing Authority in the U Zone shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The principal objective of all such housing shall be to provide
affordable housing accommodations to eligible occupants.
(b) The maximum number of housing units permitted under this
section shall be the existing 60 units to house the faculty and
employees of Drew University and their families, and not more
than the existing 12 housing units shall be permitted to be
owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing Authority.
(c) Permitted uses shall include single- and two-family detached
dwellings, attached dwellings and multifamily dwellings.
(d) Accessory uses shall include those uses customarily accessory
to a principal permitted use.
(e) Bulk standards.
[1] Maximum height.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:857
Type of Housing Stories Feet
Single- and two-family
detached housing
2 1/2 35
Multifamily 3 40
[2] Setback: 50 feet from tract boundary.
[3] Maximum floor area ration (FAR): 0.3.
[4] Minimum common open space: 30%.
[5] Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
[6] Minimum parking.
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Type of Unit
Number of Spaces
Required
Efficiency 1.0
One-bedroom 1.0
Two-bedroom 2.0
More than two-bedroom 2.0
(f) The bulk and sitting requirements set forth in the R-5 Zone for
multifamily shall apply to any multifamily housing in the U
Zone.
(g) Occupants of any housing to be owned and/or operated by the
Madison Housing Authority shall meet all applicable eligibility
standards for such housing. Occupants of all other housing
created under this section shall be faculty or employees or
Drew University and their families.
(h) All vehicular access shall be provided for in a manner
acceptable to Planning Board.
(i) Particular care shall be used in site location and site design to
minimize the impact of any proposed development on adjacent
land uses and any unique features of the University, including
special environmental features and/or any other unique
features of the University and, in that regard, adequate
setback, buffers and landscaping shall be provided. Particular
care shall be used in the site location and site design in order
to preserve any environmentally sensitive areas in the U Zone.
(j) The area(s) of the U Zone proposed for housing to be
constructed under this section shall be subdivided as a
separate parcel in accordance with the subdivision
requirements contained in this chapter. Housing proposed to
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:858
be owned and/or operated by the Madison Housing Authority
shall also be subdivided as a separate parcel.
(k) Single- and two-family detached housing built under this
section shall meet R-4 lot and setback requirements.
(7) Assisted-living residence (ALR). Assisted living residences may be
located in any zone subject to the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(d) The property shall have frontage on a secondary arterial road
or shall be located in an R-5 or R-6 Zone having frontage on a
secondary arterial or collector road, as defined in the Borough
Master Plan.
(e) Maximum height: 35 and 2 1/2 stories.
(f) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.3.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%.
(h) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard: 100 feet.
[2] Side and rear yards:
[a] From single-family residential zone and/or singlefamily
residence property line: 100 feet.
[b] From multifamily residential zone and/or multifamily
building property line: 50 feet.
[c] From nonresidential zone property line: 40 feet.
[3] A minimum of 50 feet of the setback area (except adjacent
to a nonresidential zone property line) shall be considered
a buffer strip. Buffers are fences, landscaping, berms and
mounds used to minimize any adverse impacts on the site
or from adjacent areas. Within said buffer zone, no
structure or off-street parking or loading area shall be
permitted except utility easements, fences and signs.
Driveways may only cross the buffer strip. Said buffer shall
be kept in its natural state where wooded and, when
natural vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, the Board may
require the applicant to supplement the existing
vegetation.
(i) No parking shall be permitted in any required front yard
setback area.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:859
(j) Minimum parking setbacks:
[1] From building: 10 feet.
[2] From single-family residential zone and/or single-family
residence property line: 50 feet.
[3] From multifamily residential zone and/or single-family
residence property line: 50 feet.
[4] From nonresidential zone property line: five feet.
(k) Maximum number of units: 75.
(l) Maximum number of occupants: 100.
(m) No accessory structures shall be permitted.
(n) Minimum gross floor area per unit:
[1] Single-occupant unit: 300 square feet.
[2] Double-occupant unit: 450 square feet.
(8) Continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
(a) The development shall include all of the following:
[1] Independent living units.
[2] Assisted-living residence units.
[3] Nursing units.
(b) The development shall include at least some level of each of the
following:
[1] Health-care facilities and services.
[2] Facilities and services for providing meals for residents
who will require residential health care and nursing care,
with or without common dining facilities.
[3] Physical therapy facilities and services.
[4] Meeting rooms.
[5] Recreation facilities.
[6] Health-care and physical therapy facilities may be in an
existing or new off-site location (subject to zoning
requirements), if the applicant shows adequate plans to
provide residents of the development with reasonable
access.
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:860
(c) The application for development shall include a statement
generally describing the health-care services, meal services for
residents who will require residential health care or nursing
care, and physical therapy services that will be provided. Such
statement may be, but is not required to be, the developer's
disclosure statement (or a portion of it) which is required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-336 (P.L. 1986, c. 103, § 7).
(d) It shall be a condition of final subdivision approval or final site
plan approval that residency in the CCRC shall be agerestricted
to persons at least 62 years of age, with or without a
spouse or other members of such person's housekeeping unit
in the event of the death of such resident. This condition shall
not be construed as requiring the CCRC to permit surviving
members below the age of 62 to remain in residence following
such death.
(e) Permissible accessory uses shall include houses of worship and
religious facilities, garages, sheds, fences, swimming pools,
recreational facilities designed for use by residents,
maintenance buildings, gatehouses, employee living quarters,
and retail and personal services restricted to residents, guests
and employees, and other uses customarily associated with
and ancillary to a CCRC, as long as such accessory uses are
subordinate to and serve only the conditional use.
(f) Area and setback requirements shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
[3] Minimum perimeter tract setback (buffered):
[a] For buildings: 100 feet.
[b] For parking: 75 feet, except adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way where setback may be reduced to 25 feet.
[4] Maximum impervious lot coverage: 40%.
[5] Maximum building coverage: 20%.
[6] Maximum building height: 35 feet, except that height may
be increased to a maximum of 40 feet, provided that for
each additional foot of building height above 35 feet, two
additional feet of setback shall be required from the
exterior tract buffer. Building height shall be measured
from the average finished grade level surrounding the
building measured five feet from the building wall to the
top of the roof.
(g) Maximum and minimum number of units.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:861
[1] The maximum number of independent living and assistedliving
residences shall be five units per acre.
[2] A minimum of four independent-living units shall be
provided for each nursing unit.
[3] Assisted-living residence units shall be counted as
independent-living units in meeting the 4 to 1 ratio
requirement above.
[4] The maximum number of detached single-family dwellings
shall not exceed 30% of the total permitted number of
independent-living units.
(h) Parking requirements. Sufficient off-street parking shall be
required to meet the needs of the residents, employees and
guests in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
[1] Independent-living units: 1.0 per dwelling unit.
[2] Assisted-living residences: one for every three occupants.
[3] Nursing beds: .3 per bed.
[4] Staff: one off-street parking space per full-time staff, plus
one for every two part-time staff, on the maximum shift.
[5] Visitors: an additional 10% above the total required
parking.
(i) Design standards for single-family detached housing.
[1] Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum yard requirements:
[a] Front: 25 feet.
[b] Side: five feet (one), 15 feet (both).
[c] Rear: 25 feet.
(j) Design standards for other structures.
[1] Minimum distance between residential buildings and other
buildings: 30 feet.
[2] Minimum distance between accessory buildings and
principal buildings: 10 feet.
[3] Minimum distance between parking areas and buildings:
10 feet.
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:862
(k) Buffering and screening. All CCRC's shall be landscaped and
buffered. A landscaped buffer not less than 25 feet shall be
planted or installed around the perimeter of the developed
area of any CCRC site.
(9) Long-term care facilities.
(a) Minimum tract size: 2.5 acres.
(b) Minimum tract width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum building setbacks.
[1] Front: 80 feet.
[2] Rear: 100 feet.
[3] Side: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum parking setback: five feet, but no parking shall be
allowed in the area, except required handicapped spaces
between the road and the facade of the building closest to the
road, except required handicapped spaces.
(e) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%.
(f) Perimeter screen buffers of 15 feet shall be installed.
(g) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(10)Wireless communications antennas. [Added 3-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 9-2002]
(a) Purposes. It is the overall purpose of this subsection to provide
specific zoning conditions and standards for the location and
operation of wireless communications antennas within the
Borough of Madison, to recognize the need to safeguard the
public good and preserve the intent and the purposes of the
Madison Borough Master Plan and Zone Plan.
(b) Overall objective. The overall objective of this subsection is to
enable the location within the Borough of Madison of those
antennas which are necessary to provide adequate wireless
communications services while, at the same time, limiting the
number of supporting towers to the fewest possible.
(c) Specific goals. The specific goals are to:
[1] Minimize the total number of wireless communications
towers within the Borough of Madison;
[2] Limit the impact of wireless communications antennas,
towers and related facilities upon the residences and the
streetscapes throughout the Borough of Madison;
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:863
[3] Safeguard the prevailing and historic character of
development throughout the Borough of Madison;
[4] Encourage the location of antennas upon, or within,
existing structures, including existing wireless
communications towers, existing buildings, existing water
towers or standpipes, and existing telephone and electric
poles and towers, especially those existing structures
situated on public property;
[5] Encourage as many antennas as possible, of as many of the
wireless communications carriers as possible, to be
collocated on the fewest number of existing structures
within the Borough of Madison;
[6] Discourage the construction of new towers which do not
have the likelihood of being used by a number of wireless
communications carriers;
[7] Encourage the communications carriers to configure their
facilities in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any
adverse impacts upon affected properties, streetscapes
and vistas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
[8] Formulate and maintain, for land use planning purposes, a
complete inventory of all wireless communications
antennas, towers and related facilities within the Borough
of Madison, and others in the vicinity of the Borough,
which are capable of providing service within the Borough;
[9] Enhance the ability of the carriers of wireless
communications services who adhere to the letter and
intent of this subsection to provide such services quickly,
effectively and efficiently; and
[10] Comply with the mandate of the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section 332
(c)(7), which preserves local government authority to
enforce zoning requirements which protect public safety,
public and private property and community aesthetics.
(d) Exemptions of applicability. These wireless communications
antennas provisions shall not apply to the following:
[1] This subsection shall not govern any tower, or the
installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height
and is owned and operated only by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively to
receive transmissions; and
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:864
[2] This subsection shall not govern any parabolic satellite
antennas.
(e) Overall Comprehensive Plan.
[1] In order to effectuate the purposes, objective and goals of
this subsection as noted hereinabove, any applicant to the
Borough of Madison for approval to erect a wireless
communications antenna, in addition to all other
information required by this subsection, shall provide
threshold evidence that the proposed location of the
proposed antenna(s), and any proposed supporting tower
and/or ancillary cabinets enclosing related electronic
equipment, has been planned to result in the fewest
number of tower locations within the Borough of Madison
at the time full service is provided by the applicant
throughout the Borough. Therefore, the applicant shall
provide an overall comprehensive plan indicating how it
intends to provide full service throughout the Borough of
Madison and, to the greatest extent reasonably possible,
shall indicate how its plan specifically relates to and is
coordinated with the needs of all other providers of
wireless communications services within and around the
Borough.
[2] More specifically, the overall comprehensive plan shall
indicate the following:
[a] The mapped location and written description of all
existing antennas and existing and approved
supporting structures within the Borough;
[b] The mapped or GIS database location and written
description of all existing or approved water towers or
water standpipes and existing telephone or electric
poles or towers within the Borough;
[c] How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the suitability or unsuitability of
such existing structures to be utilized to provide the
intended wireless communication;
[d] How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the anticipated need for
additional antennas and supporting structures within
and near the Borough of Madison by the applicant and
by other providers of wireless communications
services within the Borough;
[e] How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the objective of collocating the
antennas of many different providers of wireless
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:865
communications services on a single supporting
structure; and
[f] How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the overall objective of providing
full wireless communications services within the
Borough of Madison while, at the same time, limiting
the number of towers to the fewest possible, including
alternate technologies which do not require the use of
towers.
(f) Location priorities. [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
[1] Based upon the overall comprehensive plan submitted by
the applicant in accordance with § 195-33B(10)(e)
hereinabove, if the Borough of Madison determines the
proposed antenna(s) to be needed for the provision of full
wireless communication services within the Borough,
utilizing the fewest number of towers as reasonably
possible, wireless communication antennas shall be
permitted within the Borough at the following prioritized
locations:
[a] The first priority location shall be an existing or
municipally approved wireless communication tower
in any zone, or an existing telephone or electric pole
or tower in the nonresidential zones listed in
§ 195-33B(10)(f)[1][b] hereof.
[b] The second priority location shall be on lands situated
within the Borough of Madison zoned within the
CBD-1, CBD-2, CC, U, OSGU or OR Zoning Districts;
or on lands within the Borough of Madison situated in
any zoning district, which land contains an existing
utility facility with an aboveground structure that
contains one or more existing ground buildings.
[2] Notwithstanding any provision of this Land Development
Ordinance to the contrary, the location of antenna(s) on an
existing municipally approved structure shall not require a
use variance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.(1) of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
(g) Area and setback requirements.
[1] If the proposed antenna(s) will be attached to an existing
or approved tower, an existing building, an existing or
approved water tower or water standpipe, or an existing
telephone or electric pole or tower, no land area shall be
required in addition to the land area upon which the
existing structure is situated; or
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:866
[2] If the proposed antenna(s) will be supported by a new
tower and will be situated on lands owned by the Borough
of Madison, the land area required shall be as approved by
the Borough Council in consideration of existing site
conditions and surrounding land uses, and shall be subject
to a written lease agreement between the applicant and
the Borough of Madison; or
[3] If the proposed antenna(s) will be supported by a new
tower and will be situated on lands within the Borough of
Madison not owned by the municipality, the following
minimum area and setback requirements shall be met:
[a] The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting
tower and ancillary related electronic equipment shall
be located on a land area equal to in size or larger
than the minimum lot area specified in Schedule I of
this chapter164 for the applicable zoning district;
[b] The minimum required land area pursuant Subsection
B(10)(g)[3][a] hereinabove shall either be a separate
undeveloped lot or a leased portion of an already
developed lot;
[c] The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting
tower and ancillary related electronic equipment, and
any approved building housing the electronic
equipment and any approved camouflaging of the
tower, shall be the only land uses located on the
subject land area, whether a separate lot or a leased
portion of a lot; and
[d] Except for any access driveway into the property, any
required landscaping and any underground utility
lines reviewed and approved by the Planning Board as
part of the site plan submission, no building, structure
and/or disturbance of land shall be permitted within a
one-hundred-foot setback distance from any street
line, from any other existing or proposed property
line, and provided that if a tower will exceed 100 feet
in height, the tower shall be set back from any street
line and from any other existing or proposed property
line a distance equal to or greater than the height of
the tower.
(h) Maximum height. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
subsection to the contrary, the following height restrictions
shall apply for any wireless antenna and/or any new supporting
tower:
164. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:867
[1] The height of any proposed antenna extending above any
existing tower, any existing building or above any existing
or proposed water tower or water standpipe shall be
demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board or the Borough Council, as the case may
be, to be the minimum height necessary for the proposed
installation to satisfactorily operate; and
[2] The height of any proposed new supporting tower shall not
exceed 120 feet above ground level unless it can be
demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board or the Borough Council, as the case may
be, that a greater height is necessary for the proposed
installation of the antenna(s) to satisfactorily operate and
for the collocation of at least three other carriers on the
tower.
(i) Design details.
[1] Any proposed new tower shall be a monopole, unless the
applicant can demonstrate, and the Planning Board
agrees, that a different type of pole is necessary for the
collocation of additional antennas on the tower.
[2] To the greatest extent possible, no antenna and/or its
supportive tower shall be located to be visible from any
historic district or site as duly designated by Madison
Borough, the State of New Jersey or by the federal
government.
[3] To the greatest extent possible, no new tower shall be
located to be visible from any public street.
[4] To the greatest extent possible, all cables shall be installed
within underground conduits.
[5] Any new tower shall be located behind existing buildings
and/or natural topographic elevations in order to screen
the tower's base from being visible from adjacent
properties and from any street right-of-way.
[6] The color and any camouflaging of a proposed tower shall
be proposed by the applicant in the context of the visibility
of the tower from different vantage points throughout the
Borough, and the existing land uses and vegetation in the
vicinity of the subject site.
[7] No antenna shall be located on any tower in order to
provide to service provider personnel the equivalent of
wireline telephone service; such service shall be provided
via existing telephone lines if available to the site, or by
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:868
the underground extension of telephone lines to the site if
necessary.
[8] No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that
specifically is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), and any such required lighting shall
be focused and shielded to the greatest extent possible so
as not to project towards adjacent and nearby properties.
The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board all
applicable FAA standards regarding lighting that may
apply to a proposed tower.
[9] Individual cabinets for the required electronic equipment
related to the wireless communications antenna(s) shall be
permitted in accordance with the following design criteria:
[a] Any proposed cabinet or combination of cabinets
enclosing required electronic equipment shall not be
more than 12 feet in height nor more than 250 square
feet in area, and only one such area for the cabinet(s)
shall be permitted for each provider of wireless
communications services located on the site;
[b] No electronic equipment shall interfere with any
public safety communications;
[c] All of the electronic equipment shall be monitored and
configured so that, to the greatest extent possible, the
need for on-site maintenance and the commensurate
need for vehicular trips to and from the site will be
minimized;
[d] All the required electronic equipment for all
anticipated communications carriers to be located on
the subject site shall be housed within a one-and-onehalf-
story building, which building shall not exceed
250 square feet per service provider in area and shall
not exceed 1,250 square feet in gross area for the
entire building and 20 feet in height, and which shall
be designed with a single-ridge, pitched roof with a
residential or office character of appearance; and
[e] The building may have one light per service provider
at the entrance to the building, provided that the light
is attached to the building, is focused downward and
is switched so that the light is turned on only when
workers are at the building. The building may have a
separate entrance for each service provider.
[10]No signage is permitted, unless "warning" and/or
equipment information signs are deemed necessary for
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:869
safety purposes and are specifically approved by the
Planning Board.
[11] Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed
and as specifically approved by the Planning Board.
[12] Between the location of the tower and the building
enclosing related electronic equipment and any public
street or residential dwelling unit or residential zoning
district within view of the tower and the building,
landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
[a] The landscaping shall consist of a combination of
existing and/or newly planted evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs of sufficient density to
screen the view of the tower, particularly at its base,
to the maximum extent reasonably possible, and to
enhance the appearance of the building from the
surrounding residential properties and any public
street;
[b] The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect who shall present testimony to the
Planning Board regarding the adequacy of the plan to
completely screen the tower from view and to enhance
the appearance of the building; and
[c] Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least
eight feet high at time of planting, and any newly
planted deciduous trees shall be a minimum caliper of
two inches at time of planting.
(j) Site plan submission and approval requirements.
[1] The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board or the
Borough Council, as the case may be, a specific written
addressment of each of the design details enumerated in
§ 195-33 B(10)(i) hereinabove.
[2] Wireless communications antennas, and any proposed
supporting tower and related electronic equipment, shall
require preliminary major site plan approval in accordance
with the requirements specified in § 195-22 of this chapter
and final major site plan approval in accordance with the
requirements specified in § 195-22.1 of this chapter.
[3] In addition to the applicable documentation and items of
information required for preliminary and final major site
plans specified in this chapter, the following additional
documentation and items of information specific to
wireless communications antennas are required to be
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:870
submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval
as part of the submission of the preliminary site plan
application:
[a] Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing
structure proposed for the location of the antenna will
have sufficient structural integrity to support the
proposed antennas, and that the safety hazards
resulting from ice falling from the structure and the
antennas have been adequately mitigated;
[b] Documentation by a qualified expert that any
proposed tower will have sufficient structural integrity
to support the proposed antennas and the anticipated
future collocated antennas and that the structural
standards developed for antennas by the Electronic
Industries Association (EIA) and/or the
Telecommunication Industry Association (TIA) have
been met;
[c] A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is
reviewed and approved by the Borough Attorney,
indicating that the applicant will share the use of any
tower with other approved wireless communications
service providers at reasonable rates which shall be
economically viable; and
[d] A visual sight distance analysis, including
photographic reproductions of a crane or balloon test,
graphically simulating the appearance of any
proposed tower, with at least three antenna arrays
attached thereto, from at least 15 locations around
and within one mile of any proposed tower where the
tower will be most visible. The applicant shall
schedule the time of the crane or balloon test with the
Borough Engineer in order to provide the members of
the Planning Board and the general public the
opportunity to view the crane or balloon.
[e] Evidence from an independent expert that all
equipment will comply with the then-current Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and
regulations, including that radio frequency (RF)
emissions will be within the FCC guidelines. Any
approval shall contain a condition that the applicant
shall provide a further report to the Borough Engineer
from an independent expert that the RF emissions are
within the FCC guidelines within 90 days after
installation is complete and that, upon any change in
FCC guidelines or regulations governing same, the
applicant shall within 120 days of such change provide
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-33
191:871
a report to the Borough Engineer from an independent
expert that the RF emissions are within the revised
FCC guidelines or regulations.
[4] In addition to its normal professional staff, given the
technical and specialized nature of the testimony by the
applicant's radio frequency expert(s), the Planning Board
shall hire its own radio frequency expert to review and
comment upon the testimony presented by the applicant.
Additionally, based upon other testimony presented by the
applicant, the Planning Board may hire other experts with
specialized areas of expertise if deemed necessary.
(k) Restoration provisions. Except for proposals to locate antennas
on lands owned by Madison Borough, the applicant (and the
landowner in the instance of a leased property) shall provide a
performance bond and/or other assurances satisfactory to the
Planning Board and in a form approved by the Borough
Attorney that will cause the antennas, any supporting tower,
the electric equipment cabinets, any building enclosing the
electronic equipment cabinets, and all other related
improvements to the land to be removed, at no cost to the
Borough, when the antennas are no longer operative. Any
wireless communications antenna facility not used for its
intended and approved purpose for a period of six months shall
be considered no longer operative and shall be removed by the
responsible party within 60 days thereof.
(l) Other requirements. All other applicable requirements of this
Land Development Ordinance not contrary to the specific
conditions and standards specified herein shall be met, but
waivers and/or variances of such other applicable
requirements of this chapter may be granted by the Planning
Board. Additionally, based upon the site-specific information
presented by the applicant during site plan review, the
Planning Board may grant deviations from the literal
requirements for wireless communications antennas specified
in Subsection B(10)(g), (h) and (i) of this subsection
hereinabove, provided that the purposes, overall objective and
specific goals, respectively specified in Subsection B(1)(a), (b)
and (c) of this subsection, are advanced by the deviations.
(11) Outdoor dining: [Added 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
(a) Outdoor dining refers only to the service of food and
beverages, consistent with the definition of restaurant, but
extended to include privately owned outdoor property on
which a restaurant operates as the principal permitted use;
outdoor dining on any public sidewalk or right-of-way shall
continue to be governed by Borough Ordinance § 166-43 and
associated permit requirements;
§ 195-33 MADISON CODE § 195-33
191:872
§ 195-34. Signs.
(b) Outdoor dining does not include an outdoor bar or any other
similar outdoor accessory use that serves only beverages, nor
does it include any drive-through or take-out windows;
(c) Public access shall be provided from within the principal
restaurant use with a secondary means of emergency egress in
accordance with applicable New Jersey building codes;
(d) Outdoor dining areas shall be designed in accordance with
barrier-free requirements;
(e) The calculation of off-street parking requirements shall include
outdoor seating occupancy;
(f) The approval of any application for outdoor dining shall not be
construed as approval by the Borough Council for extension
and/or renewal of any license under ABC jurisdiction; such
extensions and/or renewals shall only be granted by the
Borough Council;
(g) All outdoor dining areas shall be clearly delineated by a solid
decorative fence, wall or other structure at least 4.5 feet in
height but no more than six feet in height;
(h) Hours of operation of outdoor dining areas shall not extend
later than 10:00 p.m.;
(i) All outdoor lighting shall be downward facing and shall be
turned off by 10:30 p.m.;
(j) No amplified music shall be permitted in outdoor dining areas;
(k) No outdoor dining area that serves alcoholic beverages shall
be located within 200 feet of a school or public park;
(l) No outdoor dining area shall obstruct pedestrian access
serving one or more stores or businesses in addition to the
property on which outdoor dining is proposed.
(m) There shall be no outdoor dining at any restaurant located in
any nonresidential zone, including CBD-1, CBD-2 and CC
Zones, that is located within 200 feet of any residential zone.
The distance shall be measured from any property line of the
restaurant to the closest residential zone line. [Added
9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 45-2010]
A. Sign permit exemptions. Exemptions shall not be construed as relieving
the owner of such signs from the responsibility of complying with
applicable provisions of this chapter. The exemption shall apply to the
requirement for a sign permit only. No sign permits shall be required
for the following signs:
§ 195-33 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-34
191:873
(1) Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, county or local law, regulation or ordinance.
(2) Any sign which is inside a building, not attached to a window or
door, and is not readable from a distance of more than three feet
beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel nearest to where such sign is
located.
(3) Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message,
excluding holiday inflatable decorations, which shall require
permission of the Borough Council.
(4) Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date of
construction and/or other incidental information about its
construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of
bronze or similar permanent material, including historic tablets,
cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems which do not exceed
four square feet in area from a single viewpoint.
(5) Traffic control signs on private property, the face of which meets
the Department of Transportation standard, and which contain no
commercial message of any sort.
(6) Flags of the United States, New Jersey, the Borough of Madison,
foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States,
other flags adopted or sanctioned by an elective legislative body of
competent jurisdiction and flags flown in conjunction with the flag
of the United States, provided that such a flag does not exceed 60
square feet in area and is not flown from a pole in excess of 40 feet
in height. A flag's area shall be in reasonable proportion to the
length of the pole from which it is displayed. Not more than three
flags may be flown from any one pole. The statutory requirements
associated with flags and generally accepted standards of flag
display etiquette shall be observed.
(7) Signs in the University Zone that are more than 100 feet from the
external boundary of a lot.
(8) Signs or banners advertising public or quasi-public events that are
posted with the permission of the Borough Council or of any person
to whom the Borough Council has delegated this authority
according to guidelines set by the Borough Council.
(9) Pump-mounted fuel price informational signs subject to the
following:
(a) Only one fuel price informational sign shall be permitted per
fuel pump.
(b) Fuel price informational signs shall be limited in size to an area
of 216 square inches in accordance with state and federal
regulations.
§ 195-34 MADISON CODE § 195-34
191:874
(c) Each fuel price informational sign shall be affixed directly and
firmly to a fuel pump and shall be stationary.
(d) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the
advertisement of fuel prices on any other sign meeting the
requirements of this section.
(10)U.S. Postal regulation mailboxes.
B. Permit procedure.
(1) No sign except those exempted by Subsection A above shall be
placed, constructed, or erected or modified unless a sign permit
shall have been obtained from the Zoning Officer and, where
required by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, a building
permit shall have been obtained from the Construction Official and,
in the case of a commercial use, be referred to and reviewed the
Sign and Facade Committee of the Downtown Development
Commission and, if in the Historic District, be referred to and
reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission. Signs which
are not specifically allowed by this subsection shall be prohibited.
(2) Master Signage Plan.
(a) A Master Signage Plan shall accompany:
[1] Any application for a sign permit; or
[2] Any application for development filed with the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment which involves
installation or modification of any sign.
(b) The Master Signage Plan shall contain the following
information for each existing and proposed sign:
[1] Size (i.e., length, height, area, thickness, number of faces).
[2] Letter style and size.
[3] Illumination.
[4] Colors (i.e., letter, background, trim), including PMS color
samples.
[5] Construction materials, structural integrity and
installation details.
[6] Window size (if applicable).
[7] Location (i.e., height above grade, distance from roofline,
building width, location from sides).
[8] Enumeration of relevant requirements with proposed
conditions (see Subsection I.)
§ 195-34 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-34
191:875
(c) The Master Signage Plan graphically depicting the sign shall
be prepared by the applicant or a sign professional. The Master
Sign Plan application shall include a sketch or photograph
showing the dimensions of each facade, window and canopy of
the building to which a sign is to be attached, in sufficient
detail to clearly indicate the location, dimension and area of all
existing and proposed permanent signs affixed to the walls,
windows and canopies of the building. These dimensions shall
either be shown on the sketch or photograph or on an attached
table. Samples of construction materials shall be submitted.
(d) In the case of a freestanding sign, a plot plan of the lot shall be
required as part of the Master Signage Plan, showing the
location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, landscaped
areas and all other existing and proposed signs.
(e) Whenever a Master Signage Plan is filed with the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, a plot plan as
described in this section shall be required for all applications,
and all plans and drawings which comprise a part of the
Master Signage Plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect,
engineer and/or land surveyor, as appropriate.
(f) The applicant shall provide any additional information which
may be deemed necessary to determine whether the signage
plan complies with the purpose of the sign regulations.
(3) When installation or modification of a sign has been approved by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as part of a
development application, the Construction Official shall issue a
sign permit only if the proposed sign is consistent with the
reviewing board's approval.
(4) Site plan approval.
(a) Any application for a sign permit requires site plan approval by
the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment unless
the requirement is waived by the Zoning Officer pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. When an application for a sign
permit is received by the Zoning Officer for a development that
consists solely of the erection or modification of signs for an
existing use, he shall:
[1] In the case of a commercial use, refer the Master Signage
Plan within three days to the Sign and Facade Committee
of the Downtown Development Commission for review and
recommendation.
[2] If located in the Historic District, refer the Master Signage
Plan within three days to the Historic Preservation
Commission, which shall review and make
recommendations before a permit is issued.
§ 195-34 MADISON CODE § 195-34
191:876
(b) The Zoning Officer may waive the requirement for site plan
approval only if he finds that the proposed sign meet the
requirements of this section and, in the case of any sign for a
commercial use, if the Sign and Facade Committee of the
Downtown Development Commission or the Historic
Preservation Commission finds that the signage plan meets all
requirements of the sign regulations. The Zoning Officer shall
refer the signage plan to the Sign and Facade Committee
within three days of receipt. The Zoning Officer and the Sign
and Facade Committee shall review the Master Signage Plan
and make recommendations within 10 days. If a request for
waiver of site plan is denied by the Zoning Officer, the
applicant may apply for waiver of site plan or for site plan
approval from the Board having jurisdiction. In any case, if
located in the Historic District, the Zoning Officer shall refer
the signage plan to the Historic District, the Zoning Officer
shall refer the signage plan to the Historic Preservation
Commission, which shall review within 10 days and make
recommendations before a permit is issued.
(5) The Sign and Facade Committee of the Downtown Development
Commission, in reviewing applications for a sign permit, pursuant
to Subsection B(4)(a), shall advise the Zoning Officer whether the
Master Signage Plan, including the plans for the individual signs, is
based on an integrated design, including all the elements listed in
Subsection B(2)(b)[1] through [8] above, and whether the above
elements are designed to be in harmony and are consistent with
each other, the architecture and materials of the principal
structure and the landscaping plan. The Committee may
recommend that a waiver will better promote the purposes of this
section.
(6) Whenever acting on a development application for commercial uses
where installation or modification by any sign is proposed, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall refer the application to the Sign and Facade Committee of the
Downtown Development Commission for review and
recommendation prior to approving or denying any application for
preliminary approval. If located in the Historic District, the
application shall also be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for review and recommendation. Upon receipt of any
development application for commercial use which proposes the
installation or modification of any sign, the Secretary of the Board
hearing the application shall forward one complete copy of the
application to the Sign and Facade Committee and, when
appropriate, to the Historic Preservation Commission. The Sign
and Facade Committee and, when appropriate, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall review the applicant's Master
Signage Plan and submit recommendations to the reviewing board
within 15 days after receipt of a copy of the application.
§ 195-34 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-34
191:877
C. Measurement of sign area.
(1) Measurement of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only
one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, graphic illustration,
picture, symbol or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the sign and used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or
decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning regulations and is clearly incidental to the sign itself. No
sign shall have more than two display faces. The sign area for a
sign with two faces shall be computed by adding together the area
of all sign faces visible from any one point. When a sign having two
faces is such that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the
same time, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of
the larger of the two faces. For purposes of calculating window
signs, a window shall be considered the glazed area. Signs which
are required by county, state or federal agencies are exempt from
calculation of permanent and temporary signage up to the
minimum size required by such agencies. The area of the sign in
excess of the minimum shall be subject to the sign calculation. In
the event that no size requirement is imposed by such agency, the
sign shall not exceed one square foot. Neon signs and internally
illuminated signs shall be subject to modified area computations
specified elsewhere in this chapter. [Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 8-2004]
(2) Measurement of height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade
to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to
construction or the newly established grade after construction,
exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavation solely for
the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade
cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on
the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of
the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown
of a public road or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to
the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.
D. General regulations.
(1) Signs shall be in harmony and consistent with the architecture of
the building and relate to the features of the building in terms of
location, scale, color, lettering, materials, texture and depth. Signs
shall not be dominant but shall be proportionate and shall
complement the building, existing signs and surroundings.
§ 195-34 MADISON CODE § 195-34
191:878
(2) There shall be consistent sign design throughout a particular
project. The design elements include style of lettering, construction
material, size and illumination.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be integrated with the landscaping on site.
(4) Building signs shall not obscure, conflict with or cover any
architectural element and must be aligned with major building
elements such as windows, trim and structure lines.
(5) No sign shall extend or project above the highest elevation of the
wall to which it is attached or above the lowest part of the roofline
of the building, whichever is less.
(6) No electric wiring associated with a sign shall be visible to public
view.
(7) Illuminated signs.
(a) Internally illuminated signs shall have characters, letters,
figures and designs which are illuminated by electric lights as
part of the sign proper with dark or translucent background.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 8-2004]
(b) Signs lit by external sources shall be allowed but shall be
located in such a manner so as to avoid any glare on adjacent
property. Sources of sign illumination shall be completely
shielded from the view of vehicular traffic using the road or
roads abutting the lot on which the sign is located.
(c) External lights used for the illumination of any sign on a
building, whether or not such light fixtures are attached to or
separate from the building, shall not extend above the highest
elevation of the front wall of the building or more than 18 feet
above the street level of the premises, whichever is less.
(d) The sign area measurement for neon building signs shall be
calculated as 2.0 times the actual measured area. [Amended
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 8-2004]
(8) One flag per business premises displaying only a generic logo or
design shall be allowed. Such flag shall be no larger than three by
five feet, and it must be hung from the ground floor facade at least
10 feet above ground level, and it shall project no more than three
feet from the building facade.
E. Prohibited signs.
(1) No off-site advertising sign shall be erected, used or maintained
with the Borough of Madison; provided, however, that this
regulation shall not apply to temporary signs, otherwise permitted
by this subsection, that advertise special events sponsored by
§ 195-34 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-34
191:879
nonprofit social, religious, political or cultural organizations or
institutions, or lawful sandwich boards.
(2) No signs shall be placed on fences, utility poles, trees, railway or
road bridges, bridge supports or abutments, retaining walls, or
water towers unless approved by the Borough Council.
(3) No roof sign, known also as a "sky sign," shall be allowed.
(4) No sign shall be placed on an accessory building.
(5) No sign shall be lighted by means of a flashing light, nor shall any
sign be in whole or in part moving, mobile, revolving, electrically or
mechanically activated, or give the illusion of movement.
[Amended 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
(6) No sign shall be allowed with optical illusion of movement by
means of a design which presents a pattern capable of reverse
perspective, giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy.
(7) No commercial sign shall be allowed in a window which serves a
residential use.
(8) No signs shall be allowed on any street furniture.
(9) No televised advertising in a window shall be allowed.
(10) The use and display of temporary portable signs or windsocks,
banners or strings or streamers of flags, pennants or spinners or
similar objects and devices across, upon, over or along any
premises or building, whether as part of any sign or for advertising
or public attraction, or otherwise, is prohibited in any zone, except
for:
(a) Temporary displays in business or commercial zones as
provided in this section.
(b) Temporary decorations customarily used for holidays, or for
special events as may be approved by the Borough Council.
(11)No signs shall be allowed that are placed on or affixed to vehicles
and/or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way, public
property or private property so as to be visible from a public rightof-
way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product,
service or activity or direct people to a business or activity located
on the same or nearby property. This is not intended, however, to
prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles or trailers where the
sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
(12)No sign shall be allowed which obstructs any window or door
opening used as a means of egress, interferes with an opening
required for legal ventilation, or is attached to or obstructs any
standpipe, fire escape or fire hydrant.
§ 195-34 MADISON CODE § 195-34
191:880
(13)No sign shall be allowed which obstructs the view of vehicle
operators or pedestrians entering a public roadway from any
parking area, service drive, public driveway, alley or other
thoroughfare.
(14)No trademarks or brand names on any sign (including umbrella
signs) shall be allowed when the commodity is not available in the
establishment.
(15)No sign element shall be interpreted as part of the architectural
element of the building, with the exception of a marquee of a
functioning theater.
(16)No inflatable signs and tethered balloons shall be allowed, except
decorative small balloons.
(17)No neon or gas-filled decorations which outline facade elements or
windows are allowed, with the exception of a marquee of a
functioning theater.
(18)No temporary signs shall be allowed except as detailed in
Subsection E(1).
(19)LED (light-emitting diode) signs are prohibited with the exception
of those standards provided in § 195-33B(2)(k) that apply to gas
stations; however, the use of LED technology as an indirect light
source for signs is permitted, provided the LED source is not visible
or used to comprise any part of the sign lettering, logo or external
display face. [Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011; amended
4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 9-2013]
F. Nonconforming signs.
(1) No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which
would increase its nonconformity. Existing nonconforming
permanent signs may continue to exist; however, when the sign is
modified either in shape, size, illumination or structure, the sign
shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this section.
Notwithstanding the above, all sandwich boards must receive a
permit.
(2) Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an
extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of damage,
it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this section.
G. Removal of certain signs.
(1) In the event a business ceases operation for a period of time in
excess of 60 days, the sign owner or lessee, or the property owner,
shall immediately remove any sign identifying or advertising said
business or any product sold thereby. Upon failure of the sign
owner or lessee, or property owner to comply with this section, the
§ 195-34 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-34
191:881
§ 195-35. Off-street parking.
Zoning Officer shall issue a written notice to the sign owner or any
lessee and to the property owner, which notice shall state that such
sign shall be removed with the following time period:
(a) Signface: 60 days.
(b) Posts, columns and supporting structures: one year.
(2) If the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, fails to comply with
such written notice to remove, the Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expenses
incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien
upon the property. For the purpose of this section, the word
"remove" shall mean:
(a) The sign face, along with posts, columns or supports or
freestanding signs, shall be taken down and removed from the
property.
(b) The sign face and supporting structures of projecting, roof or
wall signs shall be taken down and removed from the property.
H. Sign permit revocable. All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto are revocable at
any time by the Office of Code Enforcement if the applicant fails to
accurately depict the sign erected or to be erected or if the sign which
is erected fails to meet the details or the detailed drawing submitted by
the applicant. All such permits shall contain this provision.
I. The following signs and the standards and conditions that govern such
signs are set forth in the Sign Matrix at the end of this chapter. All other
signs are expressly prohibited.
A. Minimum required off-street parking schedule for nonresidential uses.
The number of off-street parking spaces required for any nonresidential
use shall be determined by reference to Parking Schedule 1 below.
These standards do not apply to the PCD-O District.
(1) Unscheduled uses. Off-street parking requirements for uses not
listed in Parking Schedule I shall be established by the Board,
based upon accepted industry standards.
(2) Combined uses. In the case of a combination of uses, the off-street
parking requirement shall consist of the sum of the spaces required
for each individual use unless it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the approving authority that staggered hours of
parking usage would permit modification of the total parking
required due to shared parking principles and that adequate
restrictions on the nature of the uses are imposed which would
§ 195-34 MADISON CODE § 195-35
191:882
assure the continuance of reduced parking demands. [Amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
(3) Fractional spaces. Whenever the application of Parking Schedule I
standards results in the requirements of a major fraction of a space
in excess of 50%, a full space shall be required.
Parking Schedule I
Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use Required Parking Spaces
Automotive showroom/sales lot 1 per 300 square feet of showroom and
sales office space
Bar, nightclub 1 per 3 occupants at capacity
Bowling establishment 2 per lane
Car wash 3 per washing lane
Financial institution 1 for each 200 square feet of building
area or 5 spaces per teller, whichever is
greater
Funeral home, mortuary 10 for each viewing room (minimum 30
spaces)
Garden center 1 per each 1,500 square feet of property
area
Gasoline service station or repair
garage
3 for each bay, plus 1 for each service
vehicle
Golf course 4 per hole
Home occupation 1 per employee
Hotel 1 per room, plus 1 for each 1,000
square feet of conference or similar
space
Indoor recreation, including roller
rink, ice rink, recreation center
and sports club
4.5 for each 1,000 square feet of
building area
Laboratory, research use 1 for each 300 square feet of net
building area
Long-term care facility .3 per bed, plus one per full-time staff,
plus one for every 2 part-time staff on
the maximum shift
Office, dental or medical 4 for each doctor, plus 1 per 250 square
feet of building area
Office, other 4 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Outdoor recreation:
§ 195-35 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-35
191:883
Parking Schedule I
Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use Required Parking Spaces
Court games 4 per court 1 per 150 square feet of
assemblage space
Other
Places of worship, community
buildings, social halls and places
of indoor public assembly
1 for each 3 seats. Where the specific
amount of seating is undetermined,
then 1 parking space shall be required
for each 75 square feet of assemblage
area.
Restaurant (including sit-down
and take-out), catering hall,
delica- tessen, sandwich shop,
coffee shop and similar food
service establish- ments
[Amended 6-13- 2005 by Ord.
No. 22-2005]
1 for each 2.5 seats or 1 for each 180
square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
Retail uses not separately listed165
[Amended 6-13- 2005 by Ord.
No. 22-2005]
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Educational facility:
Elementary and intermediate
school1 per employee
Secondary school 1 per employee, plus 1 per each 5
students in Grades 11 and 12
Post-secondary and other
educational facility
2 per each 3 full-time students and 1 for
each 5 part-time students
Theater 1 for each 3 seats
NOTES:
1 (Reserved)166
2 When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared parking
approach to the provision of parking shall be permitted, provided adequate
restrictions on the nature of the uses are imposed which would assure the
continuance of reduced parking demands due to shared parking. [Amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
165. Editor's Note: Former Note 1, pertaining to garage and driveway parking was repealed
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005.
166. Editor's Note: Former Note 1, pertaining to garage and driveway parking was repealed
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005.
§ 195-35 MADISON CODE § 195-35
191:884
NOTES:
3 When, in the judgment of the Board, on-street parking is available, then
only that proportion of the parking requirement which is not available on the
street shall be provided in off-street parking facilities. A length of 23 feet per
on-street parking space shall be used in calculating the number of available
on-street parking spaces.
4 For projects containing dwelling units required by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code's Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) to be accessible,
parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode and shall be considered
part of the total number of required spaces.
B. Minimum required off-street parking schedule for residential uses. The
number of off-street parking spaces required for residential uses shall
be determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21, as amended, and by reference
to Parking Schedule II below. Alternative parking standards to those
shown in the schedule below shall be accepted if the applicant
demonstrates that these standards better reflect local conditions.
Factors affecting the minimum number of parking spaces include
household characteristics, availability of mass transit, urban versus
suburban location and available off-site parking sources.
Parking Schedule IIa,c
Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
Housing Unit Type/Sizeb Parking Requirement
Single-family detached
2-bedroom 1.5
3-Bedroom 2.0
4-Bedroom 2.5c
5-Bedroom 3.0
Garden apartmentb
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0c
3-bedroom 2.1
Townhouseb
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.3c
3-bedroom 2.4
§ 195-35 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-35
191:885
Parking Schedule IIa,c
Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses
Housing Unit Type/Sizeb Parking Requirement
Retirement community Values shall be commensurate with
the most appropriate housing type
and size noted above that the
retirement community resembles
Assisted-living .5d
Notes:
a As amended from time to time.
b Requirements for attached units (apartment/condominium/
townhouse) include provisions for guest parking.
c A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as two offstreet
parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum
of 18 feet in length between the face of the garage door and
the right-of-way. A two-car garage and driveway combination shall
count as 3.5 off-street parking spaces, provided a minimum parking
area width of 20 feet is provided for a minimum length of 18
feet as specified for a one-car garage and driveway combination.
[Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
d The Board may grant waivers and exceptions where appropriate.
C. Commercial vehicles in residential zones. In a residential zone, only one
commercial vehicle of a rated capacity of one ton or less may be kept on
the premises.
D. Parking of recreational equipment.
(1) Parking of recreational equipment. No mobile dwelling, trailer or
any other recreational equipment shall be stored or parked on any
premises in any residential zone district within the limits of the
Borough, except as hereinafter provided:
(a) Recreational equipment may be stored or parked within a
closed building or garage on the premises.
(b) Recreational equipment may be stored or parked outdoors on
any premises upon the following terms and conditions:
[1] Not more than one piece of recreational equipment shall
be stored or parked on any premises in any residential
zone district within the limits of the Borough, except as
hereinafter provided. For purposes of this chapter,
premises shall include adjoining lots in common
§ 195-35 MADISON CODE § 195-35
191:886
ownership, unless said adjoining lots otherwise conform to
this chapter and other provisions hereof.
[2] No recreational equipment shall be stored or parked
within any residential district other than that lot upon
which the principal residence structure of the actual
owner of the recreational equipment is located.
[3] No recreational equipment shall be stored or parked at
any time when said premises are not being occupied,
except for vacation absences.
[4] No recreational equipment shall be stored or parked in any
district as an accessory building or use, except as herein
provided.
[5] No recreational equipment shall exceed the following bulk
requirements:
[a] A maximum height of 12 feet as parked, including
trailer, cradle or mount, but excluding mast in the case
of a boat.
[b] A maximum body length of 30 feet, excluding trailer
hitch, tongue and bumper.
[c] A maximum of eight feet in body width, excluding
hardware.
[d] A maximum gross weight of 12,000 pounds, including
trailer and mount.
(c) No recreational equipment shall be stored or parked within
any front yard or side yard required under this chapter. These
requirements shall apply to both frontages on a corner lot. In
addition, all recreational equipment shall be stored or parked
to the rear of the rear building line of the principal building.
(d) All recreational equipment must be kept clean and in good
repair at all times and shall carry a current year's license or
registration as required by law.
(e) The owner of the recreational equipment shall have and
display upon request to any authorized officials of the Borough
satisfactory proof of ownership of such recreational
equipment.
(f) All recreational equipment shall be maintained in mobile
condition.
(g) No recreational equipment shall be used for sleeping or
dwelling purposes while on said premises, and recreational
equipment shall not be commercially stored or offered or
§ 195-35 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-35
191:887
§ 195-36. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
displayed for sale. Further, such recreational equipment shall
not be connected with any electric, water, gas or sanitary
sewer facilities.
(h) No construction or repair of any such recreational equipment
shall be carried on outdoors in any residential district. For
purposes of this chapter, construction or repair shall not
include essential maintenance.
(i) No recreational equipment shall be stored, parked or
maintained so as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition on
the premises where parked.
(j) Loading and unloading of recreational equipment at any
location on the premises is permitted, provided that said
vehicle is not stored or parked for a period longer than 48
hours in any seven consecutive days.
(2) All recreational equipment shall be effectively screened with
attractive plantings, shrubs and trees or fencing so as not to be
readily visible from the street or from any adjoining or nearby
properties.
A. Continuance of existing nonconforming uses and structures. Any
nonconforming use or structure which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of this article may be continued, and any existing legally
nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or
structurally altered, but only in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
B. Discontinuance of abandoned nonconforming uses. Any nonconfirming
use which has not been used for a continuous period of one year or
more shall not thereafter be revived.
C. Alteration, extension or enlargement of nonconforming use or
structure.
(1) A nonconforming use of any building, structure or land shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or changed in any manner
whatsoever.
(2) No building in which a nonconforming use exists shall be enlarged,
extended or structurally altered in any manner; provided, however,
that:
(a) Nothing herein shall prevent the repair and maintenance of
any building wherein there exists a nonconforming use,
provided that such maintenance and repair does not in any way
constitute or result in a further extension of a nonconforming
use.
§ 195-35 MADISON CODE § 195-36
191:888
(b) Minor alterations and improvements which do not constitute or
require structural changes may be made in or to a building
wherein a nonconforming use exists, provided that such
nonconforming use will not be increased, extended or enlarged
thereby.
(c) Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoration
to a safe and lawful condition of any part of any building which
is nonconforming.
(3) Structural alterations, internal rearrangements and renovations
may be made in a building or structure which is nonconforming
because it fails to comply with height, area, yard, off-street parking
or other like requirements of this article, other than use, so long as
the structural alteration or increase, internal rearrangement or
renovation does not extend or enlarge the nonconformance of said
building or structure.
(4) A nonconforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may
not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
D. Restoration of existing building or structures nonconforming because of
use. Whenever a building or structure is nonconforming by reason of its
use, such building or structure may be restored or repaired in the event
of partial destruction thereof.
E. Restoration of existing buildings or structures nonconforming for
reasons other than use. Whenever a building is nonconforming because
it fails to comply with any height, area, yard, off-street parking or
requirements of this article, other than use, and such building is
partially destroyed, such building may be restored to its prior condition;
provided, however, that such restoration shall not enlarge the
previously existing nonconformance.
F. Nonconforming improved lot. When an improved lot in a residential
zone exists as a separate isolated lot under separate ownership and
does not adjoin any vacant land or vacant lot of the same owner, and
said improved lot is nonconforming due to size, shape, area or setback,
any existing residential building or structure on the lot may be further
improved, provided that:
(1) The number of dwelling units shall not be increased even if such
increased number of dwelling units are allowed in the zone, unless
approved by the Board of Adjustment.
(2) Any existing nonconforming setbacks from streets, side lot lines or
rear lot lines shall not be made more nonconforming, including any
vertical additions of any type.
(3) Any existing and proposed improvement on the nonconforming
improved lot shall not exceed the percentage of maximum
impervious coverage set forth in Schedule I.167
§ 195-36 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-36
191:889
§ 195-36.1. (Reserved)169
(4) The Construction official of the Borough of Madison is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue any necessary construction
permits in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
G. Nonconforming unimproved lot. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this article, any existing nonconforming lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and
R-4 Zones not adjoining any vacant land and which is nonconforming
due to shape or area, may be improved with a new building or structure
in accordance with the use requirements of this article, provided that
the minimum setbacks shall be as required in Schedule I,168 except
required side street setbacks on corner lots may be reduced one foot for
each three feet the lot is under the minimum width required in the zone
district, but shall not be reduced below 1/2 the minimum required
setback.
H. Any nonconforming structure located in the CC Zone can be further
developed, provided that the degree of nonconformity is not further
increased.
167. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
168. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Former § 195-36.1, R-PH Scatter Site Public Housing Zone, added
5-14-1984, as amended, was repealed 9-14-1987.
§ 195-36 MADISON CODE § 195-36.1
191:890
ARTICLE VI
Stormwater, Wetland Protection, Steep Slopes, Flood Control and
Riparian Buffer Zone170
[Amended 3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 7-86; 3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 7-87;
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 26-2002]
§ 195-37. Definitions. [Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. Certain
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
a county planning agency; or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
170. Editor's Note: The title of this article was changed from "Stormwater, Wetland Protection,
Steep Slopes and Flood Control" to "Stormwater, Wetland Protection, Steep Slopes, Flood
Control and Riparian Buffer Zone" 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 53-2009.
§ 195-37 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37
191:891
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building which is built, in the
case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of
the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers) or sheer walls parallel to the flow of the water and which
is adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the State or National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer as meeting the
eligibility requirements on the State or National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the State Historic Preservation
Officer as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
B.
§ 195-37 MADISON CODE § 195-37
191:892
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, Borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
historic district preliminarily determined by the State Historic
Preservation Officer to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the State Historic
Preservation Officer; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 195-37 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37
191:893
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Madison, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the state, or to a
domestic treatment works, and includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
materials.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date that the building permit was issued, provided that the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
§ 195-37 MADISON CODE § 195-37
191:894
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 195-37 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37
191:895
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 195-37.1. Stormwater control.
A. General.
(1) It is the intent and purpose of this section that all land in the
Borough be developed according to the following requirements.
(2) Any application for a building permit shall include sufficient
information to carry out the intent and purpose of this section,
which shall be administered by the Borough Engineer, except that
applications for additions or alterations of less than 400 square feet
to one- and two-family residences shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(3) Evaluation shall be made of the individual drainage structures
proposed, the entire site runoff, the off-site subwatershed(s) of
which the site is a part, downgradient properties, and the receiving
stream channel capacities. A point of confluence shall be
maintained so that valid comparisons of time of concentration can
be made between existing and proposed conditions.
(4) Control of water quality in surface water, soil erosion, transport of
sediment, and nonpoint source pollution related to development
activities shall be demonstrated and promote natural and
nonstructural management approaches and which maximize
prevention of stormwater generation as well as mitigation of
unavoidable stormwater impacts wherever possible.
(5) in support of comprehensive stormwater management, the State of
New Jersey's surface water quality standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et
seq.) establish surface water quality standards and antidegradation
policies applicable to all surface waters, the Revised Manual for
New Jersey: Best Management Practices for Control of Nonpoint
Source Pollution from Stormwater, provides effective and
economical alternatives for better stormwater management and, in
particular, the control of nonpoint source pollution from land
development, and New Jersey residential site improvement
standards have been enacted (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1) to standardize
stormwater management standards for residential development
projects.
B. Runoff standards. All land area in the Borough shall be developed so
that:
§ 195-37 MADISON CODE § 195-37.1
191:896
(1) The peak rate of stormwater runoff occurring from the site as a
result of the development proposed in the application shall be
reduced as follows:
(a) To 50% of the predevelopment rate for the two-year storm;
(b) To 75% of the predevelopment rate for the ten-year storm; and
(c) To 80% of the predevelopment rate for the one-hundred-year
storm.
(2) For the water quality storm (1.25 inches over two hours) or any
storm of lesser intensity, there shall be no increase in stormwater
runoff volumes over predevelopment levels.
(3) The drainage of the adjacent areas is not adversely affected.
(4) Soil absorption and groundwater recharge capacity of the area
shall not decrease below what occurs there under existing
conditions.
(5) The natural drainage pattern of the area is not significantly altered
and surface water runoff shall generally not be transferred from
one watershed to another.
(6) Recharge of the aquifer and associated groundwater must be
maintained.
(7) Maximum use shall be made of presently existing surface water
runoff control devices, mechanisms or areas, such as existing
berms, terraces, grass waterways, favorable hydrologic soils,
swamps, swales, watercourses, woodlands and floodplains in
accordance with their functional capabilities, as well as any
proposed retention structures.
(8) The plan shall avoid the concentration of flow and shall provide for
the dissipation of velocities at all concentrated discharge points.
(9) Reestablishing vegetative cover shall be in accordance with
Standards and Specification for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey, adopted by the Morris County Soil Conservation
District, latest edition, and with all other applicable statutes.
(10) Timing for the plan shall establish permanent surface water
management measures prior to construction or other land
disturbance.
C. Runoff control details. In order to duplicate as nearly as possible
natural drainage conditions, regulation and control of stormwater
runoff and erosion for any land area to be developed shall be through
on-site stormwater detention and/or ground absorption systems which
include, but are not limited to, the following:
§ 195-37.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.1
191:897
(1) Reduce site runoff to predevelopment conditions through any and
all of the following methods:
(a) Methods.
[1] Reduction in the amount of impervious coverage.
[2] Consider a cluster development design.
[3] Reserve open space.
[4] Divert stormwater to pervious areas.
[5] Minimize use of storm sewers.
[6] Maximize use of natural vegetated overland flow.
[7] Recharge of stormwater runoff.
[8] Other methods approved by the Borough Engineer.
(b) Other considerations. Additionally, new developments should:
[1] Minimize disruption of natural channels.
[2] Minimize storm sewers and paved drainage structures.
[3] Promote filtering and infiltration.
(2) Detention areas which may be depressions in the parking areas,
excavated basins, basins created through use of curbs, stabilized
earth berms or dikes, or any other form of grading which serves to
temporarily impound and store water.
(3) Seepage pits which control stormwater runoff through ground
absorption and temporary storage.
(4) Porous asphaltic pavement, which preserves the natural ground
absorption capacity of a site and provides a subsurface reservoir
for temporary storage of stormwater.
(5) Any system or porous media, such as gravel trenches drained by
porous wall or perforated pipe, which temporarily stores and
dissipates stormwater through ground absorption.
(6) Pretreatment of stormwater runoff through the use of sediment
forebay or micropools; grass filter strips and grass swales; catch
basin pretreatments; and/or sediment chambers.
(7) Any combination of the above-mentioned techniques.
D. Design of stormwater/detention facilities.
(1) General standards.
§ 195-37.1 MADISON CODE § 195-37.1
191:898
(a) Stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to contain an
amount equal to the increase in volume of runoff which results
from development of a site.
(b) Provisions for water quality within a detention facility shall be
addressed with the goal of maintaining eighteen-hour
detention time to promote settlement.
(c) For estimating runoff discharge, design engineers shall have
the option to choose the methodology to calculate peak rate
and volume of discharge, as follows:
[1] For relatively small drainage areas of up to 20 acres, the
peak rate of runoff may be calculated by the Rational
Method, Modified Rational Method, or more recent
derivatives as approved by the Borough Engineer.
[2] For areas up to 320 acres, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55), U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Engineering Division, as supplemented or amended to
date.
(d) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(infiltration basins, etc.) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils to function properly, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall include an on-site
geotechnical evaluation including borings or test pit
documentation, in combination with documentary evidence of
regional soils and geology, in order to determine the type,
distribution and long-term suitability of soils present at the
location of the proposed facility and surrounding region, to be
reviewed and approved by the Borough Engineer.
(e) A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for
an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site
if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has
existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more
than one land cover has existed on the site during the five
years immediately prior to the time of application, the land
cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the
site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is
pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use type is
woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation
treatment (if the land use type is cultivation). [Added
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(f) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
§ 195-37.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.1
191:899
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No.
5-2006]
(g) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may
be employed. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(h) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures. [Added
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(2) Design standards.
(a) Stormwater management systems shall be designed in
accordance with the following criteria and methods:
Criteria Method
Surface conditions Existing and proposed
conditions
Collection system 25-year storm
Storage 100-year storm
Outlet discharge 10-, 25-, 50- and 100-year
storms
Emergency spillway 100-year storm or flood of
record, whichever is greater
Top of berm 1 foot above high-water
elevation (min)
Maximum velocity at pipe
outlets
4 feet per second or per Soil
Conservation District
limitations
(b) All outfalls are to be designed in a manner to retard velocities
at the outfall and to provide stream channel protection.
(c) When a natural drainage pattern is necessarily intercepted, as
by a street, provisions shall be made to accommodate surface
§ 195-37.1 MADISON CODE § 195-37.1
191:900
water runoff from the areas upstream from the point of
interception.
(d) All water-carrying structures and/or retention areas shall be
completed and stabilized prior to diversion of water to them.
(e) The surface water management plan shall include an inventory
of the site showing all existing natural and man-made drainage
features (berms, terraces, grass waterways, favorable
hydrologic or poorly drained soils, swamps, swales,
watercourses, woodlands, floodplains). These shall be
incorporated in the plan to the greatest possible extent in
accordance with their functional capability.
(f) The design plan and calculations shall show that due
consideration has been given to the relationship of the subject
property to the natural or established drainage pattern of the
subwatershed(s) of which it is a part.
(g) Increased runoff resulting from disturbance of soil and
vegetation during development, construction, or other activity
shall be minimized into those drainage ways and watercourses
which normally carry or receive surface water runoff.
(h) Surface water runoff controls shall be designed to assure that
the land in question uses no more than its proportionate
watershed share of the natural stream and culvert capacity.
(i) Additional surface water runoff control and recharge devices
may be proposed, such as sediment forebay or micropools;
grass filter strips and grass swales; catch basin pretreatments;
and/or sediment chambers.
(3) Drywell/Seepage pit requirements for roof runoff must be included
to address recharge improvements as specified further in this
chapter. No credit for soil infiltration rate will be allowed in sizing
of the drywell system. Additional influent filtration requirements
may be required wherever water quality degradation is suspected.
[Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(4) Surface impoundment. If detention facilities utilizing surface
impoundment, such as detention basins, are used, sufficient volume
to fully contain the total volume of rainfall excess shall be provided.
The outlets of such facilities shall be designed to limit the maximum
discharge rate of stormwater runoff to what occurs at the site
under existing conditions and shall discharge in such a way as not
to adversely affect any other property. If earth berms or dikes are
used to create the impounding area, they shall be adequately
stabilized and the slopes protected with vegetative cover, paving or
rip-rap to protect against failure or breaching.
(5) Vegetated or biofilter swales.
§ 195-37.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.1
191:901
(a) The water velocity shall not exceed two feet per second (FPS)
to allow for settlement of total suspended solids (TSS) during
the water quality design storm. The slope shall not be less than
0.5% so that positive drainage is maintained. The swale shall
be of sufficient length to allow for settlement of TSS taking into
consideration the velocity, depth of flow, and expected loading
of TSS;
(b) Where feasible, vegetation shall be used in the swale to filter
out the total suspended solids (TSS) and to provide a treatment
by absorption of pollutants leached into the soil. Vegetation
used in the swale shall be native or nonintrusive exotic species
approved by the Morris County Soil Conservation District;
(c) If the swale is designed to provide infiltration, the soil texture
shall be sand, loamy sand, or sandy loam as defined by the U. S.
Department of Agriculture and there shall be a minimum of
three feet separation between the bottom of the swale and the
seasonal high-water table, as verified by a competent field
investigation.
(d) The swale shall be used internally within the stormwater
collection system and in conjunction with other methods such
as vegetated filter strips to increase their effectiveness.
(6) Above-grade infiltration facilities.
(a) There shall be at least three feet vertical separation between
the bottom of the facility and the seasonal high-water table, as
verified by a competent field investigation.
(b) The maximum depth of impoundment shall be two feet;
(c) The soil texture of the upper six inches of the facility (i.e.,
immediately below the surface layer of turf, gravel, paving
blocks, etc.) shall be sand, loamy sand or sandy loam, as
described by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. As necessary,
the applicant will import appropriate select material to comply
with this requirement;
(d) The surface of the facility shall be stabilized by turf, gravel,
porous asphalt pavement, modular paving blocks, or other
measures approved by the Borough Engineer;
(e) The entire volume of the runoff impounded during the water
quality storm shall be recharged to groundwater within 72
hours; and
(f) The design of the infiltration facility shall be based on
infiltration rates measured using procedures outlined in EPA
and NJDEP design manuals.
(7) Below-grade infiltration facilities.
§ 195-37.1 MADISON CODE § 195-37.1
191:902
(a) Where porous media are used (e.g., gravel-surfaced parking
areas, gravel-filled trenches), the applicant shall provide
documentation of the in-place porosity of the media for
purposes of estimating the retained runoff volume;
(b) A media separation (e.g., geotextile or graded sand filter) shall
be used to maintain the integrity of the interface between
porous media and the native soil;
(c) The design of the facility shall be based on infiltration rates
measures using procedures outlined in EPA and NJDEP design
manuals.
(d) The entire volume of the runoff impounded during the water
quality storm shall be recharged to groundwater within 72
hours. Standpipes are required in all below-grade infiltration
facilities for the purpose of inspecting water levels; and
(e) As required by the Borough Engineer, runoff shall be treated to
remove TSS and other nonpoint source pollutants prior to
discharge to a below-grade infiltration facility. Treatment may
consist of a vegetated buffer strip, sediment trap, etc.
(8) Porous asphalt pavement:
(a) The soil beneath the pavement shall be sand, loamy sand, or
sandy loam as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
and compaction must be considered in the infiltration rate of
the soil.
(b) The porous pavement shall be buffered with vegetative
screening to prevent the intrusion of aeolin sand and silt;
(c) The permittee shall undertake a strict maintenance schedule
including, but not limited to, vacuum sweeping on a weekly
basis and high-pressure water washing on a monthly basis.
(d) The porous pavement shall be used in light traffic areas subject
to automobiles only and is marked by a sign restricting traffic
to only passenger vehicles;
(e) No asphalt sealer may be used; and
(f) No sand or other nonsoluble traction agent which may fill
porous voids may be used during periods of snow and ice.
(9) Sediment traps and oil-grease separators. The drainage areas
serviced shall be less than 1/10 of an acre in size and particular
attention shall be paid to maintenance responsibilities, inspection
schedules and tasks as will be clearly shown in the plan.
(10) Combination of techniques. If a combination of different
stormwater detention techniques is used, the combined volume of
§ 195-37.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.1
191:903
§ 195-37.2. Major development review. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 5-2006]
the systems shall be large enough to fully contain the total volume
of rainfall excess.171
A. A. Statement and purpose. This section establishes minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs will be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans will be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs
may be necessary to achieve the established performance standards for
water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. B. Applicability.
(1) (1) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) (a) Nonresidential major developments: and
(b) (b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) (2) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Madison.
C. C. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application. the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
171. Editor's Note: Former Subsections B(11) through (13), which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006. For the provisions of former
Subsection D(11), Safety Measures, see now § 195-37.6A(1). For the provisions of former
Subsection B(12), Maintenance, see now § 195-37.7B(2)(b).
§ 195-37.1 MADISON CODE § 195-37.2
191:904
§ 195-37.3. Stormwater management requirements for major
development. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006172]
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
D. D. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards as identified herein. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards apply only to major development and are intended to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and
water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater
recharge. The standards do not apply to new major development to
the extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or water
quality management plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules. Note: Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major
development projects as would be provided under the standards in
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements:
172. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 195-37.3, Steep slopes analysis,
as § 195-41.2.
§ 195-37.2 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:905
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subparagraph F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subparagraph F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth herein into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.3
191:906
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from preconstruction
to post-construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
§ 195-37.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:907
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.3
191:908
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations herein, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
§ 195-37.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:909
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[c] Enhanced groundwater recharge standards in the
WHPA district. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
56-2010]
[i] Within WHPA Tiers 1 and 2, the design engineer
must demonstrate that the increase in runoff from
pre-construction to post-construction for the
entire five-year storm is infiltrated.
[ii] Within WHPA Tier 3, the design engineer must
demonstrate that the increase in runoff from preconstruction
to post-construction for the entire
ten-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.3
191:910
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 195-37.1D(1)(f) and (g),
complete one of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
§ 195-37.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:911
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minimum)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minimum)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.3
191:912
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minimum)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minimum)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review
agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of
calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at
the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B – (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device As certified
Sand filter 80%
§ 195-37.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:913
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.3
191:914
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
§ 195-37.3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.3
191:915
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
(9) Enhanced runoff quality standards in the WHPA district: [Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 56-2010]
(a) Within WHPA Tier 1, the TSS removal rate shall be 95%.
(b) Within WHPA Tier 2, the TSS removal rate shall be 90%.
(c) Within WHPA Tier 3, the TSS removal rate shall be 85%.
H. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
§ 195-37.3 MADISON CODE § 195-37.4
191:916
§ 195-37.4. Structural stormwater management measures. [Added
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements herein.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 195-37.6 herein.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established herein.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of this section, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the
New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
§ 195-37.4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.5
191:917
§ 195-37.5. Sources for technical guidance. [Added 4-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 5-2006]
§ 195-37.6. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
[Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed in Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. County
stormwater management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their
authority, require existing stormwater management basins to be
retrofitted to meet one or more of the safety standards for trash racks,
overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
§ 195-37.5 MADISON CODE § 195-37.6
191:918
(1) Safety measures. Stormwater detention, sedimentation or
infiltration facilities shall incorporate safety measures including
but not limited to warning signs, gauges, fencing, shallow grade
benches, trash racks, etc.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the appropriate review agency a
§ 195-37.6 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.6
191:919
§ 195-37.7. Maintenance and repair of stormwater management
facilities. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review shall comply with the
requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) Maintenance plans.
(a) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
§ 195-37.6 MADISON CODE § 195-37.7
191:920
(b) Stormwater facilities shall be constantly maintained by the
owner or association to assure continual functioning of the
system at design capacity and to prevent the health hazards
associated with debris buildup and stagnant water.
Maintenance responsibilities, inspection schedules and tasks
will be clearly shown in the proposed plan. In no case shall
water be allowed to remain in any facility long enough to
constitute a mosquito breeding disease or any other type of
health problem. The maintenance plan must include inspection
routines to reduce the potential for extensive, difficult, and
costly remedial or emergency maintenance efforts, including
inspection checklists. Inspection checklists may include such
items as:
[1] Obstruction of inlet or outlet devices by trash and debris;
[2] Evidence of erosion, sedimentation or instability;
[3] Malfunctioning of valves, gates, locks, access hatches or
equipment;
[4] Deteriorated conduit outlet or seepage around outlet;
[5] Cracks or other deterioration of inlets, outlets, pipes, and
conduits;
[6] Inadequate draining, clearing or clogging of control
devices;
[7] Trimming, cutting or mowing of vegetation as required;
[8] Erosion and debris in emergency spillways and/or filter
strips;
[9] Deterioration of downstream channels/conduits;
[10] Invasive or noxious weeds out of character with those
specified;
[11] Saturated conditions or standing water;
[12] Animal burrowing; and
[13] Vandalism or other nonspecified occurrences.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
§ 195-37.7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.7
191:921
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and B(7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
Where the ordinance requires the facility to be dedicated to the
municipality, certain aspects of the maintenance and repair plan
may be deleted, but otherwise should require the posting of a twoyear
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53. Guidelines for developing a maintenance and
inspection program are provided in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County
Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance Manual, dated June 1989, available from the NJDEP,
Watershed Management Program.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
§ 195-37.7 MADISON CODE § 195-37.7
191:922
§ 195-37.8. Drywell/seepage pit requirements for roof runoff.
[Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. New roof areas less than 400 square feet are exempt from the dry well
requirements of this chapter.
B. Runoff from roof areas shall be transported to seepage pits for recharge
of groundwater resources.
C. Seepage pits shall have the capacity to temporarily store a volume
equal to four inches of runoff from roof areas. Alternatively, the capacity
of the seepage pit wells may be determined by routing a fifty-year,
twenty-four-hour storm through the dry well system taking into
consideration soil infiltration and permeability, water table depth, and
dry well capacity.
D. Roof gutters, vertical conductors and leaders, and horizontal storm
drains shall conform with Chapter 13 of the National Standard
Plumbing Code, most recent edition. Design shall be based on a rainfall
intensity of six inches per hour.
E. All roof gutters shall be protected from the accumulation of leaves and
litter.
F. Where gutters are not used on a building, a gravel-filled trench with a
perforated pipe shall be constructed under the roof overhang to collect
roof runoff, having a capacity not less than a comparable roof drain
system, subject to approval by the Borough Engineer.
G. Seepage pits shall have an overflow pipe extending to grade. Aluminum
pins, or gutter nails, shall be extended through the pipe at its outlet to
prevent small animals from entering.
H. Seepage pits shall generally be constructed of precast concrete rings
surrounded by clean crushed stone or gravel. The nominal stone size
shall be 1 1/2 inches. A bed of coarse sand not less than four inches
thick shall be placed in contact with the surface of the soil at the bottom
of the excavation. A layer of crushed stone or gravel not less than six
inches thick shall be placed on top of the coarse sand.
§ 195-37.7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.8
191:923
§ 195-37.9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
[Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
I. There shall be a vertical separation of not less than two feet between
the bottom of the stone in dry wells and the seasonal high-water table,
as verified by a competent field investigation.
J. All applications shall include calculations and details to show
compliance with the chapter.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan herein as part of the submission of the applicant's application
for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that a topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
§ 195-37.8 MADISON CODE § 195-37.9
191:924
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§§ 195-37.1 through 195-37.4 are being met. The focus of this
plan shall be to describe how the site is being developed to
meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the
source by land management and source controls whenever
possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the pre-development and post-
§ 195-37.9 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.9
191:925
§ 195-37.10. Riparian buffer zone. [Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
53-2009]
development conditions for the design storms specified in
§ 197-37.3 herein.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of this article.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C(1)(a) through C(6)(f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
A. Intent and purpose. The governing body of the Borough of Madison
finds that riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes, or other surface
water bodies that are adequately vegetated provide an important
environmental protection and water resource management benefit. It is
necessary to protect and maintain the beneficial character of riparian
areas by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection,
and maintenance of vegetation along the surface water bodies within
the jurisdiction of the Borough, consistent with the interest of
landowners in making reasonable economic use of parcels of land that
include such designated areas. The purpose of this section is to
designate riparian zones, and to provide for land use regulation therein
in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other surface water bodies of
the Borough of Madison; to protect the water quality of watercourses,
reservoirs, lakes, and other significant water resources within the
Borough of Madison; to protect the riparian and aquatic ecosystems of
Madison; to provide for the environmentally sound use of the land
resources of the Borough, and to complement existing state, regional,
county, and municipal stream corridor protection and management
regulations and initiatives. The specific purposes and intent of this
section are to:
§ 195-37.9 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:926
(1) Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the water resources of the Borough of Madison;
(2) Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as well
as biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification,
which occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed through
vegetated buffers as stable, distributed sheet flow prior to reaching
receiving waters;
(3) Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
(4) Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (fallen leaves
and twigs) and large woody debris (fallen trees and limbs) that
provide food and habitat for small bottom-dwelling organisms
(insects, amphibians, crustaceans, and small fish), which are
essential to maintain the food chain;
(5) Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms;
(6) Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
(7) Control downstream flooding; and
(8) Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources, e.g., headwater areas, groundwater recharge zones,
floodways, floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, and
prime wildlife habitats.
B. Statutory authority. The municipality of the Borough of Madison is
empowered to regulate land uses under the provisions of the New
Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which
authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use in order to
protect public health, safety and welfare by protecting and maintaining
native vegetation in riparian areas. The Borough of Madison is also
empowered to adopt and implement this section under provisions
provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of New
Jersey:
(1) Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
(2) Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
(3) Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.
(4) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:927
(5) Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or
lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of
3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils
in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil Conservation District
offices.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or Construction Office for the Borough with all of the
powers delegated, assigned, or assumed by them according to statute
or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal
entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated
by the provisions of this section, and that would be located in whole or
in part within a regulated riparian zone.
FLOODWAY — Has the meaning ascribed to this term by the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.) and regulations
promulgated thereunder published at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq., and any
supplementary or successor legislation and regulations from time to
time enacted or promulgated.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Surface water drainage channels with
definite bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of
water. Streams shown as a dashed line on either the USGS topographic
quadrangle maps or the USDA County Soil Survey Maps of the most
recent edition that includes hydrography are included as intermittent
streams.
LAKE, POND, or RESERVOIR — Any impoundment, whether naturally
occurring or created in whole or in part by the building of structures,
for the retention of surface water, excluding sedimentation control
and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream that flows continuously throughout
the year in most years. These streams usually appear as a blue line on
USGS topographic quadrangle maps or on USDA County Soil Survey
Maps.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface waters including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their point of
origin.
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:928
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan approved by the
Engineer of the Borough of Madison. The plan shall be prepared by
a landscape architect, professional engineer or other qualified
professional, and shall evaluate the effects of any proposed activity/
uses on any riparian zone. The plan shall identify existing conditions,
all proposed activities, and all proposed management techniques,
including any measures necessary to offset disturbances to any affected
riparian zone.
RIPARIAN ZONE WATERS — Such which have been identified for
protection from degradation in water quality characteristics because of
their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other characteristics of aesthetic
value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance, or exceptional
fisheries resources. Such waters shall also be such as may be defined
by statute or administrative regulation.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any state open
waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Land Use Regulation Program
shall also be considered surface water bodies.
D. Establishment of riparian zones.
(1) Riparian zones adjacent to all waters shall be protected from
avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(a) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water, and all upstream tributaries situated
within the same HUC-14 watershed. The riparian zone shall
equal the special water resource protection area, and shall be
measured as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
(b) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters:
[1] Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
[2] Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
[3] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal, which is critically
dependent on the regulated water for survival, and all
upstream waters (including tributaries) within one linear
mile as measured along the length of the regulated water;
and
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:929
[4] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains acid-producing soils.
(c) For all other waters, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide shall be
maintained along both sides of the water.
(2) The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
is measured landward from the top-of-bank.
(3) Maps.
(a) The riparian zones of the entire municipality of the Borough of
Madison, including all land and water areas within its
boundaries, which designates surface water bodies, is based
upon the most recent versions of:
[1] Borough of Madison Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan based upon the maps of lakes, ponds, perennial or
intermittent steams, subwatersheds, waterways and
classifications, and hydraulic unit code contained within it.
[2] Borough of Madison Flood Insurance Study and Flood
Insurance Rate Map as produced by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
[3] Borough of Madison Official Tax Map.
(b) Maps of the municipality on which these designations have
been overlain shall be on file and maintained by the offices of
the Clerk of the Borough of Madison. This map conforms to all
applicable laws, rules and regulations applicable to the
creation, modification and promulgation of zoning maps.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Municipal Engineer at such times as may
be required by law to propose modifications to the maps required
by any naturally occurring or permitted change in the location of a
defining feature of a surface water body and to maintain files of
decisions or appeals, and by changes made by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in surface water
classifications or floodway delineations. Floodway delineations
shall be based upon the state's adopted floodway delineations.
However, requests for alterations to the adopted delineations can
be provided to the Department for consideration if site-specific
information is available.
(5) The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for
the initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a
site, and for identifying the area on any plan submitted to the
Borough of Madison in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:930
Municipal Engineer, designee or, where required, by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Exemptions. Instead of the riparian zone protection requirements
above, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with one of the
following:
(a) The proposed project or activity is not in the riparian zone
established;
(b) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route;
(c) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in accordance
with a stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization
plan or project approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection;
(d) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary to
provide for public pedestrian access or water-dependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard
Area Control rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E;
(e) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New
Jersey DEP or federal EPA oversight pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq. or
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.;
(f) The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does not
exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces; or
(g) The proposed disturbance would prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a
minimum economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment.
E. Uses permitted in riparian zones. Any other riparian zone area shall
remain in a natural condition or, if in a disturbed condition, including
agricultural activities, at the time of adoption of this section, may be
restored to a natural condition. There shall be no clearing or cutting of
trees and brush, except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning for
reasons of public safety or for the replacement of invasive species with
indigenous species. There shall be no altering of watercourses,
dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris, regrading or
construction. The following uses are permitted either by right or after
review and approval by the municipality in riparian zones. No new
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:931
construction, development, use, activity, encroachment, or structure
shall take place in a riparian zone, except as specifically authorized
in this section. The following uses shall be permitted within a riparian
zone:
(1) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone, provided near
stream vegetation is preserved. Such uses include wildlife
sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas,
game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated for the
protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures.
Such uses also include passive recreation areas of public and
private parklands, including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle
trails, provided that said trails have been stabilized with pervious
materials.
(2) Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the Construction
Code Office, to the extent required by applicable law, rule or
regulation.
(3) Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails, roads,
railroads, stormwater lines, sanitary sewer lines, waterlines and
public utility transmission lines, provided that the land disturbance
is the minimum required to accomplish the permitted use, subject
to any applicable state permits that are acquired, and provided that
any disturbance is offset by buffer improvements and that the area
of the crossing is stabilized against significant erosion due to its
use as a crossing.
(4) Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conforms
to the guidelines of an approved riparian zone management plan,
or wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Performance standards for riparian zones. For all riparian zones, the
following conditions shall apply:
(1) All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be
designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the riparian zone to
accommodate primary structures, any normal accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
(2) Portions of lots within the riparian zone must be permanently
restricted by deed or conservation easement held by the Borough
of Madison, its agent, or another public or private land
conservation organization which has the ability to provide
adequate protection to prevent adverse impacts within the riparian
zone. A complete copy of the recorded conservation restriction that
clearly identifies the deed book and pages where it has been
recorded in the office of the Morris County Clerk must be
submitted to the municipality.
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:932
(3) Any lands proposed for development which include all or a portion
of a riparian zone shall, as a condition of any major subdivision or
major site plan approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation
of any portions of the riparian zone which are not vegetated at the
time of the application or which were disturbed by prior land uses,
including for agricultural use.
(4) For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this
section, but for which a building permit or a preliminary site plan
approval has not been obtained or is no longer valid, the required
minimum front, side, and rear setbacks may extend into the
riparian zone, provided that a deed restriction and/or conservation
easement is applied which prohibits clearing or construction in the
riparian zone.
(5) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow through
a riparian zone and shall comply with the standard for off-site
stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (See N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.)
(6) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a riparian
zone cannot comply with the standard for off-site stability, then the
proposed stabilization measures must meet the requirements of the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act rule at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et. seq.,
and have an approved flood hazard permit.
G. Nonconforming structures and uses in riparian zones. Nonconforming
structures and uses of land within the riparian zone are subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Legally existing but nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued.
(2) For all other riparian zones:
(a) Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be allowed
where previous development or disturbance has occurred.
(b) Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the
riparian zone as a result of encroachments where previous
development or disturbances have occurred.
(c) Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time
within one year from such discontinuance but not thereafter
when showing clear indications of abandonment.
H. Uses prohibited in riparian zones. For all riparian zones, any use or
activity not specifically authorized elsewhere in this chapter shall be
prohibited. By way of example, the following activities and facilities are
prohibited, except where authorized or excepted elsewhere in this
chapter:
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:933
(1) Removal or clear cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation
removal for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization or
restoration projects that require vegetation removal or grading
prior to implementation.
(2) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
(3) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards or the recommendations of
the Soil Conservation District.
(4) Roads or driveways, except where permitted.
(5) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Any type of permanent structure.
(8) New subsurface sewage disposal areas.
(9) Residential grounds or lawns.
I. Activities permitted in riparian zones in the case of no reasonable or
prudent alternative or extreme hardship.
(1) For all riparian zones, hardship variances may be granted in cases
of a preexisting lot (existing at the time of adoption of this section)
when there is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for uses
permitted by the underlying zoning and there is no other
reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in the riparian
zone, including obtaining variances from setback or other
requirements that would allow conformance with the riparian zone
requirements, and provided that demonstrations are made
including but not limited to:
(a) The existence of an extreme economic hardship, which:
[1] Does not apply to or affect other property in the immediate
vicinity;
[2] Relates to or arises out of the characteristics of the subject
property because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions.
[3] Demonstrates that there is no adjacent land that is
reasonably available or could be obtained, utilized,
expanded or managed in order to fulfill the basic purposes.
(b) An applicant shall be deemed to have established compelling
public need if the applicant demonstrates, based on specific
facts, that one of the following applies:
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:934
[1] The proposed project will serve an essential public health
or safety need;
[2] The proposed use is required to serve an existing public
health or safety need; or
[3] There is no alternative available to meet the established
public health or safety need.
(c) A variance can only be granted if it is shown that the activity is
in conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations, and that the exception granted is the minimum
relief necessary to relieve the hardship.
(2) If the above demonstrations are made, then the encroachment of
impervious surfaces (structures or pavement) otherwise permitted
by the underlying zoning is permitted to the extent of 750 square
feet total. Said encroachment is not permitted closer than 100 feet
from the top of the bank at bank-full flow or level of Category Two
waters for trout production (FW2-TP), or closer than 50 feet from
the top of the bank at bank-full flow or level of other surface water
bodies.
(3) If such an exception is granted, the applicant shall rehabilitate an
environmentally degraded riparian zone area within or adjacent to
the same site, and at least equivalent in size to the riparian zone
reduction permitted, or, if not possible, rehabilitate or expand a
riparian zone area at least equivalent in size within a nearby site
and, if available, within the same watershed. Rehabilitation shall
include reforestation, stream bank stabilization and removal of
debris, in accordance with a riparian zone management plan, as
described. The Borough may require financial contribution be
made to an open space or municipal stormwater management plan
mitigation plan fund in exchange for this requirement.
J. Riparian zone management plan.
(1) Within any riparian zone, no construction, development, use,
activity, or encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of
such development are accompanied by preparation, approval, and
implementation of a riparian zone management plan.
(2) Plan contents.
(a) The landowner, applicant, or developer shall submit to the
Municipal Engineer, or his or her appointed representative, a
riparian zone management plan prepared by an environmental
professional, professional engineer or other qualified
professional which fully evaluates the effects of any proposed
uses on the riparian zone. The riparian zone management plan
shall identify the existing conditions including:
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:935
[1] Existing vegetation;
[2] Field-delineated surface water bodies;
[3] Field-delineated wetlands;
[4] The one-hundred-year floodplain;
[5] Flood hazard areas, including floodway and flood-fringe
areas, as delineated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection;
[6] Soil classifications as found on soil surveys;
[7] Existing subdrainage areas of site with HUC-14
(hydrologic unit code) designations;
[8] Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections
of slopes less than or equal to 15%; above 15% but less
than 20%; and greater than 20%.
(b) The proposed plan shall describe all proposed uses/activities,
and fully evaluate the effects of all proposed uses/activities in a
riparian zone, and all proposed management techniques,
including proposed vegetation and any other measures
necessary to offset disturbances to the riparian zone. A
discussion of activities proposed as well as management
techniques proposed to offset disturbances and/or enhance the
site to improve the riparian zone's ability to function effectively
as a riparian zone shall also be included with the riparian zone
management plan submittal to the Borough of Madison.
(3) The plan shall be reviewed and must be approved by the Engineer
of the Borough of Madison, in consultation with the Environmental
Commission, as part of the subdivision and land development
process.
(4) The riparian zone management plan must include management
provisions in narrative and/or graphic form specifying:
(a) The manner in which the area within the riparian zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
(b) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the riparian
zone, as applicable.
(c) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to
be necessary in order to maintain and manage the riparian
zone.
(d) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground
cover, understory shrubs, and trees that, when fully mature,
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-37.10
191:936
will form an overhead canopy. Vegetation selected must be
native, noninvasive species, and consistent with the soil, slope
and moisture conditions of the site. The Engineer of the
Borough of Madison may require species suitability to be
verified by qualified experts from the Soil Conservation
District, Natural Resources Conservation Service, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, US Fish and Wildlife
Service and/or state or federal forest agencies.
(5) A riparian zone management plan is not required where the
riparian zone is not being disturbed and conservation easements/
deed restrictions are applied to ensure there will be no future
clearing or disturbance of the riparian zone.
(6) Performance of the riparian zone management plan shall be
guaranteed for a minimum of two years, by a surety, such as a bond,
cash or letter of credit, which shall be provided to the Borough of
Madison prior to the Borough issuing any permits or approving any
uses relating to the applicable use or activity.
K. Boundary interpretation; appeals procedures; inspections; conflicts;
severability.
(1) When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of a
riparian zone, or the defined bank-full flow or level, the landowner
or applicant shall submit evidence to the Borough Engineer that
describes the riparian zone, presents the landowner or applicant's
proposed riparian zone delineation, and presents all justification
for the proposed boundary change. For Category One (C1) riparian
zones, the landowner or applicant must first obtain approval from
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. A
decision from the Department must be included with the evidence
submitted for municipal review.
(2) Inspections.
(a) Lands within or adjacent to an identified riparian zone shall be
inspected by the Borough Engineer when:
[1] A subdivision or land development plan is submitted;
[2] A building permit is requested;
[3] A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is
proposed;
[4] A discontinued nonconforming use is resumed more than a
year later.
(b) The riparian zone may also be inspected periodically by
representatives from the Borough of Madison if excessive or
potentially problematic erosion is present, other problems are
discovered, or at any time when the presence of an
§ 195-37.10 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-37.10
191:937
§ 195-38. Site plan in floodplain areas.
unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the attention of
municipal officials or when the downstream surface waters are
indicating reduction in quality.
(c) Inspections will be conducted on an as-needed basis, should
the Borough feel that a problem exists. All inspections will be
undertaken in accordance with local, state and federal
requirements for property owner notification and permission.
(3) Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this section
are hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or
conflict, and the provisions of this section apply.
(4) Severability.
(a) Interpretation. This section shall be so construed as not to
conflict with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(b) Notwithstanding that any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
all remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall continue to be
of full force and effect.
(c) The provisions of this section shall be cumulative with, and not
in substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and
land use regulations.
L. Enforcement. A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate
personnel of the Borough of Madison of any person or entity believed to
be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in
violation of this section is discovered, a civil action may be brought in
the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the
primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the
jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
preclude the right of the Borough of Madison, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court.
The violation of any section or subsection of this section shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this section.
Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
M. Penalties. Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation, with
each day or documented act or occurrence to be considered a separate
violation.
A. Site plan data. In addition to the site plan approval requirements
contained in this chapter, no building or structure shall hereinafter be
§ 195-37.10 MADISON CODE § 195-38
191:938
erected, enlarged, expanded, externally altered or modified nor shall
any paving, fill, excavation or improvements be permitted within any
floodplain area unless a site plan shall have been submitted to the
Planning Board for its review and approval.
(1) Said site plan shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch
equals 50 feet and shall show, in addition to the information
required under other ordinances, the following information:
(a) Existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(b) Proposed finished grade elevations at the corners of any
structure or structures.
(c) Existing topography and proposed grading at contour intervals
of at least one foot.
(d) The lowest elevation within any proposed structure after its
completion.
(e) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed storm
drainage facilities and other utilities servicing or proposed to
service the premises in question.
(f) The location, size, and nature of all existing and proposed
drainage rights-of-way or easements and the location, size and
description of any lands to be dedicated to the municipality,
county or state.
(g) The layout and size of existing and proposed public or private
streets.
(h) The elevation of any existing or proposed pumping facilities.
(i) The nature and extent of any construction alterations or
repairs.
(j) The location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question
and any contiguous lots owned by the applicant has a direct or
indirect interest.
(k) Proof of stream encroachment lines obtained from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(l) Flood hazard elevations and boundaries shall be shown based
upon the latest information shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(m) The extent of filling of the land, if any.
(n) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed erosion
and siltation control measures, such as slope protection, soil
stabilization, sedimentation basins, sediment traps, headwalls,
aprons and the like.
§ 195-38 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-38
191:939
(o) The applicant shall submit proof that:
[1] Proposed structures are designed and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
[2] Materials and utility equipment used are resistant to flood
damage.
[3] Construction utilizes methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
[4] Subdivision proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage in flood-prone areas.
[5] All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are designed, constructed
and located to prevent, minimize or eliminate flood
damage or infiltration.
(p) Any and all other information and data necessary to meet any
of the requirements of this article.
(2) In addition, where required by the Board, the developer shall
furnish information relating to subsurface conditions, based on
percolation tests and soil borings or probes. Test borings or probes
shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer with proven
competency in the field of soils engineering and shall be in
accordance with acceptable engineering standards and practices.
A detailed report of the test shall be submitted to the Board and
Borough Engineer for review.
(3) Any application for site plan approval under this section shall be
acted upon by the Board within 45 days of the filing date, or within
95 days of the filing date if the site plan requires a variance as
provided for in § 195-41. The filing date shall be that date when a
complete application is filed with the Secretary of the Board.
(4) Action by the Board may be conditioned upon any required
approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(5) Board disapproval shall include written findings upon any site plan
element found contrary to the provisions or intent of this article.
(6) Any application shall include a certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the applicable provisions of this Article VI. A copy of
such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
§ 195-43.
§ 195-38 MADISON CODE § 195-38
191:940
§ 195-39. Specific floodplain requirements.
B. Permits. No person or persons shall engage in a permitted use within a
delineated floodplain until all necessary permits have been obtained
from those governmental agencies from which approval is required,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
C. Conditions. The Board may impose such conditions on permitted uses
as it deems appropriate to promote the public safety, health and
welfare, to protect public and private property, wildlife and fisheries
and to preserve, protect and enhance the natural environment of the
floodplain. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all
conditions of approval have been complied with.
A. Preservation of natural land.
(1) It is hereby found that natural floodplains display complex intimate
relationships among streams, periodic flooding, soils, vegetation,
fish and wildlife and that periodic flooding of lowland areas,
marshes and swamps adjacent to stream channels produces a rich
physical chemical environment for many living organisms. It is
further found that floodplains contain biological communities
which are among the most productive of natural systems and
perform the following functions essential to the natural
environment:
(a) Passage and storage of storm floodwaters.
(b) Removal of sediment loads from streams through deposition.
(c) Replenishment of groundwater supplies through soil
infiltration.
(d) Dissipation of energy of flood flows, thereby reducing
downstream destruction.
(e) Provide areas of recreational and aesthetic pleasure.
(2) Because of the importance of the natural floodplain as cited above
all natural land within any delineated floodplain, except for land to
be developed in accordance with this chapter, shall be preserved in
its natural state, and where possible, developed land within the
floodplain shall be restored to its natural state so as to duplicate
the natural or undeveloped drainage characteristics in terms of
runoff and velocity.
(3) Whenever the alteration or relocation of a watercourse is required,
the applicant shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, County of Morris,
and adjacent communities. The applicant shall assure that the
§ 195-38 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-39
191:941
flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of
any watercourse is maintained and conforms with the state plan.
B. Performance standards. In reviewing any proposed construction or
development, the Board shall be reasonably assured upon evidence
submitted by the applicant that any structure, when built or altered,
can be occupied without peril to the health or safety of the occupant
and that the proposed land use:
(1) Has an inherent low flood-damage potential.
(2) Either acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses,
does not obstruct flood flows.
(3) Does not affect adversely the water-carrying or storage capacity of
any channel floodway or flood fringe area.
(4) Does not increase erosion or the rate of local runoff.
(5) Does not unduly stress or degrade the natural environment of the
floodplain or degrade the quality of surface water or the quality and
quantity of groundwaters.
(6) Does not require channel modification or relocation.
(7) Is set forth in Article V as a permitted use for that portion of the
floodplain where proposed and is not a prohibited use as set forth
below.
C. Prohibited uses in channels, floodways and flood fringe areas.
(1) Channel. Within any channel, structures shall not be erected,
expanded or externally altered, and fill, excavation or other
improvements or changes shall not be permitted except in
connection with stream improvement or stabilization, which
improvements or changes shall have the specific approval of the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
Board. The Morris County Planning Board shall receive copies of all
exhibits for their review and approval as required.
(2) Floodway.
(a) Within any floodway, structures shall not be erected, enlarged,
expanded or externally altered, and fill, excavation or other
improvements or changes shall not be permitted, except in
connection with stream improvement or stabilization, which
improvement or changes shall have the specific approval of the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
Board. The Morris County Planning Board shall receive copies
of all exhibits for their review and approval as required.
(b) The accepted practices of soil husbandry and farming, as well
as recreational uses in the nature of parks, playgrounds, picnic
§ 195-39 MADISON CODE § 195-39
191:942
areas, golf courses and boat landings shall be permitted in
accordance with the issuance of a permit as provided by
§ 195-38B of this article. No material, equipment or vehicles
shall be parked or stored in the floodway, even in conjunction
with a permitted use.
(c) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood
elevation data has been provided and no floodway has been
designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
(3) Flood fringe area. Within any flood fringe area, structures other
than mobile homes may be constructed, erected, enlarged,
expanded, externally altered or modified, and fill, excavation and
other improvements may be permitted in the flood fringe area after
receiving specific approval of the Board for a use allowed in Article
V and further subject to the conditions set forth in this article.
(4) Upon application for such a permit, the Board shall notify the
Borough Environmental Commission and the governing bodies and
environmental commissions of other municipalities which may be
affected by the proposed use. Such notifications shall include the
name and address of the applicant, the location of the proposed use
and abbreviated description of the proposed use and
announcement as to where and at what times the complete
application may be reviewed and to whom and by what date
interested parties may communicate their positions concerning the
application and any data that they may have developed in reference
to the effects of the proposed use. The Board shall review the
application and all information received under § 195-38.
(5) In reviewing the application and arriving at findings, the Board
shall consult with the Borough Engineer and other experts and
consider the following criteria in addition to those set forth in
§ 195-38.
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
insulation of these systems from disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions resulting from flooding.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the
effects of such damage.
(e) The need for a waterfront location.
§ 195-39 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-39
191:943
(f) The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding.
(g) The duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
floodwaters expected at the site.
(h) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(i) The extent to which the hydraulic capacity of the floodway will
be disrupted.
(j) The degree to which the proposed use serves the general
public's health, safety and welfare.
(k) The degree to which any aspect of food chain or plant, animal,
fish or human life processes are affected adversely within or
beyond the proposed use area.
(l) The degree to which the proposed activity alters natural water
flow or water temperature.
(m) The degree to which the proposed use provides facilities for
the proper handling of litter, trash, refuse and sanitary and
industrial waste.
(n) The degree to which irreplaceable land types will be destroyed.
(o) The degree to which the natural, scenic and aesthetic values at
the proposed development site can be retained.
(p) The degree to which materials not subject to major damage by
floods are firmly anchored to prevent flotation and/or are
readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
(6) If the Board finds that the proposed use would violate or tend to
violate the purposes and intent of this article, the application shall
be denied.
D. Conditions of approval for permitted uses. If the application will not
violate the purposes and intent of this chapter, the Board may approve
the application and impose such conditions as are necessary to promote
the public safety, health and welfare, to protect public and private
property, wildlife and to preserve, protect and enhance the natural
environment of the floodplain.
(1) General conditions. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(b) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions.
§ 195-39 MADISON CODE § 195-39
191:944
(c) Requirements for construction of stormwater detention
facilities, channel modifications, dikes, levees and other
protective measures.
(d) Installation of an adequate flood-warning system.
(e) Postponement of development until such time as protective
measures are installed or until the floodway and flood hazard
areas have been delineated by the NJDEP or the applicant to
the satisfaction of the Borough.
(2) Specific conditions. The following regulations shall apply to all
numbered A Zones and, in addition, to all unnumbered A Zones
where, in the absence of FIA base flood elevation data, the Planning
Board shall obtain, review and utilize any base flood elevation data
available from a federal, state or other source.
(a) Where the lowest floor of any new structure is more than two
feet above the existing grade at the perimeter of said
structure, the site shall be filled. Such fill shall be subject to
the following conditions:
[1] All fill material shall be well-compacted.
[2] The elevation of the fill shall be not more than two feet
below the base flood elevation.
[3] The elevation of the fill at the perimeter of the structure
shall be equal to the elevation of the fill beneath the
structure.
[4] Fill at the perimeter of the structure shall be stabilized by
a retaining wall or by slopes of not greater than 4:1 and
shall be protected from erosion.
[5] Where fill is stabilized by a retaining wall, said fill shall
extend beyond the perimeter of the structure a distance
equal to not less than twice the height of the retaining wall
or five feet, whichever is the greater.
(b) All new residential construction, residential additions and
substantial improvements of residential structures within the
floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to not less than six inches above the base flood
elevation. For purposes of site plan review and approval, the
requirement of six inches above the base flood elevation shall
not include a detached garage; nor shall it include a patio,
terrace, deck or an unheated and unenclosed porch, provided
that any entrance from such a structure to a main structure
shall be a minimum of six inches above the base flood
elevation. The floor of an attached garage may be not more
than two feet below the base flood elevation, provided that the
§ 195-39 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-39
191:945
portions of all walls and partitions below the base flood
elevation are floodproofed and further provided that any
entrance from an attached garage to a main structure shall be
a minimum of six inches above the base flood elevation.
(c) All new nonresidential construction within the floodplain shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to not less
than one foot above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed
as set forth in Subsection D(2)(d) below. Floodproofing alone
shall not be considered adequate for residences, hospitals,
nursing homes, schools, day-care centers and similar uses.
(d) Floodproofing measures shall be consistent with the base flood
elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations,
rates of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces and other
similar factors. The Board shall require the applicant to submit
a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with
the base flood elevation and associated flood factors. Any or all
of the following floodproofing measures may be required:
[1] Anchorage to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
[2] Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or
similar devices.
[3] Reinforced walls to resist water pressures.
[4] Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
[5] Addition of weight to structures to resist flotation.
[6] Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
[7] Pumping facilities or comparable measures for the
subsurface drainage systems of buildings to relieve
external foundation wall and basement flood pressures.
[8] Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
[9] Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm
drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent
back up of sewage or stormwaters into the structure.
Gravity drainage of basements may be eliminated by
mechanical devices.
[10] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and airconditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall
be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
§ 195-39 MADISON CODE § 195-39
191:946
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[11] Storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids or other toxic or hazardous
materials shall be situated above the base flood elevation
and shall be floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage
containers or damage to storage containers which could
result in the escape of toxic materials into the floodwaters.
[12] Use of construction materials which are resistant to water
damage.
[13] For all new construction and substantial improvements,
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject
to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
[a] Fully enclosed areas shall have a minimum of two
openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding one foot above grade.
[b] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(e) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces. All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within an area of special flood hazard
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top
of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
E. Materials prohibited in channels, floodways and flood fringe areas. No
person shall hereafter engage in, cause or permit other persons to
engage in prohibited uses within a delineated floodplain. The following
uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Placing, depositing or dumping any solid waste, garbage, refuse,
trash, rubbish or debris.
(2) Dumping or discharging untreated domestic sewage or industrial
wastes, either solid or liquid.
§ 195-39 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-39
191:947
§ 195-40. Flood insurance.
(3) The storage or disposal of pesticides.
(4) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
buoyant, flammable or explosive.
(5) The storage or processing of hazardous materials that could be
injurious in time of flooding to human, animal or plant life.
F. Preexisting nonconforming structures and uses.
(1) Structures or land uses in any floodplain which existed on or before
the effective date of this chapter may be permitted to continue,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) If any preexisting structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its replacement
cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) No preexisting structure shall be moved, altered, expanded,
changed or enlarged unless the provisions of this chapter are
complied with. This provision does not apply to routine
maintenance and repair, provided that such maintenance and
repair does not increase the flood damage potential of the
structure.
(c) In any portion of the floodplain, an existing nonconforming use
or structure may be altered or expanded, provided that such
alteration or expansion does not increase its ground coverage
or flood damage potential.
(2) If actual construction of a structure is underway on or before the
effective date of this chapter, then such construction may be
completed. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in a permanent position and
fastened in a permanent manner. The provisions of Subsection F(1)
above shall apply to such structures upon completion of
construction.
(3) Structures in the floodway abandoned for six consecutive months
or longer and structures abandoned for 12 consecutive months or
longer in the flood fringe area after the effective date of this
chapter shall not qualify as preexisting uses.
G. Flood map. The Board, after proper investigation, survey and public
hearing, may recommend amendments to the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development Flood Map.
A. Flood insurance, in accordance with the National Flood Insurance
Program of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, shall be required for all development in the floodplain.
§ 195-39 MADISON CODE § 195-40
191:948
§ 195-41. Variances.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to
actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance,
except as defined in § 195-41 of this article.
B. The Federal Insurance Rate Map shall be used to determine applicable
zones for flood insurance for a particular dwelling. The applicant shall
verify that the latest available flood elevations and the Federal
Insurance Rate Maps are being utilized in the determination of the
flood elevations.
C. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Madison," dated April 15,
2002, as subsequently amended with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps or any approved subsequent revision, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this article. The Flood Insurance
Study is on file at the Engineer's Office in the Borough of Madison.
A. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only
and is subject to applicable state and federal laws and regulations. The
Board, after examining the applicant's hardships, shall approve or
disapprove a variance request.
B. While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less
than 1/2 acre as set forth in Subsection E(2) of this section, deviations
from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases
beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing a
variance increases.
C. The Federal Insurance Administrator may review the Board's findings
justifying the granting of variances, and if that review indicated a
pattern inconsistent with the objectives of sound floodplain
management, the Federal Insurance Administrator may take
appropriate action as set forth in Section 1909.24, Paragraph (b) of
Federal Register, Vol. 41, No. 207, dated Tuesday, October 26, 1976,
and as subsequently amended.
D. Variances may be issued by the Board for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places
without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.
E. Procedures for the granting of variances by the Board are as follows:
(1) Variances shall not be issued by the Board within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
(2) Variances may be issued by the Board only for the replacement or
reconstruction of existing nonconforming structures and for
§ 195-40 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-41
191:949
§ 195-41.1. Wetland protection.
additions of not more than 150 square feet to existing residential
structures on lots of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
base flood elevation, in conformance with the procedures of
Subsection E(3) of this section.
(3) Variances shall only be issued by the Board upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause by the applicant, and
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(4) Variance shall only be issued after public hearing as required in
Article II, § 195-10C, upon determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard.
(5) The Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage.
(b) Such construction below the base flood elevation increases
risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained
with a record of all variance actions as required in Subsection
E(6) of this section.
(6) The Board shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance.
(b) Report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
(7) A burden of proof to establish all of the elements required for the
issuance of a variance shall be upon the applicant, who shall prove
these elements by expert testimony and documentation.
A. Wetland delineation. A wetlands letter of interpretation (LOI) from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) shall be
submitted as part of the application for any major subdivision or major
site plan application. A minor subdivision application or a building
§ 195-41 MADISON CODE § 195-41.1
191:950
§ 195-41.2. Steep slopes analysis.
permit application for an individual lot shall be required to perform an
on-site wetland delineation as prepared by a wetland expert suitably
qualified to submit an LOI, but no LOI will be required by this section. If
wetlands or transition areas are present that could be impacted by the
proposed improvements, an NJDEP approved LOI shall be submitted
with the minor subdivision application or building permit application. If
no wetlands are observed, a note to that effect shall be shown on the
plans.
(1) Documentation. All wetland and transition areas required pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1 et seq. (New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act Rules) or any successor statutes or regulations shall
be clearly shown on all plats or site plans submitted for approval.
(2) All final plats, final site plans or individual lot building plans shall
include the wetland line(s) identification number as assigned by
NJDEP, pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
B. Wetland protection standards. To prevent adverse impacts on
delineated wetlands, the following guidelines shall be employed:
(1) A snow fence shall be installed along the limit of disturbance
outside of the final wetland transition area boundary line prior to
any other site disturbance, so as to prevent encroachment into
these regulated areas.
(2) A silt fence and/or hay bales should be installed downstream from
disturbance areas adjacent to the state-mandated wetland
transition area line (or buffer) so as to prevent the transport of silt
into the wetland areas.
(3) Prior to signing of the final plat for site plan, the applicant shall
provide evidence of the filing of any deed restriction required by
NJDEP to permit transition area modifications.
C. Conservation easement. When an LOI or wetlands delineation is
required under Subsection A above, all wetlands and transition areas to
remain undeveloped shall be protected by a conservation easement.
A. The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the intensity of use in
areas of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss and erosion
and the degradation of surface water. Steep slopes are present on a site
when the existing terrain has a slope of 15% or greater as defined
below:
(1) A slope is considered a moderate slope when the grade of the
existing terrain ranges from 15% to 25%.
(2) A slope is considered a critical slope when the grade of the existing
terrain is 25% or greater.
§ 195-41.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-41.2
191:951
§ 195-42. Appeals.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Board, Construction
Code Official or Borough Engineer, an appeal in writing to the governing
body may be taken within 10 days after the date of such action. The
governing body shall fix and notify the appellant of a time and place for
a public hearing on said appeal, and the appellant shall cause notice of
such hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the Borough at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. All parties in interest shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard there. After such hearing, the governing body
shall affirm or reverse the action of the Board, Construction Code Official
or Borough Engineer, stating its findings and reasons for its action, and a
written copy of such action shall be given to the appellant.
§ 195-43. Administration and enforcement.
B. If the steep slopes are present on the subject property, the applicant
shall prepare a steep slope map showing topography at two-foot
contour intervals. The moderate and critical slopes shall be determined
based upon the slope of all the land areas showing slope classes of 0%
to 14.99%, 15% to 24.99% and 25% or greater. The map shall also
include a calculation of the area of proposed disturbance of each slope
class on each existing and proposed lot, as well as within any proposed
road right-of-way, and be regulated as follows:
(1) Areas with slopes ranging from 0% to 14.99% are not restricted to
development.
(2) Areas of moderate slopes shall require detailed site grading and
architectural plans which focus on minimizing development activity
in these areas. Up to 1/4 of all moderate slopes identified on-site
are permitted to be developed. The architectural plans must be
specifically designed to accommodate the topography. Roads and
driveways should be designed to follow the natural topography to
the greatest extent possible and minimize disturbance.
(3) Areas of critical slopes are restricted from development unless the
disturbance is for roadway crossings or utility construction, or it is
demonstrated that the roadway or utility improvements are critical
and no reasonable alternatives exist. The applicant may be
required to provide additional documentation of soil types, land
cover, tree surveys, stability calculations or field controls on
specific encroachment areas in order to justify the control of
impacts.
C. Disturbance of steep slope areas in an amount greater than that
indicated in the foregoing section shall require variance.
A. The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article
relating to the construction, erection, maintenance and continued
operation at design capacity of stormwater detention facilities and
§ 195-41.2 MADISON CODE § 195-43
191:952
other facilities, structures, devices and techniques required to carry out
the objectives of this article shall be the responsibility of the Borough
Engineer.
B. Failure to maintain any stormwater detention facility, structure or
device at design capacity or to carry out required procedures or
techniques shall be considered a violation of this article.
C. When base flood elevation and floodway data have not been provided by
the Federal Insurance Administrator, the Borough Engineer shall
obtain, maintain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
data available from any federal, state or other source in order to
administer this Article VI.
D. The Borough Engineer shall maintain a permanent record of on-site
water detention facilities in the Borough of Madison and shall make
periodic inspections to determine that these facilities are being
maintained at design capacities.
E. The permanent record maintained by the Borough Engineer shall
include the following information: elevation in feet above sea level of
the lowest habitable floor and basement of all new construction and
substantial improvements; and elevation to which a structure has been
floodproofed. These records shall be made available for public
inspection and be supplied upon request for the purpose of determining
flood insurance premium rates.
F. The Borough Engineer shall serve notice on the owner or occupant to
correct any violation of Article VI within 30 days. Upon failure of said
owner or occupant to correct such violation, the Borough shall
prosecute a complaint to correct such violation before the Municipal
Judge and owner or occupant shall be liable to pay fines in accordance
with this chapter not to exceed $1,500 per violation.
§ 195-43 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-43
191:953

ARTICLE VII
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control; Soil Moving
[Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 9-1992; 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
26-2002]
§ 195-44. Soil erosion and sediment control.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control soil erosion and the
resulting sedimentation from occurring by requiring proper provisions
for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during and after
construction in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience
and general welfare of the community. These rules and regulations
further adopt the purposes of P.L. 1975, Chapter 251, N.J.S.A.4:29-39 et
seq. and N.J.A.C., Chapter 90, Title 2, entitled "Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act."
B. Control plan. No site plan or land subdivision involving more than two
acres or containing more than three lots shall be approved by any board
unless it includes a soil erosion and sediment control plan in
accordance with the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey" as adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee on
April 12, 1999, or most recent revision (reference standards) and
enforced by the Morris County Soil Conservation District and further in
these regulations by the Borough of Madison. The Board may require a
soil erosion and sediment control plan for any exempted project, if, in
its judgment, the topography of the site requires consideration of soil
erosion and sediment control plans. No certificate of occupancy for any
building will be granted unless all needed soil erosion control measures
have been completed or substantially provided for in accordance with
this section. The applicant shall bear the responsibility for the
installation and construction of all required soil erosion and sediment
control measures according to the provisions of this chapter. The
applicant may consult with the Morris County Soil Conservation District
in the development of the plan and the selection of appropriate erosion
and sediment control measures.
C. Data required. The applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sediment
control plan for the entire tract of land. The soil erosion and sediment
control plan shall contain:
(1) Plans and specifications of soil erosion and sediment control
measures in accordance with the reference standards.
(2) A site-specific timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting
and completion dates of the development sequence in accordance
with reference standards and also the time of exposure of each area
prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control
measures.
D. Permits. No land subject to this section shall be cleared, graded,
transported or otherwise disturbed for any purpose, including but not
§ 195-44 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-44
191:955
limited to the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals or
removal of other natural resources, the development of golf courses or
other recreational facilities and the construction of roads and streets by
any person, partnership or corporation within the Borough, unless:
(1) There has been a plan approved by the Board that provides for
minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation consistent with this
chapter and there has been a valid grading permit issued by the
Borough Engineer; or
(2) There has been a determination by the Board that a plan for
minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation is not necessary.
E. Preparation of plans. The plans shall be prepared and duly signed and
sealed by a professional engineer, architect or land surveyor.
F. Implementation. Since considerable soil erosion can take place during
land disturbance, development plans shall contain proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures. These measures shall be
incorporated into the final plat and final construction drawings. Soil
erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the reference
standards. The measures shall apply to all features of the construction
site, including street and utility installations, as well as to the
protection of individual lots. Measures shall also be instituted to
prevent or control soil erosion and sedimentation during the various
stages of development.
G. General design principles. The following principles are effective in
minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation and shall be included, where
applicable, in the soil erosion and sediment control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize soil erosion.
(2) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(3) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(4) Temporary seedings and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(5) Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
(6) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of sediment basins or other acceptable
methods.
§ 195-44 MADISON CODE § 195-44
191:956
(7) Diversions, sediment basins and so forth shall be constructed prior
to any other on-site grading or disturbance of existing surface
material.
H. Detailed design standards. Standards and specifications for measures
used in the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be in
accordance with the reference standards. Copies of "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey" of the Morris County Soil
Conservation District shall be on file in the offices of the Morris County
Soil Conservation District and the Borough Clerk.
I. Maintenance of control measures. Applicants or developers or
subsequent owners of property carrying out soil erosion and sediment
control measures under this article shall adequately maintain all
permanent soil erosion control measures, devices and plantings in
effective working condition.
J. Maintenance bond. Upon the certification of the Borough Engineer that
any permanent soil erosion and sediment control measures installed by
individuals or developers pursuant to this chapter have a direct effect
on public improvements in the vicinity of the proposed development,
the Board shall require the individual or developer to post a surety
maintenance bond with the Borough Clerk for an amount equal to 10%
of the improvements constructed. A direct effect on public
improvements shall mean that should the soil erosion and sediment
control measures constructed by a developer or applicant be destroyed,
fail to operate properly, be removed or any other such happenstance,
such occurrence would prevent or hinder the proper operation of a
public improvement in that vicinity. The value of the improvements
constructed shall be determined by the Borough Engineer, and the
surety maintenance bond shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough
Attorney. The maintenance bond shall be for a term of two years.
K. Fees. A fee of $20 per acre (with a minimum fee of $100) shall be paid to
the Board for each soil erosion and sediment control plan filed with the
Board to cover the cost of reviewing said plan and any on-site
inspections by the Borough Engineer.
L. Enforcement. The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the
Borough Engineer, who shall inspect or require adequate inspection of
the work. If the Borough Engineer finds any existing conditions not as
stated in any application, he may refuse to approve further work or
notify the district of noncompliance. The Morris County Soil
Conservation District or Borough of Madison may issue a stop-work
order if the applicant/owner takes no action to comply with the
approved plan.
M. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate any provision of this section shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
§ 195-44 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-44
191:957
§ 195-45. Soil moving.
or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation or offense. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
N. Appeal. If any person against whom a stop-work order is issued by the
district or local authority is aggrieved by such action, said person may,
within 10 days, appeal to the State Soil Conservation Committee which
shall schedule a hearing and make a determination in the case.
A. Permit required. No person shall remove or deposit soil on any
premises in the Borough of Madison other than on the premises from
which the soil shall be moved, unless a permit therefor is first secured
from the Borough Council as hereinafter set forth; provided, however,
that no permit shall be required for the following:
(1) The moving of excess soil resulting from foundation or cellar
excavations up to 100 cubic yards total.
(2) The moving of soil upon any lot containing less than 20,000 square
feet on which there is an existing one- or two-family dwelling.
(3) The moving of soil for gardening primarily for home consumption
or landscaping for aesthetic purposes, not to exceed 20% of the lot
area and 100 cubic yards.
(4) The moving of soil which does not result in either substantial
changes in grade and/or elevation or does not significantly alter
drainage runoff patterns from said lot.
B. Information required for permit application.
(1) Application for a soil-moving permit shall be filed with the Borough
Engineer, in triplicate, accompanied by the fee set forth in
Subsection D hereof, setting forth the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner if other than the applicant.
(c) The description and location of the land in question, including
the tax map lot and block numbers.
(d) The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
(e) The kind and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be moved.
(f) The origin and destination of soil to be moved.
(g) The quality of origin and destination soils with reference to the
state soil cleanup criteria.
(h) The proposed date of commencement and completion of the
soil moving.
§ 195-44 MADISON CODE § 195-45
191:958
(i) The name, address and telephone number of the person having
direct charge over the soil-moving operation.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a topographical map, in
triplicate, of the lands in question. Said map shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed land
surveyor on a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch, showing the
following:
(a) The present grades on a fifty-foot grid layout.
(b) The proposed finished grades.
(c) The quantity, in cubic yards, of the soil to be moved.
(d) The grades of all streets and lots within 100 feet of the
property in question.
(e) Proposed slopes and lateral supports.
(f) Present and proposed surface water drainage.
C. Notice to neighboring property owners. After receipt of an application
for a permit as set forth in Subsection A hereof, the Council shall advise
the applicant that the matter will be considered at a meeting to be held
not less than 15 nor more than 30 days thereafter. Upon being advised
of the date of the meeting for consideration of the application, the
applicant shall serve written notice, either by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, upon all property owners
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property as their names
appear on the Borough tax records. Said notice shall be served as
aforesaid, not later than seven days prior to the date of the meeting
scheduled for consideration of the application. The applicant shall
deliver an affidavit of service to the Borough Clerk at least two days
prior to the date of said meeting.
D. Fees.
(1) Along with the application, there shall be deposited with the
Borough Clerk a permit fee calculated in accordance with the
following schedule:
Cubic Yards of Soil to
be Moved Fee
Up to 500 $100.00
Above 500 $250.00 plus a sum computed at
$0.15 per cubic yard multiplied by the
number of yards
(2) The charge in accordance with the schedule hereinbefore set forth
shall include all engineering and other services the Borough may
§ 195-45 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-45
191:959
deem desirable or necessary to assure an orderly soil operation in
full compliance with provisions of this section.
E. Considerations governing grant of permit.
(1) In considering and reviewing applications for soil moving permits,
the Borough Council shall be guided and take into consideration
the public health, safety and general welfare, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support, slope and grades of abutting streets and
lands.
(e) Land values and uses.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of
the Borough.
(2) If, following the hearing during which all persons shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, the Borough Council shall be of the
opinion that the proposed soil moving will not create conditions
detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety; will not result
in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil
erosion or fertility problems or depressed land values; or create
any drainage or sewerage problem or hazardous conditions,
permission to move soil shall be granted.
F. Regulation of soil-moving operations. If a permit to move soil is issued
in accordance with the provisions of this section, the operation
conducted thereunder shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The person or persons receiving the permit shall agree, in writing,
to properly level off, remove debris and grade the premises to
conform to the contour lines established by the Borough Council.
(2) Operations shall be conducted only during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m. on normal weekdays. It shall be unlawful to conduct
moving, grading or excavating operations Saturdays, Sundays,
legal holidays or off-hours except by specific written permission of
the Engineer, with specific concern for machinery producing
excessive noise or requiring additional monitoring.
(3) Soil-moving operations shall be restricted to street routes
established by the Borough Council. Determination by the Council
of the street routes to be used shall be based on factors which
§ 195-45 MADISON CODE § 195-45
191:960
contribute to the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Borough.
(4) All reasonable means shall be employed by the person or persons
conducting a soil-moving or grading or excavating operation to
prevent air pollution by large quantities of dust and dirt. Such
means may include, but are not necessarily limited to, spraying
water, oil or other dampening agents on the surface of the ground.
(5) Permits for the moving of soil issued in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be transferable.
(6) The person or persons receiving the permit shall not take away the
top layer of arable soil for a depth of 12 inches, but such layer of
topsoil shall be set aside and shall be respread over the premises
when the rest of the soil has been removed, in conformity with the
contour lines approved by the Borough Council.
G. Deposit of removed soil. Where soil moving is permitted, no person,
owner, developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the
grade of any lot without first making provisions for:
(1) The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not
result in deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity
thereof by reason of shrinkage or settlement.
(2) The collection and storage upon the lot of original topsoil not being
buried beneath soil or other material of inferior quality and the
uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored over the entire area or
surface of the fill soil or other material, so that the final grade or
grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the
event that this requirement is not practicable, provision shall be
made for the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of
the fill soil or other material, except only such portions thereof as
shall be or shall have become permanently covered by a building or
structure, street, pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other
paved area; by any body of water or waterway; or by a layer of
topsoil not inferior in quality to that of the original topsoil to a
depth of not less than six inches, measured from the proposed final
grades as shown on the topographical map. The determination of
quality which shall be the same as or better than originally existed,
as referred to hereinabove, shall be by competent authority in case
of dispute between the permit holder and the Borough.
(3) The preservation of existing watercourses, in accordance with the
plans on file.
(4) The planting of shrubbery and trees as may be directed by the
Shade Tree Management Board.
§ 195-45 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-45
191:961
(5) At no time will excavations be permitted to go below the final grade
as established by the plans approved.
(6) The seeding of the entire area upon completion of the restoration of
the topsoil in accordance with the requirements hereof. The seed
spread shall germinate to the extent that soil erosion by wind and
water will be limited. The seed shall be of rye grass or comparable
quality.
H. Certification of soil moved. The permittee shall, within 10 days after the
end of each month, furnish the Borough Engineer with certification by a
licensed engineer or land surveyor as to the soil moved during the
preceding month.
I. Performance bond. Prior to the issuance of a soil moving permit, the
applicant shall have posted with the Borough a performance guaranty
conditioned upon full compliance with all the terms and conditions of
approval. The amount of the bond shall be in accordance with the
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, which amount shall be
sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of the work to be
undertaken as approved. The form of the bond shall be approved by the
Borough Attorney.
J. Enforcement officer; inspections. The Borough Engineer is hereby
designated as the officer whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions
of this section. He shall, from time to time, upon his initiative, and
whenever directed by the Borough Council, inspect the premises for
which permits have been granted to ensure compliance with the terms
of the permit and of this section.
K. Abandonment or delay of project; extension of permit.
(1) In the event that, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the soilmoving
project or any part thereof has been abandoned or
unnecessarily delayed and completion cannot be within the time
set forth in the soil-moving permit, the Borough Engineer may so
certify to the Borough Council, in writing, and after hearing on
seven days' notice to the permittee, in writing, by certified mail at
the address on the permit application, the Borough Council may
revoke the permit or call upon any surety on the performance
guaranty to complete the project. In the event that a cash deposit
guaranty is posted, the Borough may complete the project and
deduct the cost thereof from the deposit.
(2) A permit hereunder shall be in force for one year. Applications for
the extension of the permit shall be made upon the submission of
the data required in Subsection B. As of the date of the application
for renewal, a renewal permit may be issued by the Borough
Council once, but for a period of no longer than one year.
L. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
§ 195-45 MADISON CODE § 195-45
191:962
$500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such
convictions shall be had. Each and every violation of this section, or
each day that any provision of this section shall have been violated,
shall be constructed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
§ 195-45 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-45
191:963

ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing Development Fees
[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 19-2005; amended 12-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 57-2006; 5-30-2007 by Ord. No. 36-2007; 9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 59-2007]
§ 195-46. Fees; exemptions; collection; housing trust fund; use of
fees.
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's rules.
Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
article shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees.
B. Basic requirements. The Borough of Madison shall continue to collect
development fees, and shall spend those development fees in
accordance with any spending plan approved by COAH or approved in
the court action. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the housing element and fair share plan and includes, but is not
limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Funds paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement
of property as permitted in COAH's rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the municipal tax assessor through a process designed to ensure that
all property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio
or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building
permit may be obtained utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by
the municipal tax assessor.
D. Residential development fees.
§ 195-46 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-46
191:965
(1) Within all zoning districts(s), developers of new residential
housing, which shall include any residential development on an
existing lot on which a former residential structure was located,
within the Borough shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized assessed
value for residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(3) No fee shall be charged pursuant to this section for any addition or
improvement to an existing residential structure, so long as such
addition or improvement does not increase the equalized assessed
value of the existing structure, as of the date hereof, by more than
50%.
E. Nonresidential development fees. Nonresidential development fees
shall be collected in accordance with The New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Fee Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.8. [Amended
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
F. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions.
(1) Affordable housing developments shall be exempt from
development fees. All other forms of new construction shall be
subject to development fees unless exempted below.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval
prior to the imposition of a municipal development fee shall be
exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approval.
(3) Subject to the provisions of § 195-46D(3), development fees shall
be imposed and collected when an existing structure is expanded
or undergoes a change to a more intense use. The development fee
shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value
of the improved structure.
(4) Developments that are providing for greater affordable housing
pursuant to § 195-48 and are subject to § 195-48 shall not be
subject to the development fee pursuant to this § 195-46.
[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
§ 195-46 MADISON CODE § 195-46
191:966
G. Collection of fees. Fifty percent of the development fee will be collected
at the time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion
will be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the
fee calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
H. Contested fees. Imposed and collected development fees that are
challenged shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the
Borough of Madison. If all or a portion of the contested fees are
returned to the developer, the accrued interest on the returned amount
shall also be returned.
I. Affordable housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls. All development fees paid
by developers pursuant to this article shall be deposited into this
fund.
(2) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Madison shall provide COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement
between the municipality, the bank, and COAH to permit COAH to
direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C.
5:94-6.16(b).
(3) No funds shall be expended from the affordable housing trust fund
unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by
COAH. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be
used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
J. Use of funds.
(1) Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH to address the municipal fair share.
Such activities include, but are not limited to: rehabilitation, new
construction, ECHO housing, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
purchase of housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance
designed to increase affordability, or administration necessary for
implementation of the housing element and fair share plan. The
expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH or a spending plan approved in the court action.
[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Madison
for past housing activities.
§ 195-46 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-46
191:967
(3) After subtracting development fees collected to finance a
rehabilitation program or a new construction project that are
necessary to address the Borough of Madison's affordable housing
obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal fair share
plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of
development fees collected shall be used to provide affordability
assistance to those households earning 30% or less of median
income by region. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, and
rental assistance.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the third round municipal fair share
plan to make them affordable to households earning 30% or
less of median income. The use of development fees in this
manner shall entitle the Borough of Madison to bonus credits
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) The Borough of Madison may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its housing element and fair share
plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
(5) No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
each year shall be expended on administration, including, but not
limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or
consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new
construction program, a housing element and fair share plan, and/
or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation
program, no more than 20% of the revenues collected from
development fees shall be expended for such administrative
expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring
requirements. Development fee administrative costs are calculated
and may be expended at the end of each year or upon receipt of the
fees. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
K. Monitoring. The Borough of Madison shall complete and return to
COAH all monitoring forms included in the annual monitoring report
related to the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
§ 195-46 MADISON CODE § 195-46
191:968
units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
and the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms
designed by COAH.173
173. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, regarding the ongoing collection of fees, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016.
§ 195-46 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-46
191:969

ARTICLE IX
Affordable Housing
[Added 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 47-2006; amended 12-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 57-2006; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 59-2006]
§ 195-47. Affordable housing policies, procedures and
administration.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this article to regulate the development and
management of low- and moderate-income housing units constructed in
compliance with the Housing Element of the Master Plan of the
Borough of Madison.
B. Madison Affordable Housing Corporation
(1) The Mayor and Borough Council hereby appoint, constitute and
designate the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation ("Madison
Affordable Housing Corporation") to monitor compliance of the
Borough of Madison in providing housing for low- and moderateincome
families as per regulations set forth by the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). The "Madison Affordable
Housing Corporation" shall adopt all such rules, regulations and
procedures as are necessary to effectuate the foregoing and to
meet the intent of performing all the responsibilities, functions and
duties of the Affordable Housing Policy set forth in Article VIII.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this § 195-47B to the contrary, the
Mayor and Borough Council may, at any time by resolution,
designate an entity other than the Madison Affordable Housing
Corporation to perform all or any portion of the administrative and/
or other functions set forth in § 195-47. [Added 7-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 52-2016]
(3) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation is hereby granted
and shall have and exercise the following powers:
(a) Review, with the assistance of the Affordable Housing
Administrator, regulations pertaining to the sale and rental of
affordable housing units.
(b) With the assistance of the Affordable Housing Administrator,
prepare amendments and additions to regulations as it deems
necessary or appropriate to implement the purpose of this
article. Such amendments and additions shall be submitted to
the governing body and shall not become effective until
approved by the Borough Council.
(c) Hold hearings upon notice to adjudicate the complaints of
developers or applicants, owners and renters if the developer,
applicant, owner or enter is not satisfied with the rulings of the
Affordable Housing Administrator. In matters involving a
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:971
hearing, the Affordable Housing Administrator shall give 10
days' written notice to all parties involved and shall give all
interested parties an opportunity to be heard.
(d) With the assistance of the Affordable Housing Administrator,
review requests from federal, state, county or local agencies
regarding funding or applications for funding.
(e) With the assistance of the Affordable Housing Administrator,
make recommendations to the Borough Council regarding how
town funds or funds collected from developer's contributions
for affordable housing should be spent and propose priorities
for such expenditures.
(f) Review all affirmative marketing plans submitted by any
developer, applicant or owner in connection with affordable
housing under the auspices of COAH.
(g) Administer all resale and rerental transactions as per
Subsections H through K of this section.
C. Affordable Housing Administrator.
(1) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation shall appoint an
Affordable Housing Administrator (the Administrator) to monitor
sales and resales of affordable housing units.
(2) Initial sales and rental transactions of affordable housing units
shall be administered by the developer under the advisory review
of the Borough of Madison Affordable Housing Corporation as per
Subsection G of this section. All resale and rerental transactions of
all affordable housing units shall be administered by the Madison
Affordable Housing Corporation as per Subsection G of this section.
(3) The Administrator may delegate the administration of all or part of
the duties named in this section to the Department of Community
Affairs, a nonprofit organization or another qualified entity. Such
delegation must be approved by the Madison Affordable Housing
Corporation.
(4) The Administrator may charge a reasonable fee to program
participants for the administration of this affordability controls
program.
D. Submission of affordable housing plan. The developer of low- and
moderate-income housing units shall submit to the Madison Affordable
Housing Corporation a description of the mechanism to be used to
ensure that the required low- and moderate-income units are sold or
rented only to low- and moderate-income households for a period of not
less than 30 years. In addition to such description, actual samples of
language to be included in the nature of covenants shall be submitted.
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:972
[Amended 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No.
35-2015]
E. Occupancy selection.
(1) The Administrator shall designate an application period during
which applications to purchase or rent affordable housing units will
be accepted.
(2) Applications shall be accepted only if submitted on an application
form prepared and/or approved by the Administrator. Applications
shall be completely filled out and notarized. Knowingly or
intentionally making any false statement on a form shall be grounds
for disqualifying an applicant even if the applicant is otherwise
eligible. The following information shall be required:
(a) A copy of IRS Form 1040A or 1040EZ (tax computation form)
for each of the three years prior to date of the application.
(b) A letter from all employers stating present annual income or
four consecutive pay stubs dated within 120 days of the
interview date.
(c) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying benefits,
including, but not limited to, social security or pension.
(d) A letter or appropriate reporting forms verifying any other
source of income claimed by the applicant household.
(e) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by
banks or other financial institutions managing trust funds,
money market accounts, stocks or bonds.
(f) Reports that verify assets that do not earn regular income such
as real estate and savings with delayed earnings provisions.
(3) The Administrator shall determine whether the applicant meets the
income and other requirements established in these regulations.
The review process for a prospective purchaser shall involve a
credit background report; to be an eligible applicant, the applicant
shall have an acceptable credit history such that there is a realistic
possibility that he will be approved for a mortgage.
(4) The Administrator will determine which eligible applicants shall be
offered the opportunity to purchase or rent affordable housing
units. Selection from among the eligible applicants shall be on a
random basis subject only to the priority schedule established in
Subsection E(5) and the provisions established hereunder.
(5) Residency and size of household priorities:
(a) Income-eligible residents of the Borough of Madison shall be
given priority for any units addressing the Borough's present
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:973
need under the Fair Housing Act which are rehabilitated/
created using affordable housing trust funds collected
pursuant to § 195-46. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
52-2016]
(b) Except as provided in Subsection E(5)(a) above, there shall be
no residency preference given to Borough of Madison
residents for units funded in whole or in part from the
affordable housing trust fund, unless such residency
preferences are permitted by COAH or approved in the court
action. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(c) A household of the size provided for in this subchapter shall
have priority over households with a lesser number of persons
for one-bedroom, two-bedroom and three-bedroom units.
Number of
Bedrooms Occupancy
Three-bedroom 4 or more persons (a household of
more than 4 shall be treated the same
as a household of 4.)
Two-bedroom 3 persons
One-bedroom 2 persons
(d) All applicants shall be classified by the Administrator in one of
the priority categories set forth above on the basis of the
information provided in the initial application.
(6) Appeals. In the event that applicant is determined to be ineligible
for a low- or moderate-income unit by the Administrator, the
applicant may submit additional proofs and request
reconsideration by the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation as
per Subsection C of this section. Such request for reconsideration
shall be made within 10 days of receipt of notice of denial by the
applicant.
(7) Waiting list. The Administrator may establish a waiting list for the
remaining eligible applicants in the manner established in
Subsection A. After all the units are occupied, the Administrator
may choose to accept new applications. If an applicant is deemed
eligible, the applicant shall be placed on the waiting list at the
bottom of the particular priority classification for which the
applicant qualifies. The Administrator shall periodically recertify
the applicants on the waiting list to ensure that the list remains
current and that the applicants are still qualified for the units to
which they applied.
F. Income eligibility standards.
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:974
(1) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation shall adopt income
eligibility ceilings for low- and moderate-income units for various
sized households based upon the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) "uncapped median income
by family size" for Morris County and as adopted by COAH. No
applicant with a household income in excess of these ceilings shall
be eligible to rent the low- and moderate-income units.
(2) Upon annual adoption of updated income standards by COAH, the
Administrator shall modify its income eligibility ceilings
accordingly.
(3) For purposes of determining income and eligibility, the
Administrator shall consider:
(a) All sources of income, whether taxable or nontaxable,
including social security and pensions.
(b) Imputed income. For the purpose of determining eligibility and
rents, interest on the present value of real property and
extraordinary personal property owned by the applicant shall
be imputed and deemed additional income. Interest shall be
imputed at the average interest rate on money market
accounts in the region as determined by the Administrator and/
or HUD.
(c) The income and assets of all members of the household as well
as the income and assets of any individual who is expected to
occupy the unit for which the household is seeking to qualify
shall be included in the determination of eligibility and of
rents. The form used for verification of household income shall
include an affidavit attesting that the application contains the
complete income of all current or anticipated household
members.
G. Initial sales and rental prices.
(1) All units offered for sale or rent are to be affordable to a crosssection
of low- and moderate-income households; with respect to
low-income households, that shall include households earning
between 40% and 50% of area median income, adjusted for
household size, and with respect to moderate-income households,
that shall include households earning between 50% and 80% of
area median income, adjusted for household size.
(2) For affordable housing, the average selling price of units in each
unit size category shall not exceed a price affordable to a household
earning 57.5% of the area median income, adjusted for household
size.
(3) Range of prices.
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:975
(a) In order to ensure that units are affordable throughout the
range set forth in Subsection G(1) above, the developer shall
establish a range of stratified prices of sales units for the lowand
moderate-income units, for each unit size. The developer
shall provide, to the extent practicable for the following
distribution of sales process for every 20 low- and moderateincome
units:
[1] Low-income units:
[a] One at 40.0% through 42.5%.
[b] Three at 42.6% through 47.5%.
[c] Six at 47.6% through 50.0%.
[2] Moderate-income units:
[a] One at 50.1% through 57.5%.
[b] One at 57.6% through 64.5%.
[c] One at 64.6% through 68.5%.
[d] One at 68.6% through 72.5%.
[e] Two at 72.6% through 77.5%.
[f] Four at 77.6% through 80.0%.
(b) The average of the range shall not exceed the levels set forth in
Subsection G(2) above.
(4) Sales prices shall be considered affordable where the household
purchasing the unit will not spend more than 28% of gross
household income, after a ten-percent down payment, including the
monthly principal and interest, taxes, insurance and the
homeowners' association fees, if any. In making these calculations,
the following considerations shall govern:
(a) Mortgage payments shall be determined on the basis of a
thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage at the prevailing interest rate
obtainable from at least two major lenders in Morris County;
(b) Property taxes shall be determined by applying the equalized
property tax rate in the Borough of Madison currently in effect
to the proposed selling price of the unit;
(c) The developer shall use the best available assumptions to
determine the insurance and homeowners' association fees to
be applied to the units, subject to the approval of the
Administrator as to reasonableness only for use in this
calculation.
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:976
(d) Homeowners' association fees shall be set at a specified
percentage of those paid by market purchasers. This
percentage must be included in the master deed of any
inclusionary development.
(5) Rental prices shall be considered affordable where the household
renting the affordable housing unit will not spend more than 30% of
gross household income for rent, including utilities. Maximum rent
shall be calculated as a percentage of the regional median income
adopted by the COAH that applies to the rental housing unit. The
allowance for utilities shall be the personal benefit allowance for
utilities as defined by HUD.
(6) The Administrator shall submit all sales and rental prices, including
(where applicable) the proposed stratification, proposed
affordability level and documentation for all elements as set forth in
this section to the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation, which
may modify the prices where necessary to comply with this rule. No
representation with respect to the price of any low- and moderateincome
unit may be made by the Administrator until that price has
been approved by the Affordable Housing Corporation.
H. Procedures for resale transaction.
(1) All resale transactions of affordable housing units shall be
administrated by the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation.
From the date on which the MAHC receives notice of intent to sell
by the owner of a low- and moderate-income unit, the MAHC shall
have the exclusive right to purchase the unit or to refer prospective
purchasers to that unit for a period of 90 days unless waived in
writing by the MAHC. In the event that a contract for the unit is
executed within the ninety-day period set above and the
prospective buyer is unable to close, the period during which the
MAHC shall have the exclusive right to market the unit is
automatically extended for a period of 21 days from the date it is
notified of the buyer's inability to close.
(2) In the event no contract has been entered into for the unit at the
end of a ninety-day period, the owner of the unit may seek approval
from the MAHC to sell the unit directly. If the MAHC determines at
that point not to purchase the unit, it shall authorize the applicant
to sell the unit as follows. However, if the MAHC determines that
the failure to enter into a contract was the result of negligence,
absence of good faith effort or lack of cooperation on the part of the
Seller, the MAHC shall require the applicant to attempt to sell the
unit for an additional ninety-day period.
(a) In the case of a low-income unit, to a low- or moderate-income
buyer; or
(b) In the case of a moderate-income unit, to a buyer whose
income does not exceed 120% of median.
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:977
(c) Any subsequent sale shall be fully subject to the resale
restrictions contained in these regulations. The deed to the
above income purchaser shall specifically contain a deed
restriction establishing that it is subject to all the affordability
controls outlined in this section.
I. Calculation of resale price. The resale price of the affordable housing
unit shall be the base price increased pursuant to Subsection I(1) and
(2) herein.
(1) Percentage increase in household income. The price approved by
the MAHC at which the seller acquired the property shall be the
base price. The base price shall be multiplied by 100% plus the
percentage increase in the HUD uncapped median income by
family size for Morris County from the time of acquisition of the
property to the date that notice of intent to sell is given to the
MAHC. For example, if the base price is $100,000 and the median
income at the time of initial acquisition is $32,000 and at the time
of the resale transaction the median income has increased 25% to
$40,000, then the resale price is a follows:
100 + 25 = 1.25
100 100
$100,000 x 1.25 = $125,000
(2) Improvements.
(a) In addition, the seller shall be entitled to add to the selling
price of the unit, the cost of any eligible capital improvement,
affordable housing which pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.8
renders the unit suitable for a larger household.
(b) Upon request of an owner of an affordable housing unit, the
MAHC shall consider within 30 days whether to grant prior
approval of an improvement and to approve a specific dollar
amount up to the amount actually expended for that
improvement.
J. Exempt sales.
(1) The following transactions shall be deemed nonsales for the
purpose of this plan. The owner of the affordable unit shall be
entitled to a statement of exemption from the MAHC upon
application.
(a) Transfer of an affordable housing unit between husband and
wife;
(b) Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit between
former spouses as a result of a judicial decree, judgment or
order of divorce, but not including sales to third parties;
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:978
(c) Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit as a result
of inheritance;
(d) Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit through an
order of the Superior court.
(2) A grant of exemption shall not eliminate the resale control
restrictions set forth in these regulations. Any subsequent sale
shall be subject to all of the terms of these regulations.
K. Rental increases. All rerental transactions shall be administered by the
MAHC. The rents of affordable housing units may increase based on the
percentage increase in median income for the Morris County housing
region as determined from the uncapped Section 8 income limits,
published by HUD, or other recognized standard adopted by COAH that
applies to the rental housing unit.
L. Rental of low- and moderate-income sales units. No owner of an
affordable housing unit may lease the unit to a tenant without prior
written approval of the MAHC. Such approval shall not be granted
except when justified by particular and unusual circumstances. An
owner seeking such approval shall submit a written request to the
MAHC setting forth the particular circumstances of the case, including
the reasons for the request to rent, the proposed duration of the
tenancy and certification that the proposed tenant is a qualified low- or
moderate-income household. In the event the MAHC approved the
request, it shall notify the owner of the unit. The owner shall rent the
unit only to a qualified low- or moderate-income tenant for the period
approved by MAHC at a rent affordable to a low- or moderate-income
tenant, whichever is applicable.
M. Conversion of rental units to sales units. Rental units may be converted
for sale as condominium, cooperative or fee-simple units, but any sale of
converted units shall continue to be restricted to persons meeting the
income eligibility standards as set forth in Subsection F unless COAH
otherwise requires.
N. Exemption from rent control ordinances. All rental units, both market
and affordable, shall not be subject to any rent control ordinance which
may be adopted in the Borough of Madison during the time period in
which the affordability housing price controls are effective.
O. Duration of controls.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, all units for sale
or resale subject to the provisions of this section shall be subject to
resale and rental controls for a period of 30 years from the date of
acquisition of the unit by the initial purchaser or lessee. [Amended
1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No.
35-2015]
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:979
(2) All lower-income dwelling units shall be covered by covenants to
ensure that in all initial sales and rentals, and in all subsequent
resales and rerentals, the units will continue to remain available
and affordable to the lower-income households for which they were
intended for the period specified in this subsection in accordance
with the requirements and standards established by COAH.
P. Expiration of controls.
(1) General provisions.
(a) The restrictive covenant governing the deeds of the low- and
moderate-income units shall include an option permitting
purchase of the affordable unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price at the time of the first nonexempt sale
after controls on affordability have been in effect on the unit
for the period specified in this section. The option to buy shall
be available to the Borough of Madison, the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs (DCA), the New Jersey
Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency (NJHMFA), or a
qualified nonprofit as determined by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH).
(b) All restrictive covenants governing low- and moderate-income
units shall require the owner to notify the MAHC by certified
mail of any intent to sell the unit 90 days prior to entering into
an agreement for the first nonexempt sale after controls have
been in effect on the housing units for the period specified in
this section.
(c) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales price shall be available for
90 days. The MAHC shall notify the Borough of Madison, DCA,
NJHMFA and COAH that the unit is for sale. If the Borough of
Madison exercises this option, it may enter into a contract of
sale. If the Borough of Madison fails to exercise this option
within 90 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to
the seller of its intent to purchase during the ninety-day period
shall be entitled to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase
the unit at the maximum allowable restricted sale price is not
exercised by a written intent to sell, the owner may proceed to
sell the housing unit. If the owner does not sell the unit within
one year of the date of the delivery of notice of intent to sell,
the option to buy the unit shall be restored and the owner shall
be required to submit a new notice of intent to sell 90 days
prior to any future proposed date of sale.
(d) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and
shall be deemed exercised upon mailing.
(2) Borough of Madison.
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:980
(a) If the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation, as an entity of
the municipality, elects to purchase a low- or moderate-income
unit pursuant to this section, it may:
[1] Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderateincome
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed
the maximum allowable restricted sales price or rental for
a period of up to 30 years. [Amended 1-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 1-2015; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 35-2015]
[2] Convey the unit at fair market value, subject to the deposit
of the price differential in a trust account devoted solely to
the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and
moderate-income housing. Price differential is defined as
the difference between the restricted sales price and fair
market value as determined at the date of a proposed
contract of sale after reasonable real estate broker fees
have been paid. Money in the trust account may not be
expended until the MAHC develops a plan for its use which
is reviewed and approved by the governing body of the
Borough of Madison.
(b) In the event the Borough of Madison purchases low- or
moderate-income housing units, the Borough shall maintain
them as low-income housing units.
(c) In the event the Borough of Madison elects to purchase low- or
moderate-income housing units and convey them at fair market
value, the Borough shall:
[1] Notify COAH of any proposed sale and resale price 90 days
before closing;
[2] Notify COAH of the price differential;
[3] Deposit the price differential in a trust account devoted
solely to the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of
low- and moderate-income housing; and
[4] Notify COAH by February 1 of each calendar year of the
existing balance within this trust account.
(d) Money deposited in trust accounts may not be expended until
the municipality submits and COAH approves a repayment
housing plan. COAH may approve the repayment housing plan
if it determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for the
creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderateincome
housing.
(e) Extended period of controls.
[1] The Borough of Madison shall have the right to determine
that the most desirable means of promoting an adequate
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:981
supply of low- and moderate-income housing is to prohibit
the exercise of the repayment option and maintain controls
on lower-income housing units sold within the municipality
beyond the period required by this section. Such
determination shall be made by resolution of the municipal
governing body. The resolution shall specify the time
period for which the repayment option shall not be
applicable. During such period, no seller in the
municipality may utilize the repayment option permitted
by Subsection P(5).
[2] If the Borough of Madison exercises the option outlined
above, it shall:
[a] Provide public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation; and
[b] Notify the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation of
its governing body's action. The MAHC shall ensure
that the deed restriction on all affected housing units
reflect the extended period of controls.
(3) State option. When the DCA or NJHMFA elects to purchase a lowor
moderate-income unit pursuant to this section it may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
allowable restricted sales price or rental; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
appropriate housing region.
(4) Nonprofit option. Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by
COAH shall be eligible to purchase low- or moderate-income units
pursuant to this section for the sole purpose of conveying or
renting the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income purchaser or
tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable restricted sales
price or rental. Low income units shall be made available to low
income purchasers or tenants and the housing units shall be
regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien adopted by COAH.
The term of the controls on affordability shall be the same as those
required by this section.
(5) Seller option. An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit
which has been controlled for the period established in this plan
who has provided notice of intent to sell may proceed with the sale
if no eligible entity as outlined in Subsection P exercises its option
to purchase within 90 days.
(a) The seller may elect to:
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:982
[1] Sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household at
the controlled unit sales price, providing the unit is
regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien adopted by
the Agency for a period of up to 30 years; or [Amended
1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No.
35-2015]
[2] Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at
market price, providing that 95% of the price differential is
paid to the MAHC as instrument of the municipality, at
closing.
(b) If the sale will be to a qualified low- and moderate-income
household, the MAHC shall certify the income qualifications of
the purchaser and shall ensure the housing unit is regulated by
the restrictive covenant and lien required by the Board.
(c) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation shall examine
any contract of sale containing a repayment option to
determine if the proposed sales price bears a reasonable
relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In making
this determination, the MAHC may rely on comparable sales
data or an appraisal. The MAHC shall not approve any contract
of sale where there is a determination that the sales price does
not bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value. The
MAHC shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of
the contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option
payment.
(d) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation shall also adopt
an appeal procedure by which the seller may submit written
documentation requesting the MAHC to (i) recomputed the
repayment obligation if the seller believes an error has been
made or to (ii) reconsider a determination that the sales price
does not bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value. A
repayment obligation determination made as a result of an
owner's appeal shall be a final administrative determination of
the MAHC.
(e) The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of
title for the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of
controls on affordability. Repayment proceeds shall be
deposited in a trust account devoted solely to the creation,
rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderate-income
housing. Money deposited in trust accounts may not be
expended until the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation
develops and obtains municipal approval of a plan for its use.
(6) Continued application of options. When a housing unit has been
maintained as a low- and moderate-income unit after controls have
been in effect for the period specified in Subsection O, the
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:983
restrictive covenant governing the housing units shall allow the
municipality, the state, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low- and
moderate-income units to again exercise all the same options as
provided in this section.
Q. Foreclosure.
(1) Any mortgage for a low- and moderate-income unit shall contain a
provision requiring the holder of a mortgage on the property to
inform the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation at any time
that the purchaser of a unit is 45 days or more in arrears on
payment of his mortgage payments. The MAHC shall further be
notified by the mortgagee in the event of institution of a foreclosure
action. This notification provision does not apply to any mortgage
which prohibits notice to a third party.
(2) The Madison Affordable Housing Corporation shall at all times have
the right to intervene in any foreclosure action. In addition, the
MAHC shall have the right to advance and pay all sums necessary
to cure any arrears, to cure any other default or exercise any right
of redemption or pay and satisfy any first mortgage or other lien so
that the unit may be preserved and retained as a low- and
moderate-income unit. All sums advanced by the MAHC shall
become a lien against the unit and shall have higher priority than
any other lien except that of a first mortgage or tax or other lien
held by any governmental agencies.
R. Foreclosure exemption from resale controls. In the event of a
foreclosure by an institutional first mortgagee, the unit shall be exempt
from all further resale restrictions, provided that the following
conditions have been satisfied:
(1) The first mortgage did not exceed 100% of the authorized sales
price of the unit by the current occupant (unless written
authorization was given by the MAHC for the owner to enter into a
mortgage for a higher amount).
(2) The MAHC has been given both notice of the default by the
mortgagee, as well as notice of the institution of foreclosure. In
addition, the MAHC has not exercised its right to cure the default.
(3) The lender who is the foreclosing mortgagee is the successful
bidder at a sheriff's sale and takes title by deed from the sheriff; or
the MAHC has given written approval for a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.
S. Second mortgages. No second mortgages shall be placed upon the
property without prior written approval of the MAHC. In determining
whether to grant an approval for the second mortgage, the MAHC shall
consider the need for the second mortgage and the impact that the
second mortgage shall have upon the ability of the MAHC to maintain
this unit as a low- and moderate-income unit. Under no circumstances
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-47
191:984
shall a foreclosure of a second mortgage constitute grounds for
elimination of the resale controls provided for in this regulation. Prior
written approval shall be denied unless second mortgages are
specifically authorized by COAH regulations and the application is
consistent with these regulations.
T. Sale of personal items. Items of personal property which are
permanently affixed to the unit (e.g., refrigerator, freezer, washer,
dryer) and which were not included when the affordable housing unit
was purchased may be the subject of separate negotiations between the
parties subsequent to the signing of the contract for the purchase of the
house. Any agreed price for the purchase of any items of personal
property shall be reasonable considering the original cost, nature, age
and condition of the item. The price to be paid for items of personal
property shall not be used as a mechanism to avoid or circumvent the
limitations on the resale price of the unit itself. In no event shall the
right to purchase the unit be conditioned upon the buyer's willingness
to agree to purchase any item or items of personal property of the
seller.
U. Certification of occupancy.
(1) No certificate of occupancy for a low- and moderate-income unit
shall be issued until the developer shall have submitted and have
approved by the Madison Affordable Housing Corporation a deed
restriction encompassing all provisions of these regulations.
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the resale of a lowand
moderate-income unit unless the MAHC shall certify that the
resale complies with the terms of these regulations.
(3) No low- and moderate-income unit may be occupied by an initial
purchaser or resale purchaser without a certificate of occupancy.
V. The Administrator shall implement the affirmative marketing program
for affordable housing that has been or will be approved by resolution of
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Madison. [Amended
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
W. Waiver. In the event of a special hardship or in the event that a minor
technical modification of these regulations is necessary to effectively
implement the policy of this section, the MAHC may waive or modify
these regulations relating to occupancy selection, sale or resale prices,
or income eligibility standards, provided that such waiver of
modification is (a) consistent with the intent of these regulations and
the Land Use Regulations; and (b) does not violate COAH policy,
regulations or statute.
X. Severability. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment,
§ 195-47 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-47
191:985
§ 195-48. Affordable housing inclusionary development
requirements. [Amended 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
decision, ruling or order shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, clauses, phrases of this section.
Y. Repealer. All other ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with any
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict or inconsistency.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this § 195-48 is to require new developments
to include a minimum inclusionary set aside for affordable housing.
[Amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 35-2015; 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
52-2016]
B. Applicability. The provisions of this § 195-48 shall apply to all new
development activity in the Borough of Madison regardless of whether
the development requires approval by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, except as expressly exempted herein. [Amended
5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 35-2015]
C. Exemptions. The provisions of this § 195-48 shall not apply to the
following development activities:
(1) Residential renovations and additions.
(2) Replacement residences that do not result in a net increase in the
number of dwelling units.
(3) Nonresidential renovations and improvements that do not result in
any increase in building floor area or involve a change in use that
creates a growth share obligation as determined under § 195-48E.
(4) Any development for which, prior to December 11, 2006: (i)
preliminary subdivision and/or site plan approval was granted and
the statutory vested rights period under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49
remains in effect; or (ii) final subdivision and/or site plan approval
was granted and the statutory vested rights period under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-52 remains in effect. This exemption shall not apply in the
event of the subsequent approval of an application for amended
approval involving a substantial change in the development
proposal.
(5) (Reserved)174
(6) Any development undertaken by the Borough of Madison, Madison
Housing Authority or the Madison Board of Education.
174. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), regarding an exemption for developments
involving the provision of affordable housing at certain limits, was repealed 7-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 52-2016.
§ 195-47 MADISON CODE § 195-48
191:986
(7) Any redevelopment project which, prior to the date of this section:
[Amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 35-2015]
(a) Is being proposed by a redeveloper that has been designated
by the Borough of Madison for such project; and
(b) The redevelopment agreement between the Borough of
Madison and the designated redeveloper provides for a
monetary contribution for affordable housing.
D. Residential development. All new residential developments in all zones,
except as exempted above, shall be subject to the following affordable
housing requirements: [Amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 35-2015]
(1) In the case of residential development in any zoning district
involving the creation and/or development and/or addition of five or
more market rate dwelling units and/or single-family building lots:
(i) at least 20% of all for-sale dwelling units and/or for-sale singlefamily
building lots must be an affordable housing unit; and (ii) at
least 15% of all rental units must be an affordable housing unit. Any
fractional affordable housing requirement shall be addressed by a
payment in lieu pursuant to § 195-48D(2) unless the developer
agrees to round up the number of affordable units to next whole
number. The required affordable housing unit(s) shall be
constructed on-site unless the Mayor and Council, after referral by
the Planning Board, approves a proposal involving the provision of
affordable housing elsewhere within the Borough. Construction of
the affordable housing unit(s) shall be subject to the standards and
requirements in § 195-48F, and shall be subject to the affordable
housing policies, procedures and administration provisions of
§ 195-47. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(2) In the case of residential development involving the creation of
fewer than five dwelling units and/or single-family building lots, the
developer shall be required to make a payment in lieu of providing
affordable housing, which shall be placed in the payment-in-lieu
fund governed by § 195-48I. The amount of the required payment
shall be consistent with COAH regulations and shall be negotiated
with the Borough based on consideration of the anticipated cost of
providing affordable housing units. The minimum payment amount
shall be calculated based on $182,750 multiplied by the fractional
affordable housing requirement as calculated to two decimal
points.
E. All mixed-use developments that involve the creation and/or
development and/or addition of five or more market-rate dwelling units
and/or single-family building lots shall be subject to the affordable
housing inclusionary development requirements set forth in § 195-48 of
the Madison Borough Code. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
52-2016]
§ 195-48 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-48
191:987
F. Affordable housing development criteria. Affordable housing unit(s)
required to be provided by this § 195-48 are authorized as conditional
uses, and they shall be subject to following requirements:
(1) All housing units in market-rate residential developments including
affordable housing units shall be subject to the requirements
applicable to inclusionary developments, controls on affordability
and the affirmative marketing requirements as set forth in the
COAH regulations.
(2) All affordable housing units must qualify as affordable units under
the COAH regulations.175
G. Administration. The Municipal Housing Liaison is hereby authorized
and directed to administer the provisions of this § 195-48, including the
authority to negotiate payment-in-lieu fees (subject to the minimum
payment amount set forth in this § 195-48) and off-site affordable
housing proposals as provided for herein.
H. Payment-in-lieu procedures. Payments in lieu of providing affordable
housing that are authorized by this § 195-48 shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Fifty percent of the required payment shall be made prior to
issuance of a building permit. If the development involves the
construction of multiple buildings, the total payment in lieu for the
development may be allocated on a proportionate basis in
connection with each building permit applied for in connection with
the development, according to the number of residential dwellings
units and/or total square footage of nonresidential development, as
applicable.
(2) The remaining balance of the required payment shall be paid prior
to issuance of any certificate of occupancy, subject to the potential
pro rata allocation as provided for in Subsection H(1). [Amended
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016]
(3) All payments in lieu shall be deposited in the payment-in-lieu fund
provided for under § 195-48I.
I. Payment-in-lieu fund. There is hereby established a Payment-in-Lieu
Fund to be maintained separately from the Housing Trust Fund
established by the § 195-46H. The funds in the Payment in Lieu Fund
may only be used in accordance with an approved spending plan and for
the same purposes as the Housing Trust Fund as specified in § 195-48,
except that such funds may only be used for purposes involving the
provision of affordable housing within the Borough.
175. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3), regarding the requirement that residential units
be compatible in design with nonresidential use, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 52-2016.
§ 195-48 MADISON CODE § 195-48
191:988
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
§ 195-48.1. (Reserved)
§ 195-48.1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-48.1
191:989

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 53-2006]
§ 195-49. Position established; powers and duties.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of the Borough of Madison's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for the Borough of Madison to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Borough of Madison.
C. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
the Borough of Madison.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the
governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Borough of Madison, including the following responsibilities which
may not be contracted out:
(a) Serving as the Borough of Madison's primary point of contact
for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Madison's Fair Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
§ 195-49 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-49
191:991
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in the Borough of Madison as
described in Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Madison may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or
any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have
the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program
of the Borough of Madison. If the Borough of Madison contracts
with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and
Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison.
(a) Affirmative marketing.
[1] Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with
the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Madison
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
[2] Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/
tenant law.
(b) Household certification.
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
§ 195-49 MADISON CODE § 195-49
191:992
set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Madison
when referring households for certification to affordable
units.
(c) Affordability controls.
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's register of
deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
(d) Resale and rental.
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(e) Processing request from unit owners.
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
§ 195-49 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-49
191:993
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(f) Enforcement.
[1] Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowledgement of
the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust
fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
[6] Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
[7] Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for
administering such affordability controls; and
[8] Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(g) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
§ 195-49 MADISON CODE § 195-49
191:994
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other
part of this section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this section, but
shall be confined in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence or other part of this section directly involved in the
controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered and all
other provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect.
E. Inconsistent ordinances repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this section are hereby
repealed, but only to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 195-49 WATER EMERGENCIES § 195-49
191:995
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 201
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 195-49 MADISON CODE § 195-49
191:996
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-15-1977 by Ord. No. BH-1-77]
§ 201-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Borough of Madison, of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 201 through 235, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of
Madison, Part III," which, together with the ordinances of the Mayor and
Council adopted as the "Code of the Borough of Madison, Parts I and II,"
and an Appendix, shall hereafter be known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 201-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 201-3. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after March 1, 1977.
§ 201-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for the use and
examination of the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 201-5. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
application of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 201-1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 201-6
191:997
§ 201-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Madison" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 201-7. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given to § 201-13A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 201-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 201-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in
§ 201-14 of this ordinance.
§ 201-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 201-6 MADISON CODE § 201-11
191:998
§ 201-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 201-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 201-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 201-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 201-14. Violations of the Code; penalties. [Amended 4-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 5-94; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. BH 2017-4]
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to December
18, 1973 (Ord. No. 73-1BH).
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employment, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which are not in
conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance pertaining to the
salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers and employees or
personnel policies.
§ 201-11 WATER EMERGENCIES § 201-14
191:999
§ 201-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Unless a specific penalty is provided elsewhere in Part III of this Code,
in state law, or in other ordinances of the Board of Health for a
particular violation, any person, firm or corporation who or which shall
violate any provision of Part III of this Code or any code or other
regulation adopted by reference therein or any order promulgated
under such provision, code or regulation, by doing any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful or a violation thereby, or who shall engage in or
exercise any business or occupation or do anything for which a license
or permit is required thereby without having a valid license or permit
therefor as required, or who shall fail to do any act required by any such
provision or when such provision declares such failure to be unlawful or
a violation, shall be punished by a payable fine of not less than $75 for
each offense; not less than a payable fine of $200 for each second
offense; and not less than a payable fine of $500 for a third offense.
B. Any subsequent offense(s) within a twelve-month time frame shall
require a mandatory court appearance and a minimum fine of $750 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment, or be subject to a civil penalty, not to
exceed $500, which penalty shall be enforced or collected through any
court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the Penalty
Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A-58-1 et seq.
C. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and the person or persons
allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Deletions, amendments and additions. The following changes in the
form of deletions, revisions or additions to the original ordinances have
been made in the preparation of this revision and codification. (Section
number references are to the sections of the ordinances as they have
been renumbered and appear in the Code.)176
176. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 201-15B, the following sections were added, amended or
deleted. A complete description of each change is on file in the office of the Secretary of
the Board of Health. (a) Penalty sections amended: §§ 218-8, 222-5, 228-5, 232-4 and
232-10. (b) Chapter 209 (0rd. No. 4BH, adopted 10-9-1962) amended in its entirety. (c)
Sections deleted: Section 4(a) and (b) of Ord. No. 1-69BH, adopted 12-30-1969 (Ch. 222)
and Section 4 of Ord. No. 1BH, adopted 10-9-1962 (Ch. 228). (d) Sections added: § 228-4.
§ 201-14 MADISON CODE § 201-15
191:1000
Chapter 202
FEES
§ 202-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Board of Health Fees Ordinance."
§ 202-2. Intent.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other law or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter. Where this chapter sets a
fee different from existing provisions of law or ordinances or establishes a
new fee, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 202-3. Fees.
Chapter 203
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 22. General provisions, Board of Health — See
Ch. 201.
A. Clinic and program fees.
(1) Fees and charges for various programs and clinics shall be paid by
participants at the time of registration.
(2) Fees for programs and clinics may be established by resolution
adopted from time to time by the Board of Health.
(3) The fees charged are nonrefundable, unless the clinic or program is
cancelled by the Board of Health.
B. Certified and noncertified copies. Fees for copies of documents shall be
as follows.
(1) For noncertified copies: See Chapter 147.
(2) For certified copies: $10.
(3) For filing of correction form: $5.
(4) For certified copy with correction form attached: $15.
§ 201-15 FEES § 202-3
202:1001

ARTICLE I
User Charge for Management and Transportation of Rabid Animals
[Adopted 12-30-1997 by Ord. No. BH 3-97]
§ 203-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "User Charge for Management and
Transportation of Rabid Animals Ordinance."
§ 203-2. Findings.
The findings of the Board of Health concerning the management and
transportation of suspected rabid animals is as follows:
§ 203-3. User charge.
There is hereby imposed a user charge upon every owner of a suspected
rabid animal that must be transported to Trenton, which shall be
established by the Board of Health annually by a resolution for certain
charges and fees for services rendered to the public.
§ 203-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
A. The Board of Health has the primary statutory responsibility (N.J.S.A.
26:4-78 et seq.) to manage and to transport rabid animals to the New
Jersey State Department of Health and Senior Services, Division of
Public Health and Environmental Laboratory, Virology Program, Rabies
Laboratory Unit (hereinafter "RLU"), located in Trenton, New Jersey,
through its Board of Health Department.
B. There has been a significant increase in the number of animals
transported to Trenton in the last two years.
C. The Board of Health must incur automotive, mileage, fuel and
personnel charges for the management and the transportation of these
rabid animals.
D. The Board of Health desires to institute a user charge for the
management and the transportation of rabid animals to the RLU located
in Trenton, New Jersey, in order to generate revenues for the payment
of such services and to motivate those owners responsible for the
animals to take appropriate measures to vaccinate their animals
against rabies.
E. The Board of Health annually adopts a resolution for certain charges
and fees for services rendered to the public.
§ 203-1 ANIMALS § 203-4
203:1003
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat or other animal which is affected by rabies or
suspected of being affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known
or suspected to be affected by rabies.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
OWNER — Includes, when applied to the proprietorship of an animal, every
person having a right of property or custody in such animal and every
person who has such animal in his or her keeping or who harbors or
maintains an animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by that person.
USER CHARGE — The user charge shall be the amount established annually
by Board of Health resolution.
§ 203-5. Manner of payment.
§ 203-6. Appeal.
Within 30 days of the date of mailing the invoice, the owner of the animal
may appeal the imposition of the user charge to the Board of Health. The
Board of Health's decision upholding, modifying or reversing the invoice
shall constitute final administrative action.
§ 203-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Within 30 days of the transportation of the animal, the Board of Health
shall mail an invoice for the user charge, established by annual
resolution, to the owner of the animal at the address of the owner set
forth on the license for the animal, if available, otherwise to the owner's
last known address. Each invoice shall be paid in full within 30 days of
its date.
B. All user charges mentioned in this section shall be paid to and retained
by the Board of Health.
A. The Health Officer, or his or her designee, shall issue a violation notice
and/or summons if such invoice is not paid in full within 30 days of its
due date or within 30 days of the final administrative date, whichever is
later. The complaint shall be delivered by the Health Officer, or his or
her designee, or sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
B. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, together
with court costs. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Madison or before such other judicial officer having
authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 203-4 MADISON CODE § 203-7
203:1004
Chapter 204
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 163. Sale of tobacco — See Ch. 175A.
§ 204-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Prohibition of Smoking by Pupils on
School Premises Ordinance."
§ 204-2. Findings.
The findings of the Board of Health concerning smoking on school premises
are as follows:
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BOARD OF EDUCATION — The Board of Education of the Borough of
Madison.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
PUPIL — Any student who attends any school, either public or private.
SCHOOL — Any school, either public or private, which shall make and
enforce suitable regulations controlling or prohibiting the smoking of
tobacco on its premises.
SMOKING — The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other matter
or substance which contains tobacco.
A. The Board of Health has the primary statutory responsibility (N.J.S.A.
26:3D-15 et seq.) for implementation of the Board of Education policy
for prohibition of use of tobacco by pupils on school premises.
B. The Board of Health adopts by reference the policy of the Board of
Education governing Use of Tobacco by Pupils and incorporates the
same as if set forth herein at length. (Policy No. 5512, adopted April
1984, last revised May 19, 1998.)
C. The Board of Health adopts by reference the policy of the Board of
Education governing Smoking on School Premises and incorporates the
same as if set forth herein at length. (Policy No. 7434, adopted
September 16, 1986, last revised May 19, 1998.)
§ 203-7 SMOKING § 204-3
204:1005
USE OF TOBACCO — Smoking, as defined herein, and the use of any
tobacco-containing product, including but not limited to smokeless tobacco,
chewing tobacco and snuff.
§ 204-4. Prohibition of smoking by pupils on school premises.
The Board of Health prohibits smoking and the use of tobacco by pupils at
any time in any school building, on school grounds, at any school-related
activities away from school and on any transportation vehicle supplied by
the Board of Education or private school administrative body.
§ 204-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 205
APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 22.
§ 205-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Appointment of Alternate Members
Ordinance."
§ 205-2. Appointment.
The Board of Health authorizes the appointment of two alternate members.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
A. The principal or his/her designee of each school building is authorized
to report violations to the Board of Health in accordance with state law,
borough ordinance and Board of Education regulations or policy
adopted by private school administrative body, upon a third or any
subsequent offense.
B. Upon a third or any subsequent offense, the principal or his/her
designee shall report the violation to the Health Officer or his/her
designee, who shall issue a summons for violation subjecting the pupil
to a fine in accordance with state law and borough ordinance.
C. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any pupil
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100, together
with court costs. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Madison.
§ 204-3 MADISON CODE § 205-3
205:1006
§ 205-3. Term.
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for
Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year.
§ 205-4. Vacancy.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by
the Board of Health for the unexpired term only.
Chapter 209
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 22.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 56.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Land development — See Ch. 195.
Vending machines — See Ch. 232.
§ 209-1. Provisions of state code accepted; enforcement;
interpretation.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance with
N.J.S.A. Title 24, entitled "Food and Drugs," and the interpretations thereof
contained in the New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.).
The provisions of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code are hereby recognized
as being of full force and effect in the Borough of Madison.
§ 209-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Chapter 12 of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 209-3. License required; application.
§ 209-4. Conditions and requirements.
A. No person shall at any time within the Borough of Madison conduct,
maintain or operate a retail food establishment, either mobile,
temporary or at a fixed location, or otherwise engage in the handling of
food or drink, without first having obtained a license to do so from the
Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
§ 205-3 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 209-4
205:1007
§ 209-5. Fees. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. BH 3-98]
A. A separate license shall be obtained for each retail food establishment
operating at a fixed location, mobile retail food establishment,
temporary retail food establishment or other place or event at which
food or drink is sold, distributed, served or otherwise dispensed.
B. No license to conduct, maintain or operate a retail food establishment
of any type shall be granted if such conduct, maintenance or operation
will result in the violation of the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code177 or
any other ordinance of the Borough of Madison.
C. Either the manager, owner or operator of a retail food establishment
licensed by the Board of Health shall be required to attend the yearly
food handlers' training seminar provided by the Board and to obtain a
certificate of completion of said course, annually.
A. Every applicant for whom a license is granted as required by the
provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Board of Health of the
Borough of Madison an annual license fee for the same as follows:
(1) For a retail food establishment (RFE) operating at a fixed location,
selling or dispensing food or drink, whether or not such food or
drink is consumed upon the premises where the same is sold or
dispensed, the fee shall be based upon the floor area of the
premises, including storage areas, calculated as follows:
(a) For 2013 and thereafter: [Amended 11-18-2008 by Ord. No.
BH 3-08; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. BH 1-10; 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. BH 2012-3]
Total Floor Area of RFE
(square feet)
or Type Fee
Pharmacy/package goods $80
Less than 2,000 $145
2,000 to 5,000 $200
5,000 to 10,000 $225
Greater than 10,000 $750
Reinspection fee – 2 $150
Reinspection fee – 3 $200
Temporary $45
Mobile $150
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Land Development, and Ch. 75, Building Construction.
§ 209-4 MADISON CODE § 209-5
205:1008
§ 209-6. Contents of license; transfer; display; removal of all refuse
and garbage.
Total Floor Area of RFE
(square feet)
or Type Fee
Catering $150
Farmers' market $40
Plan review fee $225
Plan alterations review $175
Food handler's course $40
B. The fee shall be due and payable on the first business day of January of
each year. Effective February 1 of each year, an additional late fee of
$50 will be charged to those retail food establishments that have not
obtained a license. [Amended 11-18-2008 by Ord. No. BH 3-08]
C. No fee shall be charged for a license when the same is issued to any
organization, society or group, such as a hospital, a school not operated
for profit or a religious institution, when the license is requested for a
purpose from which no profit is planned.
D. Whenever resampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous foods
are necessitated by reason of unsatisfactory results, the owner(s) of the
retail food establishment shall be assessed and the Board reimbursed
for the costs of resampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous
foods at the rate of $100 per sample.
E. Additional conditional inspections: Whenever a second, or more,
conditional inspection in a sequence of inspections is necessitated by
reason of classification of a food establishment as conditionally
satisfactory, the owner shall be assessed for the cost of each such
additional inspection at the rate of $100 per inspection for the
administrative cost of the additional inspection(s). [Added 11-18-2008
by Ord. No. BH 3-08]
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
the location of the premises or other place of operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. All licenses shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises, machine or vehicle.
§ 209-5 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 209-6
205:1009
§ 209-7. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked, or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 209-8. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 209-9. Handwashing and toilet facilities.
In addition to the minimum toilet and handwashing facilities established by
the State Sanitary Code for employees of food-handling establishments, any
food-handling establishments designed for on-premises consumption shall
provide at least the following minimum handwashing and toilet facilities for
use by patrons:
Patron Seating Capacity Minimum Facilities for Each Sex*
1 to 49 1 toilet and 1 handwashing basin
50 to 99 2 toilets and 2 handwashing basins
100 to 150 3 toilets and 3 handwashing basins
Over 150 1 additional unit for each additional 50
patrons or fraction thereof
* NOTE: Toilet facilities for males may be reduced by one-third (1/3) by
substituting urinals.
§ 209-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by
D. Every licensee shall be required to sign an agreement certifying that
the licensee has a contract for the collection or removal of all refuse,
garbage and trash from the food service establishment, so as not to
create a health hazard.
A. A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by
the holder thereof of any provision of this chapter or of Chapter 12 of
the State Sanitary Code by the Health Officer; provided, however, that
the holder shall be afforded an opportunity to appeal the suspension of
the license to the Board of Health and the Health Officer within 48
hours of the effective date of the suspension.
B. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for the holder directly or indirectly shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the
borough unless the application for such license shall be approved by the
Board of Health.
§ 209-6 MADISON CODE § 209-10
205:1010
both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
Chapter 217
NOISE
§ 209-10 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 209-10
205:1011

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 217-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance of the Borough
of Madison."
§ 217-1 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-1
205:1013

ARTICLE II
Words Defined
§ 217-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTIDWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including but not limited to apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions or health and
recreational facilities or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 217-2 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-2
205:1015
activities; or a municipality with a department-approved noise control
ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement training and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the imaginary line, including its vertical
extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another; the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a
multidwelling unit building; or on a multi-use property, the interface
between the two portions of the property on which different categories of
activity are being performed (e.g., if the multiuse property is a building
which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real
property line would be the interface between the residential area and the
commercial area).
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 217-2 MADISON CODE § 217-2
205:1016
ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 217-3. Sounds to which chapter applies.
A. This noise chapter applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multidwelling unit buildings.
B. This noise chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multidwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
§ 217-3 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-3
205:1017

ARTICLE IV
Declaration of Findings and Policy
§ 217-4. Declaration of findings and policy.
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and, whereas, a substantial body
of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and, whereas, the people have a right to, and
should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound; now,
therefore, it is the policy of the Borough of Madison to prevent
excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
B. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Borough of Madison.
§ 217-4 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-4
205:1019

ARTICLE V
Noise Control Officers
§ 217-5. Noise control officers; powers.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, or any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 217-6B and C of this chapter and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Borough of Madison and cooperate with all other public bodies and
agencies to the extent practicable;
(2) Review the actions of the Borough of Madison and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer in accordance
with Article VIII below; and
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
§ 217-5 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-5
205:1021

ARTICLE VI
Sound Levels
§ 217-6. Maximum permissible sound levels.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 217-3A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II178 when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multidwelling unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a
multidwelling unit building. The allowable sound level standards for
indoors are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
178. Editor's Note: Tables I and II are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 217-6 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-6
205:1023

ARTICLE VII
Restricted Uses and Activities
§ 217-7. Exemptions; applicable standards.
A. Exemptions.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
(2) Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in
Subsection B below.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment.
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
§ 217-7 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-7
205:1025
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers and lawn equipment with
attached snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler. At
all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply.
(5) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth at Tables I and II do not apply.
§ 217-7 MADISON CODE § 217-7
205:1026
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 217-8. Violations and penalties; construal of provisions.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
the Municipal Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 217-8 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-8
205:1027

ARTICLE IX
Severability; Repealer; When Effective
§ 217-9. Severability; repealer.
§ 217-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after publication and final passage thereof as
provided by law.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of this chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 217-9 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 217-10
205:1029
Chapter 218
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
22.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 73.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 101.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 145.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 183.
Water — See Ch. 190.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 218-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. BH 2017-4]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH, LOCAL BOARD OF HEALTH OR BOARD — The Board
of Health of the Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
BOROUGH, THE BOROUGH, SAID BOROUGH, THIS BOROUGH OR
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Madison, New Jersey.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Health Department of the Borough of
Madison, New Jersey, which shall include the Health Officer of said borough
and the officers and personnel who shall, under the jurisdiction of the Board
of Health, and by the direction of said Health Officer, or as empowered by
the statutes of the State of New Jersey, be engaged in the protection of
health in the Borough of Madison and the enforcement of the public health
laws of the State of New Jersey and the provisions of this chapter.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Borough of Madison
appointed by the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership and their agents or employees.
REGISTERED ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST — The Registered
Environmental Health Specialist of the Borough of Madison appointed by
the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
§ 218-2. Nuisances enumerated and prohibited. [Amended
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. BH 2017-4]
A. No person shall create, commit, maintain or allow to be created,
committed or maintained any nuisance within the Borough of Madison,
New Jersey.
§ 217-10 MADISON CODE § 218-2
205:1030
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following specific things,
conditions and acts, each and all of them, are hereby defined and
declared to be nuisances:
(1) Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond, ditch,
stream or other body of water, or any cistern, privy vault, cesspool,
rain barrel or other receptacle containing liquid, or permitting the
accumulation of any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae or
pupae breed or do exist.
(2) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter in which fly larvae or pupae
exist, or which attracts flies and other insects or wherein they
breed.
(3) Constructing, maintaining or using any well, or permitting the use
of any well or other supply of water for drinking or household
purposes, which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed
that it may become polluted.
(4) Polluting or causing or permitting the existence of any condition or
conditions which pollute or cause or threaten the pollution of any
source of potable waters or any water supply.
(5) Permitting ragweed in a flowering state or poison ivy to exist or to
grow upon any public or private property.
(6) Permitting the existence of any imperfect, defective, leaking,
unclean or filthy sink, water closet, urinal, sump pit, stop basin or
other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human
beings.
(7) Depositing, maintaining or permitting the maintenance or
accumulation of any household refuse, wastewater, sewage,
garbage, tin cans, offal or excrement; any decaying fruit, vegetable,
fish, meat, animal carcass or bones; any oyster or clam shells; or
any other matter, material, substance or thing which serves as food
for insects or rodents and to which they may have access, or which
serves as or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects,
rats or other rodents.
(8) Causing or permitting to be created or to exist on any property any
foul or obnoxious odors, gases or vapors.
(9) Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any foul, putrid, corrosive or
otherwise obnoxious liquid or substance.
(10) Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any chemical or other waste or
flammable, explosive, corrosive or otherwise dangerous liquid
§ 218-2 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 218-2
205:1031
material or substance, except in a manner and under such
conditions and restrictions as are prescribed by law.
(11) Permitting any garbage, offal, scraps, waste food or other
putrescible material to be held in a container which is not
watertight or which is uncovered, in any store or factory, outside of
any building, on any public or private property or in any building of
multiple occupancy, except in individual apartments.
(12) Spitting by any person upon any public sidewalk or crossing, or
upon the floor of any public building, bus or other public
conveyance.
(13) The keeping of horses, cows, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, dogs, cats
or other animals under insanitary conditions.
(14) The keeping of swine, cows, horses or chickens, except by special
written permission of the Health Department.
(15) Permitting any human excrement or material containing human
excrement to remain or flow upon the surface of the ground, or to
remain or flow in any open ditch or stream; or burying, ploughing
under or otherwise disposing of such excrement or permitting the
same to be done within 100 feet of any stream, well, lake, spring or
other source of water used for drinking or domestic purposes; or
depositing or permitting to be deposited any such material in any
place where it is likely to gain access to such water or appear again
above the surface of the ground.
C. No person shall, within the Borough of Madison, sweep, throw, place or
otherwise deposit in or upon any sidewalk, street, gutter, public alley,
park or parking area, or any other public place any dirt, rubbish, paper,
garbage, filth, ashes, glass, rubbish or refuse of any kind, or suffer or
permit the same to be done.
D. No person shall throw, deposit or otherwise place upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk or other public place used for pedestrian travel any fruit,
vegetable or other substance which, when stepped upon, is liable to
cause or does cause any person to slip or fall.
E. No person shall, within the Borough of Madison, direct, discharge or
otherwise drain or cause or permit the direction, discharge, flow or
drainage into any gutter, or upon or across any sidewalk, street, public
alley, park or parking area or any other public or private place, of any:
(1) Refuse or wastewater from any sink, stable, toilet, septic tank,
cesspool, sewer lateral or sewage disposal unit.
(2) Waste- or wash water from any laundry, automobile filling station,
garage or car-washing establishment.
§ 218-2 MADISON CODE § 218-2
205:1032
(3) Stormwater from a cellar drain or sump pump, or from any storm
drain, brook, spring, pond, marsh lowland or from any swimming
pool.
F. No person shall, within the Borough of Madison, deposit, empty, drain
or discharge any gasoline, fuel or lubricating oil or other petroleum
product or derivatives; or any solvent, thinner, lacquer, paint, paint
remover, varnish, cleaning fluid or other cleansing preparation; or
anything of a corrosive, explosive or flammable nature; or any effluent
containing any of the same into any storm sewer, catch basin, ditch,
stormwater drain, gutter, street or other public place.
G. No person shall, within the Borough of Madison, burn any substance in
any public streets; or burn or permit to be burned any garbage, animal
remains or offal; or burn any other substance in such a manner that
there is thereby created noxious, nauseating or annoying smoke, fumes
or odors.
H. No person shall, within the Borough of Madison, allow the planting,
growing or maintaining of any native and non-native invasive vines or
vegetation that extends roots across or extends branches, stalks or
leaves over any public property, right-of-way or onto any adjacent
private property. The planting, growing or maintaining of any native
and non-native invasive vines or vegetation shall be as follows:
(1) Planting of any bamboo shall be planted in a contained area using
appropriate materials that will effectively contain the spread of
roots, branches, stalks or leaves over any public property, right-ofway
or onto any adjacent private property. Any planting of bamboo
will be at least two feet from any property line to allow for the
maintenance of the bamboo and containment area.
(2) Any existing bamboo planted prior to the effective date of this
section may remain, provided that:
(a) All plant parts, including leaves, stalks, branches and roots,
are removed or trimmed so they are effectively contained from
and don't encroach on the property line;
(b) All plant parts, including leaves, stalks, branches and roots,
that encroach upon any private property, right-of-way, or public
property shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property cited for such encroachment;
(c) Upon passage of this ordinance,179 removal and containment as
noted in Subsection H(2)(a) and (b) above shall be completed
within 180 days of receipt of violation notice; and
179. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. BH 2017-4.
§ 218-2 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 218-2
205:1033
§ 218-3. Noises and sounds.
(d) After May 1, 2018, containment and removal as noted in
Subsection H(2)(b) above shall be completed within 30 days of
receipt of violation notice.
(3) Inspections and violation notices will be initiated only upon
complaints received from affected adjacent property owners,
occupants, tenants, or other persons who have direct responsibility
for the property encroached upon, by the property owner cited for
such encroachment.
A. Noises and sounds.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or suffer or
permit to be made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied
or controlled by him or it, or upon any public street or thoroughfare
in the Borough of Madison, any noises or sounds contrary to the
following maximum permissible sound pressure requirements:
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure
Levels Measured from Nearest Property
or Boundary Line
(decibels re 0.0002 dynes/cm2)
Octave Bands
Frequency
(cycles per
second)
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
0 to 75 69 74
75 to 150 54 59
150 to 300 47 52
300 to 600 41 46
600 to 1,200 37 42
1,200 to 2,400 34 39
2,400 to 4,800 31 36
4,800 up 28 33
Overall — —
Correction for the following:
Noise of impulsive character (hammering): -5db
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.): -5db
Noise operating less than 12 minutes per hour: -5db
Noise operating less than 3 minutes per hour: 10db
§ 218-2 MADISON CODE § 218-3
205:1034
§ 218-4. Apartment heating requirements. [Amended 11-21-2017 by
Ord. No. BH 2017-4]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat
to any building designed to be occupied or occupied as a residence by more
than two families to fail to supply heat from the first day of October in each
year to the first day of May of the succeeding year in such manner that the
temperature of said building where one or more persons reside shall always
be kept at 68° F. or above between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.,
and 65° F. between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 218-5. Inspection of premises. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
BH 2017-4]
All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to inspection by
the authority of the Board of Health, through the Health Officer, Registered
Environmental Health Specialist, or other officials authorized by the Health
Officer.
§ 218-6. Abatement of nuisances.
Noise operating less than 1 minute per hour: 15db
(2) Industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable
due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness.
B. The creation, existence or continuance of any condition or situation
which is a violation of or contrary to any of the provisions of this
chapter is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance, and the same shall
be subject to injunction and abatement in the manner provided by law.
A. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this chapter, is found on any plot
of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice
in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the
same within such time as shall be specified therein but not less than five
days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be
left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or
place.
B. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or
occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
C. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this chapter, is found on any
public property or on any highway or any other public premises or
place, notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Board of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in the
§ 218-3 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS § 218-6
205:1035
§ 218-7. Recovery of costs.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance, as declared by this
chapter, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance
to exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the same
within the time specified in such notice.
§ 218-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-15-1977 by Ord. No.
BH-1-77]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter, or any notice or order issued pursuant thereto, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 201, General
Provisions, Board of Health, Article I.
Chapter 222
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
22.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
§ 222-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A code, regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
cesspools or other receptacles and regulating the practice of plumbing
and the issuance of licenses to practice plumbing, is hereby established
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 188, P.L. of 1950.180 A copy of said
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
D. If the owner, tenant or occupant who is notified as provided by this
section shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner by such means as said Board shall deem
proper in accordance with law.
180. Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 218-6 MADISON CODE § 222-2
222:1036
§ 222-2. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964)."
§ 222-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the said Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964),
similarly marked, have been placed on file in the office of the Board of
Health of this borough upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 222-4. Fees.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted as a part hereof, the following fees shall be
charged and received:
§ 222-5. Violations and penalties.182
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter or of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964) made
a part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
provided in Chapter 201, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article I.
§ 222-6. Disposition of moneys collected.
All fees, penalties and moneys collected under any provision of this chapter
or the code established herein shall be paid to the Treasurer of the borough.
Chapter 223
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING FACILITIES
A. For the filing of plans for a proposed plumbing work, $2.181
B. For the issuance of a permit for a proposed plumbing construction or
alteration, $3; provided, however, that an additional fee of $1 per
fixture is hereby established for each fixture proposed in the approval
plan for construction or alteration.
C. For the issuance of a permit for the replacement of a plumbing fixture,
$1.
D. For each reinspection of plumbing work caused by the failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or permit issued, $5.
181. Editor's Note: Original Subsections (a) and (b), which immediately preceded this
subsection and pertained to the fee for examinations and licensing of plumbers, was
deleted and repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 201, General Provisions, Board
of Health, Art. I) as plumbers are now licensed by the state.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 201, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I.
§ 222-2 PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING § 223-1
223:1037
§ 223-1. Provisions of state code accepted; enforcement;
interpretation.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance with
N.J.S.A. Title 26, entitled "Health and Vital Statistics" and the
interpretations thereof contained in the New Jersey Administrative Code
(N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.)
§ 223-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, words and terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Title 8, Chapter 26 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 223-3. License required; application.
§ 223-4. Fees.
Every applicant for whom a license is granted as required by the provisions
of this chapter shall pay to the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison
an annual license fee for the same in the amount of $100.
§ 223-5. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked, or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 223-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. No owner, operator, or person shall at any time within the Borough of
Madison conduct, maintain or operate a public recreational bathing
facility without first having obtained a license to do so from the Board of
Health of the Borough of Madison.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
A. A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by
the holder thereof of any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations promulgated under N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq. by the Health
Officer; provided, however, that the holder shall be afforded an
opportunity to appeal the suspension of the license to the Board of
Health and the Health Officer within 48 hours of the effective date of
the suspension.
B. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for the holder directly or indirectly shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the
Borough unless the application for such license be approved by the
Board of Health.
§ 223-1 MADISON CODE § 223-7
223:1038
§ 223-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
Chapter 225
SALARIES AND BENEFITS
§ 225-1. Personnel policies and procedures.
§ 225-2. Salaries. [Amended 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. BH 1-07;
7-1-2008 by Ord. No. BH 1-08; 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. BH 2-08;
7-22-2009 by Ord. No. BH 1-09183]
During the year 2009 all officers and employees of the Board of Health shall
receive salaries within the salary ranges hereinafter set forth. No officer or
employee shall be entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected in the
performance of his/her duties as a Board of Health officer or employee.
Title Minimum Market Value Maximum
Administrative and Support
Services
Health Officer $89,571 $97,474 $105,378
A. The Mayor and Borough Council shall by resolution adopt and amend
from time to time personnel policies and procedures, including rules
concerning the hiring and termination of employees, terms and
conditions of employment, and regulations required to comply with
applicable federal and state employment-related law. The personnel
policies and procedures adopted pursuant to said resolution(s),
including those that may be contained within a Borough of Madison
employee handbook and/or Borough of Madison personnel policies and
procedures manual, shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent
contractors of the Board of Health.
B. The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for implementing and
enforcing the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution
authorized pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said
personnel practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective
bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or federal or state
law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all
other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this chapter shall
prevail.
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance shall be retroactive to 1-1-2009 and shall continue in effect
through 12-31-2009, unless sooner amended.
§ 223-7 PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING § 225-2
223:1039
Title Minimum Market Value Maximum
Administrative Officer,
Registrar
$52,321 $61,554 $70,787
Administrative Officer,
Deputy Registrar
$38,250 $45,000 $51,750
Asst. Administrative
Officer, Deputy Registrar
(P/T 25 hours per week)
$10/hr $15/hr $18/hr
Health Educator (P/T
23.5 hours per week)
$41,419 $48,728 $56,216
Environmental Health
Services
Senior Registered
Environmental Health
Specialist
$60,314 $65,636 $70,958
Registered
Environmental Health
Specialist
$43,475 $51,147 $58,819
Personal Health Services
Nursing Director (P/T 25
hours per week)
$53,272 $62,172 $72,073
Public Health Nurse (P/T
25 hours per week)
$36,745 $43,230 $49,715
§ 225-3. Confidential information.
The Health Officer shall release files in accordance with law.
§ 225-4. Conflict with Borough Code; effective date.
Chapter 226
A. To the extent that anything contained in §§ 225-2 through 225-3 of this
chapter is in direct conflict with the Borough of Madison Employee
Handbook ("Handbook"), the Borough of Madison Personnel Policies
and Procedures Manual ("Manual"), and/or Borough of Madison
personnel policies and procedures as may be more fully set forth in or
promulgated under the Code of the Borough of Madison, as amended
("Code"), the pertinent provisions of the Handbook, Manual and/or
Code shall govern.
B. This chapter shall be retroactive January 1, 2007, and shall continue in
effect through December 31, 2007, unless sooner amended. [Amended
4-17-2007 by Ord. No. BH1-07]
§ 225-2 MADISON CODE § 225-4
226:1040
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recyclable
materials — See Ch. 107.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Plumbing — See Ch. 222.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 226-1. Adoption of code.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance of
permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems and fixing penalties
for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et
seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it
without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 226-2. Code established.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as "Standards for Construction of Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems (1978)."
§ 226-3. Public record.
Three copies of the code hereby adopted have been placed on file in the
offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and the Borough Clerk for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 226-4. Permits.
§ 226-5. Compliance with code required.
A. Permit required. No person shall locate, construct or alter any
individual sewage disposal system until a permit for the location,
construction or alteration of the sewage disposal system is issued by
the Board of Health.
B. Issuance of permit. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an
application is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating that
the design of the individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in
compliance with the code.
A. Certificate required. New individual disposal systems shall not be
placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions
thereto be sold or occupied which must rely on such a system for
sewage disposal, until the Board of Health has issued a certificate
indicating that the disposal system has been located and constructed in
§ 225-4 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 226-5
226:1041
§ 226-6. License required to empty or clean septic tanks; issuance,
renewal and revocation of license; license fee.
compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements
of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required
for alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. Issuance of certificate. The Board of Health may issue such certificate if
an engineer licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey
submits a statement in writing signed by him to the Board of Health
that the disposal system has been located and constructed in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of
the code.
A. License required. No person shall engage in the business of installing
individual or any other type of sewage disposal systems in the borough,
unless he has demonstrated a thorough knowledge of the law applicable
to installation of individual sewage disposal systems.
B. Examination. The Board of Health or its authorized agent shall conduct
examinations designed to test the knowledge and ability of an applicant
for a license as a certified builder and installer of individual sewage
disposal systems in accordance with the code. Examinations shall be
held at least once yearly. No person shall be admitted to the
examination for a license as a certified individual sewage disposal
system installer unless he has met the requirements as set forth on the
application and has shown proof of being at least 21 years of age, and
has had at least two years' experience in the business of installing
individual sewage disposal systems or the equivalent thereof.
C. Issuance of license. The Board of Health shall issue an appropriate
license to each applicant who has successfully passed the examination
for a license to build and install individual sewage disposal systems in
the borough, and such license shall not be transferrable. Licenses held
in other municipalities shall not be accepted in lieu of taking the
examination.
D. Renewal of license. All licenses to build and install individual sewage
disposal systems in the borough shall expire on December 31 of each
year and shall be renewed for the ensuing year prior to any work being
done during that year.
E. Revocation of license. The license held by a certified installer of
individual sewage disposal systems in the borough may be suspended
or revoked by the Board of Health or by the Board's authorized agent if
the holder of such license is shown to be incompetent in his work or if it
is proven that the license was obtained through fraudulent means or
misrepresentation.
§ 226-5 MADISON CODE § 226-6
226:1042
§ 226-7. Appeal of denial of license or permit.
If any license, permit or certificate required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request is made by the applicant. Upon such hearing, the Board
of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within 15 days thereafter.
§ 226-8. Violations of code; stop order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy the violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of such
order and the service of a copy upon the person connected with or working
in and about the erection or installation of the disposal system or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done except as aforesaid.
§ 226-9. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges shall be established:
F. License fee. A fee of $50 shall be paid annually by each certified
installer of individual sewage disposal systems for a license to operate
in the borough.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system: $50. The application
shall be valid for one year from the date of filing but may be renewed
upon payment of an annual renewal fee of $15.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system: $25. The application shall be valid
for one year from the date of filing but may be renewed upon the
payment of an annual fee of $15.
C. For the issuance of a license or permit to locate and construct an
individual sewage disposal system: $50. The permit shall be valid for
one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed upon the
payment of an annual fee of $15.
D. For the issuance of a license or permit to alter an individual sewage
disposal system: $25. The permit shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance but may be renewed upon the payment of an annual fee
of $15.
E. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or part
thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code: $50.
§ 226-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 226-9
226:1043
§ 226-10. Amendments to code.
The following specified regulations which are in addition to or different from
those in the Standards for Construction of Individual Subsurface Disposal
Systems (1978) shall govern in the Borough of Madison and shall supersede
anything to the contrary contained therein:
F. For the observation of a test of soil characteristics, by a representative
of the Board of Health, by appointment, for purposes of meeting the
requirements of an application for subdivision approval, or for the
purpose of filing an application for an individual sewage system permit:
the sum of $100 for each test so observed up to three hours, and $40
per hour, or part thereof, in excess of three hours. Said application for
the observation of the test shall be on file at the Board of Health office,
prior to the request for the viewing of the percolation test.
G. For miscellaneous inspections by a Board of Health representative: $20
per 1/2 hour or part thereof.
A. Prohibitions.
(1) No individual sewage disposal system shall be installed upon a
property served by a sanitary sewer system. A property shall be
deemed to be served by a sanitary sewer system whenever a
sanitary sewer system is available within 100 feet of a property line
or whenever a building upon the property can be directly
connected by a house connection to an existing sewer main of such
system without the need for any extension of the sewer main,
provided that there is available capacity in the system.
(2) No component of an individual sewage disposal system may be
located within 100 feet of a potable water well cased or uncased.
B. Separate disposal facilities for different wastes. Every single-family
dwelling hereafter constructed in the Borough of Madison shall be
served by separate disposal facilities as follows:
(1) There shall be an individual sewage disposal system meeting all of
the requirements established therefor, including the higher
standards established by this chapter. This system shall receive all
wastes from bathroom and lavatory toilets, water closets, basins,
bathtubs, showers and other bathroom and lavatory fixtures.
(2) There shall also be a waste disposal system meeting all of the
requirements for an individual sewage disposal system; provided,
however, that the septic tank and disposal area need only meet the
requirements for a two-bedroom dwelling. This system shall
receive all wastes from sinks, tubs and showers other than those
located in bathrooms and lavatories and also all wastes from
laundry tubs, washing machines, dishwashers and any other source
of water-carried wastes not originating in bathrooms or lavatories.
§ 226-9 MADISON CODE § 226-10
226:1044
Chapter 228
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
22.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 107.
Littering; handbills; brush and trash — See
Ch. 120.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Nuisances — See Ch. 218.
(3) There shall be no cross-connections between the aforementioned
separate disposal facilities, and each of the facilities shall be
connected to its own septic tank by a separate building sewer.
(4) No part of the disposal areas of the aforementioned separate
disposal facilities shall be closer to each other than 10 feet at any
point.
C. Disposal area expansion or replacement. An area equivalent to 100% of
the disposal area plus allowance for a ten-foot buffer between the
systems, shall be reserved for future expansion or replacement of the
system. Percolation must be achieved in this reserve area.
Furthermore, this area shall meet all the requirements applicable to the
initial installation and shall be shown on the plan and marked
"Reserved for Disposal Area Expansion." No permanent improvements
shall be installed within or adjacent to this reserved area which will
adversely affect its future use as a disposal area.
D. Percolation tests and subsoil and groundwater determinations.
(1) Percolation tests shall not be conducted in previously disturbed or
filled ground, in fissured soil or in wet soil formation.
(2) At least one soil log and percolation test shall be made for each
proposed disposal area.
(3) Information regarding the type, nature and depth of the soils found
and the depth to groundwater shall be furnished to the sanitarian
for submission to the Board of Health.
(4) No test for the determination of soil characteristics shall be
reported unless the entire test was conducted in the presence of
the sanitarian of the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison.
Every owner or developer shall give the sanitarian notice of
intention to conduct tests to determine soil characteristics, and the
owner or developer and the sanitarian shall arrange a mutually
convenient time for the conduct of the tests.
§ 226-10 SOLID WASTE § 228-1
228:1045
§ 228-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A code, regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored, collected
and disposed of; declaring and defining certain conditions as nuisances;
fixing the responsibilities and duties of persons storing, collecting and/or
disposing of refuse; and providing for the issuance of permits to collect
refuse, is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 188,
P.L. 1950.184 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 228-2. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959)."
§ 228-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the said Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959) have been
placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board of Health
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there until final
action is taken on this chapter for the use and examination of the public.185
§ 228-4. Modifications to code.186
The following additions, amendments and insertions are hereby made to the
code adopted by this chapter:
§ 228-5. Violations and penalties.187
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
chapter or the code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties provided in Ch. 201, General Provisions, Board of
Health, Article I, for each violation.
Chapter 230
A. Section 3.6 is amended to read as follows:
3.6 Refuse prepared for collection should be packaged or otherwise
assembled in quantities weighing not more than 80 pounds.
B. Section 6.1, pertaining to permits for conducting the business of refuse
collection, is deleted in its entirety.
184. Editor's Note: See N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, which immediately followed this section and provided
for the licensing of collectors, was deleted and repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 201, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I) as such licensing has been preempted
by the state.
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code see Ch. 201, General Provisions, Board of
Health Art. I.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code see Ch. 201, General Provisions,
Board of Health Art. I.
§ 228-1 MADISON CODE § 228-5
230:1046
TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 22.
Building construction — See Ch. 75.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 93.
Zoning — Ch. 195.
§ 230-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Tanning Booth Ordinance of the Borough
of Madison."
§ 230-2. Findings.
Whereas tanning booth establishments have enjoyed a recent, rapid growth
in popularity; and whereas the operation of tanning booths involves a
serious potential hazard to the public health, welfare and safety, through
the exposure of persons to concentrations of ultraviolet light in excess
of those normally occurring in the environment; and whereas it has been
established that acute overexposure to the ultraviolet light emitted by
tanning booth lamps will cause skin burns and eye damage; and whereas it
has been established that chronic exposure to ultraviolet light can result in
increased incidences of skin cancer; now, therefore, it is the policy of the
Borough of Madison to protect the health, welfare and safety of its citizens
from the potential hazards associated with the operation of tanning booth
establishments by the adoption of licensing procedures and standards to
govern such facilities.
§ 230-3. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
TANNING BOOTH — Any enclosed or semienclosed area or room,
containing one or more ultraviolet lamps, intended for irradiation of any
part of the human body to induce skin tanning.
TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise or
facility containing one or more tanning booths, provided that this definition
shall not include any hospital, clinic or other medical facility wherein
ultraviolet radiation is or may be used, under the supervision of a trained
medical staff, for the diagnosis or treatment of disease,
§ 230-4. License required; application.
A. No person shall, at any time within the Borough of Madison, conduct,
maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment without first having
obtained a license to do so from the Board of Health of the Borough of
Madison.
§ 228-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 230-4
230:1047
§ 230-5. Conditions and requirements.
No license to conduct, maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment
shall be granted to any person until such person has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Board of Health that the following conditions and
requirements have been met:
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
A. Each tanning booth shall have, prominently displayed on its door or
beside its entrance, a sign that states: "DANGER - Ultraviolet Radiation.
Follow instructions. As with natural sunlight, overexposure can cause
injury and sunburn; repeated exposure may cause premature aging of
skin and skin cancer. Exposure of eyes to ultraviolet light without
protective eyewear may cause serious injury to eyes. Medications or
cosmetics applied to the skin may increase oversensitivity to ultraviolet
light, as may a family history of skin problems or allergy to sunlight.
Consult a physician before using this booth if you are taking any
medication or if you believe yourself sensitive to sunlight."
B. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with handrails, floor markings or
other suitable physical aids to assure that the user maintains the proper
exposure distance from the lamps.
C. Users shall, on each visit, be provided, free of charge, with sanitary
protective eyewear that protects the user's eyes from ultraviolet
radiation but permits sufficient vision to enable the user to maintain
balance, read necessary labels or instructions and effect a quick, safe
exit from the tanning booth.
D. Each timer used to control exposure duration, whether controlled by
the user from within the tanning booth or by the operator of the tanning
booth establishment, shall be accurate to within plus or minus 10% or
any selected timer interval.
E. The ambient air temperature in each tanning booth shall at no time
exceed 100° F. (38° C.).
F. Each tanning booth shall be sufficiently strong and rigid to resist
collapse due to the impact of a falling person. Tanning booth access
doors shall open outwardly, shall be free of locks or latches and shall, in
all other respects, be designed to facilitate safe and rapid entrance to
and exit from the booths. Tanning booth floors shall provide adequate
traction, even when wet, to allow such safe and rapid ingress and
egress.
G. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with heavy wiregrids, ultraviolet
transmitting plastics or some similar physical barrier to protect users
from contact with ultraviolet lamps. Such barrier shall be sufficiently
strong and rigid to resist collapse due to the impact of a falling person.
§ 230-4 MADISON CODE § 230-5
230:1048
§ 230-6. Fees.
Every applicant for whom a license is granted, as required by the provisions
of this chapter, shall pay to the Board of Health an annual license fee for the
same in the amount of $50.
§ 230-7. Contents of license; transferability; display.
§ 230-8. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 230-9. Suspensions and revocations.
A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by the
holder thereof of any provision of this chapter after an opportunity has been
afforded to said holder for a hearing before the Board of Health or the
Health Officer of the Borough of Madison.
H. In addition to the foregoing, each tanning booth and tanning booth
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, Electrical
Standards188 and every other ordinance of the Borough of Madison.
I. Each tanning booth establishment shall obtain and maintain on file with
the Board of Health of the Borough of Madison a certification from a
dermatologist approved by the Board of Health stating that the
methods for exposure determination, both as to duration and distance,
utilized by the tanning booth establishment are safe and that such
methods comply with current medical standards.
J. Each tanning booth establishment and the equipment used therein shall
comply with the regulations promulgated by the United States Food and
Drug Administration and published in Volume 21 of the Code of Federal
Regulations at 1002.61(a)(4) and 1040.20.
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
the location of the premises or other place of operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. Each tanning booth establishment shall display its license in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Building Construction; Ch. 93, Electrical Standards; and Ch.
195, Zoning.
§ 230-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 230-10
230:1049
§ 230-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 201, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article I.
Chapter 232
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Board of Health — See Ch.
22.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 209.
§ 230-10 MADISON CODE § 230-10
230:1050
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 10-9-1962 by Ord. No. 2BH]
§ 232-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A code, regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations, is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part thereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ 232-2. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)."
§ 232-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of the said Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer
of this local Board of Health upon the introduction of this article and will
remain on file there until final action is taken on this article for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 232-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-16-2007 by Ord. No.
BH 1-77]
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
article or the code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties provided in Ch. 201, General Provisions. Board
of Health, Article I, for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 232-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 232-4
230:1051

ARTICLE II
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 10-9-1962 by Ord. No. 3BH]
§ 232-5. Permit and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, to:
§ 232-6. Fees.
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other
means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Board of Health of this borough so to do, or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by
said Board.189
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
borough one or more machines or devices offered for public use which,
upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means, dispenses
unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without
the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this borough
or without complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and
Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended
by said Board.
A. The fees for permits and licenses, as required by § 232-5 above, for the
purpose of raising revenue, for regulation and for control, to be paid
annually to this borough, are hereby fixed as follows: [Amended
11-18-2008 by Ord. No. BH 4-08]
(1) Permit fee: $25 per year.
(2) License fee: $20 per machine, per year.
B. All permits and licenses issued under the authority of this article shall
expire on the 31st day of December each year.
C. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
189. Editor's Note: See Article I of this chapter for adoption of the Code to which reference is
made.
§ 232-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 232-7
230:1053
§ 232-7. Applications for and issuance of permits and licenses;
transfers.
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 232-5 above shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Food
and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended
by the Board of Health of this borough. Such permits and licenses are not
transferable.
§ 232-8. Suspensions, revocations or reinstatements.
Permits and licenses issued under the authority of this article may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this borough
pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverages Vending Code of New
Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by said Board of Health.
§ 232-9. Effect of provisions on interstate commerce.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 232-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-15-1977 by Ord. No.
BH 1-77]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 201, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article I. Each violation
of any of the provisions of this article and each day the same is violated shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 232-7 MADISON CODE § 232-10
230:1054
Chapter 233
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION
BY MINORS OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 56.
§ 233-1. Possession or consumption by persons under legal age on
private property prohibited; violations and penalties.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses, without legal authority, or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any
subsequent offense.
B. The Municipal Judge may, in addition to any other sentence imposed for
the offense, suspend or postpone, for up to six months, the driving
privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any person under this
section, Chapter 233, the Municipal Judge shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles (the "Division") stating the first and last day
of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the Municipal
Judge pursuant to this section, Chapter 233. If a person is less than 17
years of age at the time of the imposition of a sentence, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after
the person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid New
Jersey driver's license, the Municipal Judge shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division, along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the Municipal Judge shall
include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye
color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the Municipal Judge.
D. The Municipal Judge shall inform the person orally and in writing that,
if the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge, in writing, the receipt of
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 232-10 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § 233-1
230:1055
E. If the person convicted under this section, Chapter 233, is not a New
Jersey resident, the Municipal Judge shall suspend or postpone, as
appropriate, the nonresident driving privilege of the person based on
the age of the person and submit the required report to the Division.
The Municipal Judge shall not collect the license of a nonresident
convicted under this section, Chapter 233. Upon receipt of a report
from the Municipal Judge, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
(1) The Municipal Judge shall have the discretion to waive the penalty
provisions of Subsections A, B and C above if the defendant is
enrolled in an educational institution that has imposed
administrative sanctions and penalties against the defendant for
the offense(s). [Added 5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013]
F. Exceptions:
(1) Religious observance, presence of a parent or guardian. Nothing in
Chapter 233 shall prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of, and with the permission of, a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to
purchase or consume alcoholic beverages. As used in this section,
Chapter 233, "guardian" means a person who has qualified as a
guardian of the underage person pursuant to testamentary court
appointment, or other applicable laws, as determined by the
Municipal Judge, and "relative" means an underage person's
grandparent, aunt, uncle, sibling, or any other person related by
blood or affinity.
(2) Performance of employment. Nothing in Chapter 233 shall prohibit
possession of alcoholic beverages by any person while engaged in
the performance of employment pursuant to an employment permit
issued by the Director of the Division of the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, or for a bona fide hotel or restaurant, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-26, or while actively engaged in
the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocation school or postsecondary
educational institution; however, nothing in Chapter 233
shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
these subsections, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(3) An underage person and one or two other persons, if applicable,
shall be immune from prosecution under this chapter prohibiting
any person under the legal age who, without legal authority,
knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic beverage
on private property if: [Added 5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013]
§ 233-1 MADISON CODE § 233-1
230:1056
Appendix
Chapter A236
BOROUGH COUNCIL BYLAWS
§ A236-1. Rules of order.
The deliberation of the Council shall be governed by Roberts Rules of Order.
§ A236-2. Mayor.
(a) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that
another underage person was in need of medical assistance
due to alcohol consumption;
(b) The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one
or two other persons acting in concert with the underage
person who called 9-1-1, provided each of their names to the
9-1-1 operator;
(c) The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1
report; and
(d) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other
persons acting in concert with the underage person who made
the 9-1-1 call, remained on the scene with the person under the
legal age in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived
and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement
personnel on the scene.
(4) The underage person who received medical assistance as provided
in Subsection F(3) of this section shall also be immune from
prosecution under this chapter prohibiting the possession or
consumption of an alcoholic beverage on private property. [Added
5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013]
A. The Mayor shall preside over the deliberations of the Council, prepare
the agenda therefor and conduct the meetings thereof. He or she shall
also participate in the determination of Borough affairs to the extent
permitted by statute. (See: N.J.S.A. 40:87-31 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
40:88-1.190)
B. He or she shall on all occasions preserve the strictest order and
decorum, and he or she shall cause the removal of all persons who
interrupt the orderly proceedings of the Council.
190. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-31 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379, § 1, effective January 1,
1988; see now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. N.J.S.A. 40:88-1 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379, § 1,
effective January 1, 1988; see now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3 and 40A:60-5.
§ 233-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-2
230:1057
§ A236-3. Borough Clerk.
C. When two or more Council members shall rise at the same time, he or
she shall name the one entitled to the floor.
D. He or she shall decide all questions of order without debate, subject to
an appeal to the Counsel, and he or she may call upon the Counsel for
the opinion of the Counsel upon any question of order.
E. He or she shall be an ex-officio member of all committees and shall be
informed in advance of all meetings of such committees.
F. The Mayor shall serve as the liaison between the governing body and all
boards, committees, agencies or organizations except as herein
assigned to a specific Council member for liaison purposes, and except
that he or she shall serve as the liaison between the governing body and
the Trustees of the Hartley Dodge Memorial.
G. In the absence of the Mayor, or if he or she is unable to perform his or
her duties, the Council President (or, in his or her inability to act, the
Council Member having the longest continuous term as such) shall act
as Mayor, as provided by statute. (See: N.J.S.A. 40:88-3.191)
H. The Mayor shall submit to the Council the names of all persons to be
proposed for appointment to any board, body, agency or committee and
requiring the Council's confirmation at least 15 days prior to the date of
the second regular public meeting of the Council after the office
becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails to submit such nominee within said
time period, or the Council fails to confirm any nomination made by the
Mayor, the Council shall make the appointment.
I. The Council President is responsible for public relations from the
Council to the press. [Added 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
A. The Clerk shall perform the duties enjoined upon him or her by the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey and these bylaws. (See: N.J.S.A.
40:87-54 et seq.192)
B. He or she shall keep the minutes and ordinance books properly and
fully indexed and shall perform all duties usually devolving upon such
officer and, in addition, such other duties or services as the Mayor or
Council may direct.
C. Upon the introduction of an ordinance, the same shall be properly
numbered and recorded at length by the Borough Clerk in the
ordinance book. The assigned number shall appear in the
advertisement of such ordinance.
191. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:88-3 was repealed by L.1987, c. 379, § 1, effective 1-1-1988; see
now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5.
192. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-54 et seq. was repealed by L.1987, c. 379, § 1, effective
1-1-1988; see now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1.
§ A236-2 MADISON CODE § A236-4
230:1058
§ A236-4. Borough Administrator. [Amended 1-12-2015 by Res. No.
R39-2015]
The Borough Administrator shall perform such duties as are set forth in
Chapter 4 of the Code of the Borough of Madison and as required by
ordinance.
§ A236-5. Meetings.
A. The Council shall hold an annual reorganization meeting within the first
seven days of the New Year on a date determined by the prior year's
Council.
B. At the aforesaid meeting, the Council shall by resolution establish a
schedule setting forth the time and place for holding regular public
meetings and work meetings during the ensuing year, which schedule
shall not be changed except by resolution. However, the Mayor, with the
consent of three Council members, shall have authority to cancel any
scheduled work meetings. Notice of the aforesaid meetings schedule
and any revision thereto shall be provided in accordance with the Open
Public Meetings Act.193 [Amended 1-12-2015 by Res. No.
R39-2015]
C. At the annual meeting, the Council will elect one of its members as
Council President to serve for the calendar year. (See: N.J.S.A. 40:88-2
and 40:88-3.194)
D. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the Council in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act; in case of his or her
neglect or refusal, any four members of the Council may call such
meeting at such time and place in such Borough as they may designate,
and in all cases of special meetings, reasonable advance notice,
considered to be 48 hours, except in case of emergency, shall be given
in person to all members of the Council or left at their place of
residence. (See: N.J.S.A. 40:48-24.)
E. A quorum shall be as provided by the Revised Statutes of New Jersey,
viz.: three Council members and the Mayor, and in the absence of the
Mayor, four Council members. (See N.J.S.A. 40:88-1.195)
F. If no quorum shall be present at any meeting, those assembled shall
have power and are hereby authorized to set a new meeting date and
then adjourn.
193. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
194. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:88-2 and 40:88-3 were repealed by L.1987, c. 379, § 1, effective
1-1-1988; see now N.J.S.A. 40A: 60-3 and 40A:60-5.
195. Editor's Note: Repealed by L.1987, c. 379, § 1, effective 1-1-1988; see now N.J.S.A.
40A:60-3 and 40A:60-5.
§ A236-4 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-5
230:1059
G. Order of business. The following order of business shall be followed at
regular meetings of the Council: [Amended 12-12-1994; 1-27-2003
by Res. No. 33-2003; 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
(1) Call to order.
(2) Statement in compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act.196
(3) Roll call.
(4) Agenda review.
(5) Reading of closed session resolution certifying that items to be
discussed are authorized by law (if necessary).
(6) Reconvene with (all) members present.
(7) Pledge of Allegiance.
(8) Approval of minutes.
(9) Greeting to public.
(10) Council Liaison reports and Borough business-related remarks.
(11) Presentation of communications and petitions.
(12) Invitation for discussion by the public on items on the agenda or
resolutions.
(13) Agenda discussions.
(14) Advertised hearings.
(15) Invitation for discussion by the public.
(16) Introduction of ordinances.
(17) Consent agenda resolutions.
(18) Unfinished business.
(19) Approval of vouchers.
(20) New business.
H. The aforesaid order of business at any such regular meeting may be
changed by a majority vote of the members of the Council present at
such meeting. [Amended 12-12-1994; 1-27-2003 by Res. No.
33-2003]
I. The Mayor shall prepare an agenda for all meetings of the Council. Any
Council member may add items to the agenda by requesting, in writing,
at least seven days, by 12:00 noon, prior to the meeting. Any item may
196. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ A236-5 MADISON CODE § A236-5
230:1060
§ A236-6. Council responsibilities.
be added to the agenda of any work session by vote of a majority of the
Council members present during the session. [Amended 1-27-2003
by Res. No. 33-2003; 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
J. Except as otherwise required by the statutes or specifically provided in
these bylaws, all action of the Council shall be by a majority vote of
those present. [Amended 1-27-2003 by Res. No. 33-2003]
K. Upon demand of one member of the Council, or when ordered by the
Mayor, or when directed by statute, a roll call vote shall be taken and
the yeas and nays entered in the minutes of the meeting. [Amended
1-27-2003 by Res. No. 33-2003]
L. Regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of
each month. For the limited purposes as are set forth below, a regular
meeting may be held each Monday night of the year, except on the third
Monday of each month. On those Mondays which are national or state
holidays, the meeting shall be held on Wednesday night pursuant to the
New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act.197 [Amended 1-27-2003 by
Res. No. 33-2003]
M. All Council meetings, including any closed sessions that may be held,
shall end by 11:00 p.m. unless a majority of the Council agrees at or
during a meeting to extend the meeting beyond 11:00 p.m. Council
President shall motion and a vote shall be taken to extend the meeting
at 10:45 p.m. [Amended 1-27-2003 by Res. No. 33-2003;
2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
A. In order to define areas of Council responsibility, the municipal
operations of the Borough of Madison shall be divided as follows:
(1) Finance, Borough Clerk and Administration. [Amended
1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
(2) Public safety.
(3) Utilities.
(4) Public works and engineering.
(5) Health. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
(6) Community affairs.
B. The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint two Council
Members, one of which is to be the Chairperson having responsibilities
as outlined in Subsection C of this section and the various subsections
of § A236-7 to each of the subdivisions set forth in Subsection A
hereinabove.
197. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ A236-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-6
230:1061
C. The Council Chairpersons are appointed to expedite and facilitate the
work of the Council, but only within statutory limits as the entire
Council is held responsible for any and all of its acts:
(1) A Council Chairperson shall:
(a) Coordinate, through the department head and in conjunction
with the Borough Administrator, Council policy within his or
her area of responsibility.
(b) In conjunction with the Borough Administrator and the
department head, plan, study and review proposed budgets
within his or her area of responsibility. [Amended 2-13-2012
by Res. No. R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
(c) In conjunction with the Borough Administrator and the
department head, plan, study and review proposed projects
within his or her own area of responsibility. [Amended
2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No.
R39-2015]
(d) In conjunction with the Borough Administrator and the
department head, make reports and recommendations to the
Council regarding his or her area of responsibility. [Amended
2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No.
R39-2015]
(e) In conjunction with the Borough Administrator, department
head and Borough Attorney, review draft resolutions and
ordinances and implement recommended action in his or her
area of responsibility. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Res. No.
R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
(f) Perform such acts as may be assigned to him or her by the
Council.
(2) Except as provided above, a Council Chairperson shall not:
(a) Make promises or commitments to anyone which directly or by
inference tend to bind the Council.
(b) Act in such a manner or make decisions which set a precedent
or violate established Council policy.
(c) Conduct formal hearings or inquiries regarding any Council
area of responsibility unless specifically authorized by a
majority of Council present.
D. In case of death, resignation, removal from office or incapacity to serve
of any Council Chairperson, the Mayor shall name the successor
Chairperson, subject to the approval of the Council. The Mayor may,
with the approval of a majority of the Council, change existing
assignments when it is in the best interests of the Borough to do so.
§ A236-6 MADISON CODE § A236-6
230:1062
§ A236-7. Powers and duties of Council Chairperson.
E. A Council Chairperson shall be prepared to report to the Mayor and
Council at each regular meeting on the activities and achievements of
his or her area of responsibility.
F. The Council shall appoint two Council Members to serve as Finance
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson and Operations Chairperson or Vice
Chairperson of the Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting.
A. The Finance Chairperson shall have responsibilities for the following
described activities and matters:
(1) The Borough Clerk/Administration and his or her office. [Amended
1-12-2015 by Res. No. R 39-2015]
(2) The Finance Director and his or her office.
(3) The Tax Assessor's office.
(4) Library appropriations.
(5) The Tax Collector's office.
(6) Serve as Finance Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting, but the Finance Chairperson may
designate the second Council member appointed to Finance to
serve as Finance Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting. [Added 2-13-2012 by Res. No.
R66-2012]
(7) Technology Department and Communications and Technology
Coordinator. [Added 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012
amended 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015; 12-19-2019 by
Res. No. R350-2019]
(8) The Finance Chairperson shall serve as the backup representative
of the Joint Municipal Court Committee. [Added 2-13-2012 by
Res. No. R66-2012; amended 1-12-2015 by Res. No.
R39-2015]
(9) Audit Committee. [Added 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019 ]
B. Public Safety Chairperson.
(1) The Public Safety Chairperson shall have responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
(a) The Police Department.
(b) The Fire Department.
§ A236-6 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-7
230:1063
(c) The Public Safety Chairperson shall serve as an officer of the
Joint Municipal Court Committee. [Amended 2-13-2012 by
Res. No. R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
(d) Office of Emergency Management. [Added 1-12-2015 by
Res. No. R39-2015]
(e) Safety Committee. [Added 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R
350-2019]
(2) He or she shall also serve as the liaison between the Council and
public transportation corporations or agencies and all
organizations or agencies concerned with public safety or juvenile
delinquency.
C. Community Affairs Chairperson.
(1) The Community Affairs Chairperson shall have responsibility for
the following described activities and matters:
(a) (Reserved)198
(b) Madison Arts and Culture Alliance. [Amended 1-12-2015 by
Res. No. R39-2015]
(2) He or she shall also serve as the liaison between the Council and
the following:
(a) (Reserved)199
(b) (Reserved)200
(c) (Reserved)201
(d) Downtown Development Commission, Director of Business
Development. [Amended 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R
350-2019 ]
(e) Senior citizens.
(f) Chamber of Commerce.
D. Health Chairperson. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R 66-2012]
(1) The Health Chairperson shall have responsibility for the following
described activities and matters:
198. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(1)(a), regarding activities conducted at Borough
expense, was repealed 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019.
199. Editor's Note: Former § A236-7C(2)(a), Recreation Advisory Committee, was repealed
3-10-1997 by Res. No. 34-97.
200. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(b), The Madison Community House, was repealed
2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012.
201. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), Patriotic celebrations financed wholly or in part
by public funds, was repealed 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012.
§ A236-7 MADISON CODE § A236-7
230:1064
(a) Public health.
(b) Madison Alliance Addressing Substance Abuse (MAASA).
[Added 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019 ]
(c) Sanitation inspection activities.
(2) He or she shall also serve as the liaison between the Council, the
Board of Health and other organizations or agencies concerned
with public health and welfare.
E. The Public Works and Engineering Chairperson shall have
responsibility for the following described activities and matters:
[Amended 3-10-1997 by Res. No. 34-97; 2-13-2012 by Res. No.
R66-2012; 1-12-2015 by Res. No. R39-2015]
(1) Public Works Department and Operations.
(2) Planning and maintenance of shade trees, Shade Tree Management
Board. [Added 2-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019]
(3) The Borough Engineer and Engineering Administrator and their
offices.
(4) Parks Advisory Committee. [Amended 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R
350-2019]
(5) Sustainable Madison Advisory Committee. [Amended 12-19-2019
by Res. No. R 350-2019]
(6) (Reserved)202
(7) (Reserved)203
(8) Parks usage and planning.
(9) (Reserved)204
(10) Environmental Commission.
F. The Utilities Department Chairperson shall have responsibility for the
following described activities and matters:
(1) The water utility.
(2) The electrical utility.
(3) Serve as Operations Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the
Madison-Chatham Joint Meeting, but the Utilities Chairperson may
202. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(6), regarding the Building Code Official, was repealed
12-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019.
203. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(7), regarding recycling, was repealed 12-19-2019 by
Res. No. R 350-2019.
204. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(9), regarding the Historic Preservation Committee,
was repealed 12-19-2019 by Res. No. R 350-2019.
§ A236-7 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-7
230:1065
§ A236-8. Special committees.
§ A236-9. Bills, claims and vouchers.
designate the second Council member appointed to utilities to
serve as Utilities Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Madison-
Chatham Joint Meeting.
(4) Member of the Utility Advisory Committee. [Added 1-12-2015 by
Res. No. R39-2015]
A. Special Committees may be appointed by the Mayor from time to time
as the need arises. The appointment of these committees is subject to
the approval of Council and will include a Council member acting as
liaison. [Amended 2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
B. The Mayor shall appoint all such committees and the Chairpersons
thereof, subject to the approval of the Council, and shall be a member,
ex-officio, of each such committee. In addition, he or she shall see that
all matters referred to the committees are acted upon and reported
promptly by the Chairperson to the Mayor and Council. [Amended
2-13-2012 by Res. No. R66-2012]
C. In case of death, resignation, removal from office or incapacity to serve
of any Committee Chairperson, the Mayor shall name the successor
Chairperson, subject to the approval of the Council. The Mayor may,
with the approval of the majority of the Council, change existing
committee assignments and/or chairperson when it is in the best
interests of the Borough to do so.
D. The Chairperson of each Special Committee shall report, as the Mayor
or Council may direct, to the Mayor and Council.
A. All bills or claims against the Borough shall be paid in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 10 of the Code of the Borough of Madison.
B. All bills or claims against the Borough shall be in writing, fully itemized
and on such forms as the Borough shall provide for that purpose. As
required by statute, the bills or claims shall be sworn to by the claimant
before submission for approval and payment.
C. Procedure.
(1) All bills and claims must be supported by a certification of the
receipt of the goods or the satisfactory rendering of the services by
the responsible person who may be held accountable therefor,
accepting the same on behalf of the Borough. Each such bill or
claim shall then be carefully reviewed and checked by or under the
direction of the Borough official who accomplishes the
administrative certificate on the voucher form.
§ A236-7 MADISON CODE § A236-9
230:1066
§ A236-10. Seal.
§ A236-11. Amendments. [Amended 1-27-2003 by Res. No. 33-2003]
§ A236-12. Adoption and term.
The bylaws shall be adopted by a resolution of the Council concurred in by
a majority of the members of the Council. The bylaws shall become effective
(2) All checked vouchers with supporting papers attached will be
presented to the Council Committee Chairperson whose committee
has primary interest in the matter, who shall approve the payment
of the vouchers by signing a voucher register in a form prepared by
the Administrator of the Borough. If approved by the Chairperson
having jurisdiction over the activity or matter for which the
expenditure was incurred, it will be referred to the Council as a
whole for its approval by motion.
(3) All vouchers recommended for payment shall be presented to the
Council by the Borough Clerk at a regular meeting or an adjourned
regular meeting for its approval by motion, which approval shall
authorize the payment of the vouchers concerned.
D. The corresponding vouchers shall accompany all checks drawn in
payment thereof when said checks are presented to the Mayor, the
Collector-Treasurer and the Borough Clerk for signature.
E. All bills, vouchers and paid checks shall be filed in a safe place and shall
be made available for public inspection whenever requested.
A. The Seal of the Borough shall be circular in form and shall contain the
following: In the center, a facsimile of a rose, circumscribed by the
wording "The Borough of Madison - Madison, N.J., Incorporated
December 27, 1889."
B. The seal shall be in the custody of the Clerk and shall be impressed on
all appropriate documents or papers.
A. The Mayor or any member of the Council may propose amendments to
these bylaws at any regular public session or adjourned regular public
session.
B. The Mayor shall then appoint a Special Committee of three members of
the Council to consider the proposed amendments.
C. The Special Committee will present its recommendations at a regular
public session of the Council.
D. These bylaws shall only be altered or amended by a two-thirds vote on a
roll call at a regular public session or adjourned regular public session
of the Council.
§ A236-9 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A236-12
230:1067
immediately after adoption and shall remain in effect for not longer than
December 31st of the calendar year in which the bylaws were adopted.
§ A236-13. Interpretation of bylaws.
Chapter A237
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 79. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 166.
§ A237-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance the terms defined below shall have the
meanings there indicated:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Borough's office and is
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Madison in the County
of Morris and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — CSC TKR, Inc. ("Cablevision"), the grantee of rights under this
ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR § 76.1 et seq., (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
A. The Borough Attorney shall be responsible for interpreting and
ensuring adherence to the bylaws of the Borough of Madison.
B. The remainder of the bylaws unaffected by these amendments shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ A236-12 MADISON CODE § A237-1
230:1068
not limited to those described in 47 CFR § 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq., and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A237-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A237-3. Grant of authority.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable television system, and for the provision of any
communication service over such system as may be authorized by federal
or state regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A237-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A237-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. The Company shall also seek
approval from the Board authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a time
that a decision is made by the Borough and the Board relative to the
renewal of said consent.
§ A237-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A237-6
230:1069
§ A237-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A237-7. Primary service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence located in the portion of the franchise
territory, as described in the map attached to the application, at tariffed
rates for standard and nonstandard installation. Such area designated shall
constitute the primary service area.
§ A237-8. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough an annual franchise fee, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30.
§ A237-9. Free service.
A. Upon enactment of this ordinance by the Borough and issuance of a
certificate of approval by the Board, the company shall provide, upon
request and within 90 days, free of charge, one standard installation
and monthly basic cable television service to all state or locally
accredited public, private and parochial schools and all municipal
buildings used for governmental purposes within the Borough. A
preliminary schedule of said properties is attached hereto as Exhibit
A.205
B. Upon enactment of this ordinance by the Borough and issuance of a
certificate of approval by the Board, the company shall provide to one
municipal location used for governmental purposes, without charge,
the following within 90 days: (1) one standard installation; (2) one cable
modem per installation; and (3) basic cable modem service for the term
of this ordinance. The Borough shall be permitted to network, at its own
cost, four personal computers terminals to the cable modem provided
by Cablevision. This offer shall be subject to the reasonable terms,
conditions and use policies of the company as those policies may exist
from time to time.
C. Upon enactment of this ordinance by the Borough and issuance of a
certificate of approval by the Board, the company shall provide, upon
request and within 90 days, to state and locally accredited public and
private and parochial elementary and secondary schools and municipal
public libraries in the Borough, without charge, the following: (1) one
standard installation per school and library; (2) one cable modem per
installation; and, (3) basic cable modem service for the term of this
ordinance for each installation. Each school and library shall be
permitted, at its own cost, to network up to 25 computers to the cable
205. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A237-6 MADISON CODE § A237-9
230:1070
§ A237-10. Construction and system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Borough:
§ A237-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A237-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
modem provided by Cablevision. This offer shall be subject to the
reasonable terms, conditions and use policies of the Company, as those
policies may exist from time to time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim public trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities, and shall be coordinated and approved by the
Borough of Madison Shade Tree Management Board.
§ A237-9 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A237-12
230:1071
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A237-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A237-14. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost at
all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability insurance naming
the Borough as an additional insured and insuring against loss by any such
claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of
$500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, and $1,000,000 for bodily
injury or death resulting from any one accident or occurrence stemming
from or arising out of the company's exercise of its rights hereunder.
Cablevision shall provide to the Borough at the commencement of this
consent evidence of such insurance, which evidence shall, upon the request
of the Borough, also be provided on an annual basis during the term hereof.
§ A237-15. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this ordinance, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise. The bond shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk.
§ A237-16. Rates.
A. The rates of the company for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly broadcast basic level of cable television service
rate to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes to cable
television services provided by the company, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age;
(2) Subscribers seeking eligibility for the discount must meet the
income and residence requirements of the Pharmaceutical
Assistance to Aged and Disabled (PAAD) Program in the state
pursuant to N.J.S.A 30:4D-21;
(3) The senior citizen discount herein relates only to the entry level
basic rate of cable television service, and shall not apply to any
§ A237-12 MADISON CODE § A237-16
230:1072
§ A237-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Borough pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Borough or any other person during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Borough shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A237-18. Equitable terms.
additional service, feature, or equipment offered by the company,
including premium channel services and pay-per-view services.
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
C. In the event that Cablevision shall be required to increase the franchise
fee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48-5A-30(d), then at such time as the
new fee is instituted, Cablevision shall no longer be obligated to
maintain or offer the senior discount specified in § A237-17B above.
A. In the event that the Borough approves or permits a cable system to
operate in the community on terms more favorable or less burdensome
than those contained in this ordinance, such more favorable or less
burdensome terms shall be applicable in this consent, subject to a
petition to the Board of Public Utilities as provided for in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. In the event that a nonfranchised multi-channel video programmer
provides service to residents of the Borough, Cablevision shall have a
right to request franchise amendments to this ordinance that relieve
Cablevision of regulatory burdens that create a competitive
disadvantage to the company. In requesting amendments, Cablevision
shall file with the Board of Public Utilities a petition for approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 seeking to
amend the ordinance. Such petition shall: i) indicate the presence of a
nonfranchised competitor(s); ii) identify the basis for Cablevision's
belief that certain provisions of this franchise place it at a competitive
disadvantage; and iii) identify the regulatory burdens to be amended or
repealed in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage. The
Borough shall not unreasonably withhold or object to granting the
company's petition.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Borough shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of multichannel
video programming subject to the Borough's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
§ A237-16 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A237-18
230:1073
§ A237-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A237-20. Public, educational and governmental access.
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions
as the instant consent, the Borough agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
(1) The Borough agrees that the company shall retain the right to use
the PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming
shall remain the priority use and the company's rights with respect
to using the channel for non-PEG programming shall be
subordinate to the Borough provision of PEG access programming
on such channel.
(2) Within 90 days from the effective date of this franchise, Cablevision
shall provide and maintain one access return line at Madison Public
Library located at 39 Keep Street in Madison, New Jersey, for the
production of noncommercial educational and governmental access
programming on the cable system. Upon request of the Borough,
Cablevision shall provide access training at least once every year.
B. In consideration for the rights granted by this ordinance, Cablevision
shall provide the Borough with an initial one-time grant of $10,000 (the
"initial grant"). Such amount shall be paid within 60 days following the
grant of the certificate from the Board. The grant may be used by the
Borough for any cable and/or other telecommunications-related
purpose as the Borough, in its discretion, may deem appropriate.
Beginning in year two of the franchise (measured by the certificate of
approval) and annually thereafter through year 10 of the franchise,
Cablevision shall provide the Borough with an annual amount of $1,500
(the "annual grant"). Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any
§ A237-18 MADISON CODE § A237-20
230:1074
§ A237-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A237-22. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A237-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A237-24. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval by
the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A237-25. Written request.
The execution hereof by the Mayor of Madison shall fulfill the requirement
to provide written notice as specified throughout the agreement.
Chapter A238
MADISON-CHATHAM JOINT MEETING
additional payments beyond year 10 of the franchise. The annual grant
shall be payable to the Borough within 60 days from receipt of the
Borough's written request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should
Cablevision apply for a systemwide certification or otherwise convert
its municipal consent to a systemwide certification in accordance with
applicable law, it shall be relieved of any payments due and owing after
the date of such conversion or award of a systemwide franchise with
the exception of the initial grant.
§ A237-20 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A237-25
230:1075

ARTICLE I
Name, Membership, Purpose and Location
§ A238-1. Name.
This Meeting composed of the members of the governing bodies of the
municipalities of Madison and Chatham, located in the County of Morris,
in the State of New Jersey, shall be known as the "Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting."
§ A238-2. Membership.
§ A238-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Joint Meeting shall be to provide, maintain and operate
a sewerage system and treatment facility for the Borough of Madison and
the Borough of Chatham.
§ A238-4. Location.
The Joint Meeting's principal office shall be at the Administration Building
at the Molitor Water Pollution Control Facility, North Passaic Avenue,
Chatham, New Jersey.
A. The members of the Joint Meeting shall consist of:
(1) All of the elected representatives, namely, the six elected Council
representatives and the Mayor, of the governing body of the
Borough of Madison, a municipal corporation and body politic of
the State of New Jersey, located at Hartley Dodge Memorial,
Madison, New Jersey 07940; and
(2) All of the elected representatives, namely, the six elected Council
representatives and the Mayor, of the governing body of the
Borough of Chatham, a municipal corporation and body politic of
the State of New Jersey, located at Municipal Building, 54
Fairmount Avenue, Chatham, New Jersey 07928.
B. For the purposes of Article VI, entitled "Voting Procedure," each
municipal corporation shall be deemed one local governmental unit
entitled to cast one vote each.
§ A238-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A238-4
230:1077

ARTICLE II
Meetings
§ A238-5. (Reserved)
§ A238-6. Meetings. [Added 10-13-2016 by Ord. No. 61-2016206
The Joint Meeting shall hold meetings in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, Chapter 231 (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.), and any
amendments thereto, and as authorized in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A238-7. Standing committees.
The Joint Meeting may establish such standing committees as necessary to
provide for the effective and efficient governance of the Joint Meeting, and
to make recommendations to, and act on behalf of, the Joint Meeting to the
extent set forth in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A238-8. Special committees.
The Joint Meeting Chair may appoint such other special committees at any
time as necessary to provide for the effective and efficient governance of
the Joint Meeting, and to make recommendations to, and act on behalf of,
the Joint Meeting to the extent set forth in the Joint Meeting bylaws.
§ A238-9. Bylaws.
The Joint Meeting may adopt, and from time to time amend, bylaws and
other rules of operation.
206. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ A238-5 through A236-35 and
provided for the redesignation of §§ A238-36 through A238-39 as §§ A238-10 through
A238-13, respectively.
§ A238-5 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A238-9
230:1079

ARTICLE III
Insurance and Defense and Indemnification of Joint Meeting
Officials and Employees
§ A238-10. Insurance.
The Joint Meeting shall secure and maintain at all times for the protection
of the Joint Meeting such public liability, property damage and any and all
other forms of insurance as it may deem necessary.
§ A238-11. Indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Joint Meeting shall, upon the request of
any present or former member, employee or appointee of the Joint Meeting,
provide for indemnification and legal defense of any civil action brought
against said person or persons arising from an act or omission falling within
the scope of their public and/or assigned duties.
A. Definitions. The terms of this Article VIII and the definition of
"member," "employee" and "appointee" are to be construed liberally in
order to effectuate the purposes of this Article VIII, except that these
terms shall not mean: a) any entity that is not a natural person; b) any
person while providing goods or services of any kind under any contract
with the Joint Meeting except an employment contract; c) any person
while providing legal or engineering services for compensation unless
said person is a full-time employee of the Joint Meeting; and d) any
person who, as a condition of his or her appointment or contract, is
required to indemnify and defend the Joint Meeting and/or secure
insurance.
B. Civil actions. The Joint Meeting shall provide for the defense of and
indemnify any present or former member, employee or appointee of the
Joint Meeting whenever any action has been or shall be brought against
such person, if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Joint Meeting has or
had an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
C. Costs and counsel fees. In indemnifying and defending such persons,
the Joint Meeting shall incur all costs of defending such action, which
defense shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim against such
person, as well as the costs of appeal, if any, including reasonable
counsel fees and expenses, and shall save harmless and protect such
person from any financial loss resulting therefrom.
D. Punitive damages. The Joint Meeting shall not indemnify any person
against the payment of punitive damages, penalties or fines, but may
§ A238-10 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A238-11
230:1081
provide for the legal defense of such claims in accord with the
standards set forth herein. The Joint Meeting may refuse to provide for
the defense and indemnification of any civil action referred to herein if
the Joint Meeting determines that: a) the act or omission did not occur
within the scope of a duty authorized or imposed by law; b) the act or
failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual
malice of the person requesting defense and indemnification; or c) the
defense of the action or proceeding by the Joint Meeting would create a
conflict of interest between the Joint Meeting and the person or persons
involved.
E. Criminal proceedings. In any other action or proceeding, including
criminal proceedings, the Joint Meeting may provide for the defense of
a present or former member, employee or appointee, if the Joint
Meeting first determines that such representation is in the best interest
of the Joint Meeting and that the actions of the person to be defended
did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, gross misconduct, an
intentional tort, or an intentional violation of any federal or state
environmental law or regulation promulgated thereunder.
F. Exclusive control by the Joint Meeting. Whenever the Joint Meeting
provides for the defense of any action set forth herein and as a
condition of such defense, the Joint Meeting may assume exclusive
control over the representation of such persons defended, and such
persons shall cooperate fully with the Joint Meeting. In the event that
any member or employee or appointee engages an attorney without the
approval of the Joint Meeting and prior agreement as to the cost of
services, all costs so incurred shall be the sole responsibility of such
member, employee, or appointee.
G. Manner of defense. The Joint Meeting may provide for the defense
pursuant to this Article VIII by authorizing its attorney to act on behalf
of the person being defended or by employing other counsel for this
purpose or by asserting the right of the Joint Meeting under any
appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer to provide
defense.
H. Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth above,
the Joint Meeting will not be responsible for indemnification under the
following conditions:
(1) Judgment or settlement of a civil cause of action relating to a claim
based upon willful fraud, malice, or misconduct.
(2) Judgments calling for punitive or exemplary damages, unless there
is a judicial determination that the actions of the officer, employee
or appointee did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, gross
misconduct, or an intentional tort.
(3) Any insurance coverage is available for payment.
§ A238-11 MADISON CODE § A238-11
230:1082
(4) Where any officer, employee, or appointee is found to have acted in
violation of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:22-1 et
seq.
(5) Where any officer, employee, or appointee purposely, knowingly or
recklessly violates the Water Pollution Control Act.
§ A238-11 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A238-11
230:1083

ARTICLE IV
Amendments; Authority
§ A238-12. Submission of proposed amendments; adoption at
regular meeting.
These bylaws shall not be amended except at a regular meeting of the
Joint Meeting. All proposed amendments shall be submitted in writing at a
regular meeting, read and referred to the next regular meeting of the Joint
Meeting for a vote on the proposed amendments.
§ A238-13. Power to act.
In all instances in which the Joint Meeting shall be required to act in
accordance with law for the purpose of the operation and maintenance of
the Joint Meeting, and where there are no provisions in these bylaws for the
procedure governing such act or acts, the members acting as a municipal
corporation shall have full power and authority to act as if such power and
authority were vested herein.
§ A238-12 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § A238-13
230:1085
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
53-2004 12-13-2004 Appropriation NCM
54-2004 12-13-2004 Open Space, Recreation
and Historic
Preservation Advisory
Committee
Ch. 25
55-2004 12-13-2004 Drug-free zones
amendment
Ch. 91
56-2004 12-13-2004 Appropriation NCM
1-2005 3-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
2-2005 3-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
3-2005 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
4-2005 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
5-2005 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
6-2005 4-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
7-2005 5-9-2005 Appropriation NCM
8-2005 5-9-2005 Appropriation NCM
9-2005 5-9-2005 Appropriation NCM
10-2005 5-9-2005 Appropriation NCM
11-2005 5-9-2005 Appropriation NCM
12-2005 5-9-2005 Garbage, municipal
solid waste and
recyclables amendment
Ch. 107
BH 1-05 5-17-2005 Board of Health salaries
and benefits
Ch. 225
13-2005 5-23-2005 Salaries NCM
14-2005 5-23-2005 Salaries NCM
15-2005 5-23-2005 Animals and rabies
control; cats and dogs
repealer
Ch. 59; Chs. 82 and
89, repealer only
16-2005 5-23-2005 Appropriation NCM
§ A238-13 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1086
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2005 5-23-2005 Appropriation NCM
18-2005 6-13-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
19-2005 6-13-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
20-2005 5-23-2005 Establishing a CAP bank NCM
21-2005 Not adopted
22-2005 6-13-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
23-2005 5-23-2005 Appropriation NCM
24-2005 6-13-2005 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
25-2005 6-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
26-2005 6-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
27-2005 6-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
28-2005 6-27-2005 Appropriation NCM
29-2005 Withdrawn
30-2005 6-27-2005 Historic district
preservation
amendment
Ch. 112
31-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
32-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
33-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM (canceled by
Ord. 60-2005)
34-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
35-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
36-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
37-2005 7-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
38-2005 7-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
39-2005 7-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
40-2005 7-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
41-2005 7-25-2005 Appropriation NCM
42-2005 7-25-2005 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1087
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
43-2005 9-12-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
44-2005 8-22-2005 Animals and rabies
control amendment
Ch. 59
45-2005 9-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
46-2005 9-26-2005 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
47-2005 9-26-2005 Appropriation NCM
48-2005 10-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
49-2005 10-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
50-2005 10-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
51-2005 10-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
52-2005 11-14-2005 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
53-2005 12-12-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
54-2005 11-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
55-2005 11-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
56-2005 11-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
57-2005 11-28-2005 Appropriation NCM
58-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
59-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
60-2005 12-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
1-2006 2-13-2006 Appropriation NCM
2-2006 2-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
3-2006 2-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
4-2006 3-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
5-2006 4-24-2006 Land development
amendment (stormwater
management)
Ch. 195
6-2006 4-10-2006 Madison-Chatham Joint
Meeting amendment
Ch. A238
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1088
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2006 4-24-2006 Building construction
amendment; multiple
dwellings and hotel
maintenance
amendment; swimming
pools amendment
Chs. 75, 146, 170
8-2006 Number not used
9-2006 4-10-2006 Appropriation NCM
10-2006 4-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
11-2006 4-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
12-2006 4-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
13-2006 4-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
14-2006 4-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
15-2006 4-24-2006 Establishing a CAP bank NCM
16-2006 5-22-2006 Personnel policies
repealer
Ch. 30 (repealer
only)
17-2006 5-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
18-2006 5-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
19-2006 5-8-2006 Penalties amendments Chs. 1, 36, 45, 54,
56, 58, 70, 73, 75,
79, 93, 98, 101, 103,
107, 109, 111, 113,
120, 122, 136, 145,
146, 155, Art. II, 170,
173, 177, 183, 191
and 195
20-2006 5-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
21-2006 5-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
22-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
23-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
24-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
25-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
26-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
27-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
28-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
29-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1089
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-2006 5-22-2006 Appropriation NCM
31-2006 Not used
32-2006 5-22-2006 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 176
33-2006 6-12-2006 Appropriation NCM
34-2006 Not used
35-2006 6-12-2006 Appropriation NCM
36-2006 6-26-2006 Appropriation NCM
37-2006 6-26-2006 Appropriation NCM
38-2006 6-26-2006 Salaries NCM
39-2006 7-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
40-2006 7-24-2006 Appropriation NCM
41-2006 8-28-2006 Salaries NCM
42-2006 8-28-2006 Appropriation NCM
43-2006 8-28-2006 Appropriation NCM
44-2006 9-11-2006 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
BH 1-06 9-19-2006 Board of Health salaries
and benefits amendment
Ch. 225
45-2006 9-25-2006 Appropriation NCM
46-2006 Withdrawn
47-2006 10-23-2006 Land development
amendment
(affordable housing)
Ch. 195
48-2006 10-11-2006 Electric utility rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
49-2006 10-11-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
50-2006 10-23-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
51-2006 10-11-2006 Appropriation for
recodification
NCM
52-2006 10-11-2006 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1090
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
53-2006 11-13-2006 Land development
amendment (Municipal
Housing Liaison)
Ch. 195
54-2006 10-23-2006 Salary amendment NCM
55-2006 10-23-2006 Appropriation NCM
56-2006 11-13-2006 Appropriation NCM
57-2006 12-11-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
58-2006 11-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
59-2006 12-11-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
60-2006 12-11-2006 Appropriation NCM
61-2006 12-11-2006 Appropriation NCM
62-2006 12-11-2006 Appropriation NCM
1-2007 1-22-2007 Salaries NCM
2-2007 1-22-2007 Salaries NCM
3-2007 2-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
4-2007 2-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
5-2007 3-12-2007 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
(Appendix A)
6-2007 3-12-2007 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4
7-2007 3-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
8-2007 3-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
9-2007 3-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
10-2007 3-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
11-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
12-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
13-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
14-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
15-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
16-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
17-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
18-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1091
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
20-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
BH 1-2007 4-17-2007 Board of Health salaries
and benefits amendment
Ch. 225
21-2007 4-23-2007 Appropriation NCM
22-2007 Failed
23-2007 4-23-2007 Appropriation NCM
24-2007 4-23-2007 Appropriation NCM
25-2007 Withdrawn
26-2007 5-14-2007 Appropriation NCM
27-2007 5-14-2007 Appropriation NCM
28-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
29-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
30-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
31-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
32-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
33-2007 5-30-2007 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
34-2007 5-30-2007 Service charge for
returned checks
Ch. 157
35-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
36-2007 5-30-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
37-2007 6-25-2007 Appropriation NCM
38-2007 6-25-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
39-2007 6-25-2007 Appropriation NCM
40-2007 6-25-2007 Appropriation NCM
41-2007 6-25-2007 Animals and rabies
control amendment
Ch. 59
42-2007 6-25-2007 Appropriation NCM
43-2007 Number not used
44-2007 7-9-2007 Salary amendment NCM
45-2007 7-23-2007 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1092
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
46-2007 7-23-2007 Bond NCM
47-2007 7-23-2007 Appropriation NCM
48-2007 7-23-2007 Appropriation NCM
49-2007 8-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
50-2007 8-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
51-2007 8-27-2007 Bond NCM
52-2007 8-27-2007 Appropriation NCM
53-2007 8-27-2007 Appropriation NCM
54-2007 8-27-2007 Towing and storage fees
amendment
Ch. 176
55-2007 Number not used
56-2007 8-27-2007 Salary amendment NCM
57-2007 8-27-2007 Appropriation NCM
58-2007 8-27-2007 Appropriation NCM
59-2007 9-10-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
60-2007 9-10-2007 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
61-2007 9-10-2007 Defense and
indemnification of
municipal officials and
employees amendment
Ch. 14
62-2007 9-24-2007 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
63-2007 9-24-2007 Appropriation NCM
64-2007 10-10-2007 Cable television
franchise: CSC TKR,
Inc.
Ch. A237
65-2007 9-24-2007 Building construction
fees amendment
Ch. 75
66-2007 9-24-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
67-2007 9-24-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
68-2007 9-24-2007 Appropriation NCM
69-2007 10-10-2007 Authorization of
agreements for bond
NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1093
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
70-2007 10-10-2007 Bond NCM
BH 2-2007 10-16-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 202
71-2007 11-26-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
72-2007 11-26-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
73-2007 11-26-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
74-2007 11-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
75-2007 11-26-2007 Appropriation NCM
76-2007 11-26-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
77-2007 12-10-2007 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
78-2007 12-10-2007 Appropriation for
emergency services
NCM
79-2007 12-10-2007 Appropriation NCM
80-2007 12-10-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
81-2007 12-10-2007 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
82-2007 12-10-2007 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
1-2008 1-28-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
2-2008 1-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
3-2008 1-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
4-2008 1-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
5-2008 2-11-2008 Salaries NCM
6-2008 2-11-2008 Salaries NCM
7-2008 3-24-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
8-2008 2-25-2008 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
9-2008 Number not used
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1094
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2008 3-24-2008 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
11-2008 3-24-2008 Water amendment Ch. 190
12-2008 3-10-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
13-2008 3-10-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
14-2008 3-24-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
15-2008 3-24-2008 Historic district
preservation
amendment
Ch. 112
16-2008 Number not used
17-2008 3-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
18-2008 3-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
19-2008 4-14-2008 Garbage, municipal
solid waste and
recyclables
Ch. 107
20-2008 4-28-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
21-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
22-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
23-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
24-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
25-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
26-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
27-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
28-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
29-2008 4-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
30-2008 4-28-2008 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
31-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
32-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
33-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
34-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
35-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1095
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
36-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
37-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
38-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
39-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
40-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
41-2008 5-12-2008 Appropriation NCM
42-2008 Number not used
43-2008 5-28-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
44-2008 5-28-2008 Appropriation NCM
45-2008 6-23-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
46-2008 6-23-2008 Appropriation NCM
BH 1-08 7-1-2008 Salaries and benefits
amendment
Ch. 225
47-2008 7-14-2008 Bond NCM
48-2008 7-14-2008 Bond NCM
49-2008 7-14-2008 Bond NCM
50-2008 7-14-2008 Bond NCM
51-2008 7-14-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 39, Art. I
52-2008 7-14-2008 Parks amendment Ch. 136
53-2008 7-28-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
54-2008 7-28-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
55-2008 7-28-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
56-2008 8-11-2008 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
57-2008 8-25-2008 Appropriation NCM
58-2008 9-8-2008 Bond NCM
59-2008 9-22-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
60-2008 9-22-2008 Bond NCM
61-2008 9-22-2008 Bond amendment NCM
62-2008 9-22-2008 Parking lots amendment Ch. 134
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1096
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
63-2008 9-22-2008 Alcoholic beverages: offpremises
consumption
amendment; model car
raceways amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VI; Ch.
125
64-2008 10-15-2008 Appropriation NCM
65-2008 10-15-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
BH 2-08 10-21-2008 Salaries and benefits
amendment
Ch. 225
66-2008 Tabled; number not
used
67-2008 11-10-2008 Appropriation NCM
68-2008 11-10-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
69-2008 11-10-2008 Appropriation NCM
BH 3-08 11-18-2008 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 209
BH 4-08 11-18-2008 Vending machines:
licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. II
70-2008 11-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
71-2008 Number not used
72-2008 11-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
73-2008 11-24-2008 Bond NCM
74-2008 11-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
75-2008 12-8-2008 Electric utility rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
1-2009 1-26-2009 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 176
2-2009 1-26-2009 Salary amendment NCM
3-2009 2-9-2009 Appropriation NCM
4-2009 Number not used
5-2009 3-9-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2009 3-9-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
7-2009 2-23-2009 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1097
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2009 3-9-2009 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
9-2009 3-9-2009 Salary amendment NCM
10-2009 3-23-2009 Water amendment Ch. 190
11-2009 4-13-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
12-2009 3-23-2009 Clothing bins Ch. 82
13-2009 3-23-2009 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
14-2009 Number not used
15-2009 3-23-2009 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
16-2009 4-13-2009 Sewer use charges
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. IV
17-2009 4-13-2009 Salary amendment NCM
18-2009 4-27-2009 Downtown Development
Commission amendment
Ch. 15
19-2009 4-27-2009 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
20-2009 5-11-2009 Appropriation NCM
21-2009 5-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
22-2009 5-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
23-2009 5-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
24-2009 5-27-2009 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
25-2009 6-22-2009 Appropriation NCM
26-2009 6-22-2009 Appropriation NCM
27-2009 7-13-2009 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
28-2009 7-13-2009 Bond NCM
29-2009 7-13-2009 Appropriation NCM
BH 1-09 7-22-2009 Salaries and benefits
amendment
Ch. 225
30-2009 7-27-2009 Water amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1098
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-2009 7-27-2009 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
32-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
33-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
34-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
35-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
36-2009 7-27-2009 Salary amendment NCM
37-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
38-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
39-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
40-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
41-2009 7-27-2009 Appropriation NCM
42-2009 8-10-2009 Standing Finance
Committee
Ch. 47
43-2009 8-10-2009 Appropriation NCM
44-2009 9-14-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
45-2009 8-24-2009 Parking lots amendment Ch. 134
46-2009 9-28-2009 Appropriation NCM
47-2009 11-9-2009 Bond amendment NCM
48-2009 11-9-2009 Bond amendment NCM
49-2009 11-9-2009 Bond amendment NCM
50-2009 Withdrawn
51-2009 11-9-2009 Wild animals Ch. 192
52-2009 11-9-2009 Fertilizer application
and use
Ch. 97
53-2009 12-14-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
54-2009 11-9-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
55-2009 11-23-2009 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
56-2009 12-14-2009 Appropriation NCM
57-2009 Withdrawn
58-2009 12-14-2009 Water amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1099
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
59-2009 12-14-2009 Sewer use charges
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. IV
1-2010 2-22-2010 Water amendment Ch. 190
2-2010 2-8-2010 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
3-2010 2-8-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 101
4-2010 2-8-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 101
5-2010 2-8-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 101
6-2010 2-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
7-2010 2-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
8-2010 2-22-2010 Loitering repealer Ch. 122, reference
only
9-2010 3-22-2010 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
10-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
11-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
12-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
13-2010 Withdrawn
14-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
15-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
16-2010 4-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
17-2010 5-10-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
18-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
19-2010 4-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
20-2010 7-12-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
21-2010 Withdrawn
22-2010 5-10-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
license fees
Ch. 56, Art. IV
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1100
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2010 5-10-2010 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
24-2010 5-24-2010 Appropriation NCM
25-2010 5-24-2010 Appropriation NCM
26-2010 5-24-2010 Appropriation NCM
27-2010 5-24-2010 Appropriation NCM
28-2010 5-24-2010 Appropriation NCM
29-2010 5-24-2010 Access easement
agreement
NCM
30-2010 6-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
31-2010 6-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
32-2010 6-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
33-2010 6-28-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
34-2010 6-14-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
35-2010 7-12-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
36-2010 7-12-2010 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
37-2010 7-12-2010 Appropriation NCM
38-2010 7-12-2010 Appropriation NCM
39-2010 8-9-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
40-2010 8-23-2010 Salary amendment NCM
41-2010 8-23-2010 Salary amendment NCM
42-2010 8-23-2010 Appropriation NCM
43-2010 8-23-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
44-2010 8-23-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
45-2010 9-13-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1101
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
46-2010 9-27-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
47-2010 9-13-2010 Alliance Addressing
Substance Abuse
amendment
Ch. 5
48-2010 Number not used
49-2010 9-13-2010 Salary amendment NCM
50-2010 Number not used
51-2010 9-27-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
52-2010 9-27-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
53-2010 10-13-2010 Salary amendment NCM
54-2010 10-13-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
55-2010 11-8-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
56-2010 11-8-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
57-2010 12-13-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
58-2010 Failed
59-2010 11-8-2010 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
60-2010 11-8-2010 Utility easement
agreement
NCM
61-2010 12-13-2010 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
BH 1-10 12-21-2010 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 209
1-2011 1-24-2011 Water amendment Ch. 190
2-2011 1-24-2011 Bond NCM
3-2011 2-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
4-2011 2-28-2011 Salary amendment NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1102
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2011 3-28-2011 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
6-2011 Number not used
7-2011 3-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
8-2011 3-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
9-2011 Number not used
10-2011 Number not used
11-2011 3-28-2011 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
12-2011 3-28-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
13-2011 3-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
14-2011 4-11-2011 Volunteers: fingerprint
checks
Ch. 49, Art. I
15-2011 4-25-2011 Appropriation NCM
16-2011 4-25-2011 Annexation of land NCM
17-2011 5-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
18-2011 5-23-2011 Parks amendment Ch. 136
19-2011 5-23-2011 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
20-2011 6-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
21-2011 6-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
22-2011 6-27-2011 Appropriation NCM
23-2011 7-11-2011 Appropriation NCM
24-2011 7-11-2011 Appropriation NCM
25-2011 8-22-2011 Appropriation NCM
26-2011 8-22-2011 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 139
27-2011 9-12-2011 Appropriation NCM
28-2011 9-12-2011 Salary amendment NCM
29-2011 9-26-2011 Appropriation NCM
30-2011 10-12-2011 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1103
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
31-2011 11-14-2011 Appropriation NCM
32-2011 11-14-2011 Green Village School
Redevelopment Plan
NCM
33-2011 11-28-2011 Appropriation NCM
34-2011 11-14-2011 Newspaper distribution
boxes amendment
Ch. 128
35-2011 12-21-2011 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
R66-2012
2-13-2012 Borough Council bylaws Ch. A236
1-2012 3-26-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2-2012 4-9-2012 Appropriation NCM
3-2012 4-23-2012 Sustainable Madison
Advisory Committee
Ch. 26
4-2012 4-23-2012 Appropriation NCM
5-2012 5-14-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2012 5-30-2012 Appropriation NCM
7-2012 5-30-2012 Apropriation NCM
8-2012 6-25-2012 Salary amendment NCM
9-2012 6-25-2012 Salary amendment NCM
10-2012 6-25-2012 Sewer use charges
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. IV
11-2012 7-9-2012 Appropriation NCM
12-2012 7-9-2012 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
13-2012 7-9-2012 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
14-2012 Tabled
15-2012 7-9-2012 Appropriation NCM
16-2012 7-9-2012 Madison Community
Garden Advisory
Committee
Ch. 27
17-2012 7-23-2012 Water amendment Ch. 190
18-2012 9-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
19-2012 9-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
20-2012 9-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1104
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
21-2012 9-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
22-2012 9-10-2012 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
23-2012 9-10-2012 Salary amendment NCM
24-2012 Number not used
25-2012 9-24-2012 Professional service
contracts
Ch. 11A
26-2012 9-24-2012 Appropriation NCM
27-2012 Number not used
28-2012 9-24-2012 Parking lots amendment Ch. 134
29-2012 Tabled
30-2012 10-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
31-2012 10-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
32-2012 Tabled
33-2012 11-5-2012 Appropriation NCM
34-2012 11-5-2012 Appropriation NCM
35-2012 11-5-2012 Appropriation NCM
36-2012 11-5-2012 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
37-2012 11-26-2012 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
38-2012 12-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
39-2012 12-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
40-2012 12-10-2012 Appropriation NCM
BH 2012-3 12-18-2012 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 209
1-2013 2-11-2013 Appropriation NCM
2-2013 2-25-2013 Appropriation NCM
3-2013 4-1-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
4-2013 4-1-2013 Standing Finance
Committee repealer
Ch. 47, reference
only
5-2013 4-1-2013 Appropriation NCM
6-2013 4-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1105
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2013 4-22-2013 Open Space Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 132
8-2013 4-22-2013 Possession and
consumption by minors
of alcoholic beverages
Ch. 233
9-2013 4-22-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
10-2013 4-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
11-2013 4-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
12-2013 4-22-2013 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
13-2013 5-13-2013 Appropriation NCM
14-2013 5-13-2013 Appropriation NCM
15-2013 5-13-2013 Open Space, Recreation
and Historic
Preservation Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 25
16-2013 5-29-2013 Possession and
consumption by minors
of alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 233
17-2013 5-29-2013 Appropriation NCM
18-2013 5-29-2013 Appropriation NCM
19-2013 5-29-2013 Appropriation NCM
20-2013 5-29-2013 Appropriation NCM
21-2013 5-29-2013 Appropriation NCM
22-2013 5-29-2013 Salary amendment NCM
23-2013 6-24-2013 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 139
24-2013 6-24-2013 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 54
25-2013 6-24-2013 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
26-2013 6-24-2013 Appropriation NCM
27-2013 6-24-2013 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
28-2013 Withdrawn
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1106
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
29-2013 7-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
30-2013 7-22-2013 Appropriation NCM
31-2013 8-12-2013 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
32-2013 8-12-2013 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
33-2013 8-12-2013 Appropriation NCM
34-2013 8-12-2013 Appropriation NCM
35-2013 Number not used
36-2013 9-9-2013 Water amendment Ch. 190
37-2013 9-9-2013 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
38-2013 9-9-2013 Appropriation NCM
39-2013 9-23-2013 Appropriation NCM
40-2013 10-16-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
41-2013 10-16-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
42-2013 9-23-2013 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
43-2013 9-23-2013 Appropriation NCM
44-2013 9-23-2013 Appropriation NCM
45-2013 11-13-2013 Parks amendment Ch. 136
46-2013 11-13-2013 Smoking: Borough
property
Ch. 163, Art. I
47-2013 12-9-2013 Advisory Audit
Committee
Ch. 9A
48-2013 12-9-2013 Joint Municipal Court Ch. 12
49-2013 12-9-2013 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
1-2014 2-10-2014 Salaries NCM
2-2014 2-10-2014 Appropriation NCM
3-2014 2-10-2014 Fees for public records
and documents
amendment
Ch. 147
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1107
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2014 3-24-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
5-2014 3-24-2014 Appropriation NCM
6-2014 4-11-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
7-2014 Tabled
8-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
9-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
10-2014 5-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
11-2014 5-12-2014 Salaries NCM
12-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
13-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
14-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
15-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
16-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
17-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
18-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
19-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
20-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
21-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
22-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
23-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
24-2014 5-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
25-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
26-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
27-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
28-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
29-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
30-2014 5-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
31-2014 5-28-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
32-2014 6-23-2014 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1108
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
33-2014 6-23-2014 Appropriation NCM
34-2014 6-23-2014 Appropriation NCM
35-2014 6-23-2014 Appropriation NCM
36-2014 6-23-2014 Appropriation NCM
37-2014 6-23-2014 Agreement NCM
38-2014 6-23-2014 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
39-2014 6-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
40-2014 7-28-2014 Appropriation NCM
41-2014 8-11-2014 Downtown Development
Commission amendment
Ch. 15
42-2014 8-11-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
43-2014 9-8-2014 Utility Advisory
Committee
Ch. 47
44-2014 9-8-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
45-2014 9-8-2014 Water amendment Ch. 190
46-2014 9-8-2014 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
47-2014 9-8-2014 Refunding bond NCM
48-2014 9-22-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
49-2014 10-15-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 145
50-2014 10-27-2014 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
51-2014 10-27-2014 Appropriation NCM
52-2014 10-27-2014 Appropriation NCM
53-2014 11-24-2014 Bond NCM
54-2014 11-10-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
55-2014 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
56-2014 11-10-2014 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1109
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
57-2014 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
58-2014 12-8-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
Res. No.
R39-2015
1-12-2015 Borough Council bylaws
amendment
Ch. A236
1-2015 1-28-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
2-2015 1-28-2015 Appropriation NCM
3-2015 1-28-2015 Appropriation NCM
4-2015 2-23-2015 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
5-2015 2-23-2015 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
6-2015 2-23-2015 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
7-2015 2-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
8-2015 3-9-2015 Recreation Department
code and policies
Ch. 137
9-2015 3-23-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
10-2015 3-23-2015 Appropriation NCM
11-2015 3-23-2015 Appropriation NCM
12-2015 4-13-2015 Downtown Development
Commission amendment
Ch. 15
13-2015 4-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
14-2015 4-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
15-2015 4-13-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
16-2015 4-13-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
construction and repair
of sidewalks amendment
Ch. 166, Art. IV
17-2015 4-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
18-2015 4-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
19-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
20-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
21-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1110
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
23-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
24-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
25-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
26-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
27-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
28-2015 4-27-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
29-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
30-2015 4-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
31-2015 4-27-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
openings and
excavations;
encumbrances
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. III
32-2015 5-11-2015 Appropriation NCM
33-2015 5-11-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk dining licenses
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. V
34-2015 5-27-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
35-2015 5-27-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
36-2015 5-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
37-2015 5-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
38-2015 5-27-2015 Redevelopment plan NCM
39-2015 6-22-2015 Appropriation NCM
40-2015 6-22-2015 Appropriation NCM
41-2015 6-22-2015 Appropriation NCM
42-2015 6-22-2015 Appropriation NCM
43-2015 7-13-2015 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
44-2015 7-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
45-2015 7-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
46-2015 7-27-2015 Water amendment Ch. 190
47-2015 7-27-2015 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1111
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
48-2015 8-10-2015 Sewer connections Ch. 155, Art. I
49-2015 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
50-2015 10-14-2015 Appropriation NCM
51-2015 10-14-2015 Appropriation NCM
52-2015 11-23-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
53-2015 11-23-2015 Appropriation NCM
54-2015 11-23-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
openings and
excavations;
encumbrances
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. III
55-2015 11-23-2015 Water rate sunset
provision in Ord. No.
1-2011
NCM
56-2015 12-14-2015 Appropriation NCM
1-2016 1-25-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 75
2-2016 1-25-2016 Appropriation NCM
3-2016 1-25-2016 Appropriation NCM
4-2016 2-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
5-2016 2-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
6-2016 2-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
7-2016 2-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
8-2016 3-14-2016 Appropriation NCM
9-2016 3-14-2016 Appropriation NCM
10-2016 3-28-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
11-2016 3-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
12-2016 3-28-2016 Appropriation NCM
13-2016 3-28-2016 Appropriation NCM
14-2016 4-11-2016 Appropriation NCM
15-2016 4-11-2016 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1112
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-2016 4-11-2016 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
17-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
18-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
19-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
20-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
21-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
22-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
23-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
24-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
25-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
26-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
27-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
28-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
29-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
30-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
31-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
32-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
33-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
34-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
35-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
36-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
37-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation NCM
38-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
39-2016 5-9-2016 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
40-2016 5-23-2016 Appropriation NCM
41-2016 5-23-2016 Appropriation NCM
42-2016 5-23-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
43-2016 5-23-2016 Water amendment Ch. 190
44-2016 5-23-2016 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1113
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
45-2016 6-13-201 6 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
46-2016 6-13-2016 Authorizing capital
reserve
NCM
47-2016 6-13-2016 Appropriation NCM
48-2016 6-13-2016 Appropriation NCM
49-2016 6-27-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
50-2016 6-27-2016 Appropriation NCM
51-2016 6-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
52-2016 7-11-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
53-2016 7-11-2016 Appropriation NCM
54-2016 8-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
55-2016 8-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
56-2016 8-8-2016 Appropriation NCM
57-2016 9-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
58-2016 9-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
59-2016 11-14-2016 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
60-2016 10-13-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
61-2016 10-13-2016 Madison-Chatham joint
meeting amendment
Ch. A238
62-2016 11-14-2016 Appropriation NCM
63-2016 11-14-2016 Appropriation NCM
64-2016 11-28-2016 Appropriation NCM
65-2016 11-28-2016 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
66-2016 12-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
1-2017 1-23-2017 Appropriation NCM
2-2017 1-23-2017 Appropriation NCM
3-2017 1-23-2017 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1114
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2017 1-23-2017 Defense and
indemnification of
municipal officials and
employees amendment
Ch. 14
5-2017 2-13-2017 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
(Appendix C)
6-2017 2-13-2017 Appropriation NCM
7-2017 2-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
8-2017 2-27-2017 Appropriation NCM
9-2017 3-13-2017 Appropriation NCM
10-2017 3-13-2017 Appropriation NCM
11-2017 3-27-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
12-2017 Water amendment Tabled
13-2017 4-12-2017 Water amendment Ch. 190
14-2017 4-12-2017 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
15-2017 5-8-2017 Water amendment Ch. 190
16-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
17-2017 5-8-2017 Street naming NCM
18-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
19-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
20-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
21-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
22-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
23-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
24-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
25-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
26-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
27-2017 5-8-2017 Appropriation NCM
28-2017 6-26-2017 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
(Appendix B)
29-2017 6-26-2017 Electric utility: rates
amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
(Appendix C)
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1115
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
30-2017 6-26-2017 Water amendment Ch. 190
31-2017 7-24-2017 Appropriation NCM
32-2017 8-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 185
33-2017 9-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
34-2017 9-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
35-2017 9-11-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
36-2017 9-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
37-2017 9-25-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
38-2017 9-25-2017 Appropriation NCM
39-2017 9-25-2017 Sewers: connections
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
40-2017 9-25-2017 Appropriation NCM
41-2017 10-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
42-2017 11-13-2017 Appropriation NCM
43-2017 11-13-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 195
44-2017 11-13-2017 Appropriation NCM
BH 2017-4 11-21-2017 General provisions,
Board of Health:
adoption of Code
amendment; nuisances
amendment
Ch. 201, Art. I; Ch.
218
45-2017 11-27-2017 Parking lots amendment Ch. 134
46-2017 11-27-2017 Appropriation NCM
47-2017 11-27-2017 Appropriation NCM
48-2017 12-11-2017 Sale of certain Borough
property
NCM
49-2017 12-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
50-2017 12-11-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 34
1-2018 1-22-2018 Appropriation NCM
2-2018 1-22-2018 Appropriation NCM
3-2018 1-22-2018 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1116
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2018 1-22-2018 Appropriation NCM
5-2018 2-12-2018 Downtown Development
Commission
Amendment
Ch. 15
6-2018 2-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
7-2018 2-26-2018 Appropriation NCM
8-2018 2-26-2018 Appropriation NCM
9-2018 3-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
10-2018 3-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
11-2018 3-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
12-2018 3-26-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
13-2018 3-26-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
14-2018 3-26-2018 Appropriation NCM
15-2018 4-9-2018 Exceed Budget;
Establish Cap Bank
NCM
16-2018 4-9-2018 Downtown Development
Commission
Amendment
Ch. 15
17-2018 Not adopted
18-2018 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
19-2018 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
20-2018 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
21-2018 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
22-2018 4-9-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 190
23-2018 4-9-2018 Sewers: Connections
Amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
24-2018 4-23-2018 Open Space, Recreation
and Historic
Preservation Advisory
Committee Amendment
Ch. 25
25-2018 5-14-2018 Appropriation NCM
26-2018 5-30-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1117
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
27-2018 5-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 185
28-2018 5-30-2018 Appropriation NCM
29-2018 5-30-2018 Appropriation NCM
30-2018 5-30-2018 Appropriation NCM
31-2018 5-30-2018 Appropriation NCM
32-2018 5-30-2018 Appropriation NCM
33-2018 Not adopted
34-2018 6-25-2018 Salary NCM
35-2018 6-25-2018 Appropriation NCM
36-2018 6-25-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Openings and
Excavations;
Encumbrances
Amendment
Ch. 166, Art. III
37-2018 6-25-2018 Appropriation NCM
38-2018 6-25-2018 Appropriation NCM
39-2018 6-25-2018 Appropriation NCM
40-2018 6-25-2018 Appropriation NCM
41-2018 7-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
42-2018 7-23-2018 Shade Tree
Management Board
Amendment
Ch. 45
43-2018 8-13-2018 Appropriation NCM
44-2018 8-13-2018 Appropriation NCM
45-2018 9-12-2018 Payroll Procedures:
Direct Deposit
Ch. 29, Art. I
46-2018 10-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 185
47-2018 10-10-2018 Parks Amendment Ch. 136
48-2018 11-12-2018 Appropriation NCM
49-2018 Not Adopted
50-2018 11-26-2018 Bond NCM
1-2019 1-28-2019 Appropriation NCM
2-2019 1-28-2019 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1118
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2019 1-28-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
4-2019 2-11-2019 Appropriation NCM
5-2019 3-11-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
6-2019 3-25-2019 Appropriation NCM
7-2019 3-25-2019 Electric Utility: Rates
Amendment
Ch. 94, Art. I
8-2019 4-8-2019 Exceed Budget;
Establish Cap Bank
NCM
9-2019 4-8-2019 Appropriation NCM
10-2019 4-8-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
11-2019 Not Adopted
12-2019 4-8-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 190
13-2019 4-8-2019 Sewers: Connections
Amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
14-2019 Not Adopted
15-2019 5-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
16-2019 5-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
17-2019 5-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
18-2019 5-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
19-2019 5-29-2019 Parking Lots
Amendment
Ch. 134
20-2019 5-29-2019 Animals and Rabies
Control Amendment
Ch. 59
21-2019 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM
22-2019 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM
23-2019 6-24-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 195
24-2019 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM
25-2019 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM
26-2019 6-24-2019 Appropriation NCM
27-2019 7-22-2019 Parking Lots
Amendment
Ch. 134
28-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1119
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
29-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
30-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
31-2019 7-22-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 185
32-2019 7-22-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
33-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
34-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
35-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
36-2019 7-22-2019 Appropriation NCM
37-2019 Not adopted
38-2019 Not adopted
39-2019 8-12-2019 Appropriation NCM
40-2019 8-12-2019 Appropriation NCM
41-2019 8-12-2019 Appropriation NCM
42-2019 9-9-2019 Alcoholic Beverages:
Hours of Sale
Amendment
Ch. 56, Art. V
43-2019 9-9-2019 Appropriation NCM
44-2019 9-23-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 185
45-2019 9-23-2019 Appropriation NCM
46-2019 9-23-2019 Appropriation NCM
47-2019 10-16-2019 Plastic Bags, Single-Use Ch. 136A
48-2019 10-16-2019 Appropriation NCM
49-2019 11-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
50-2019 11-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
51-2019 Not Adopted
52-2019 11-13-2019 Appropriation NCM
53-2019 12-9-2019 Parks Amendment Ch. 136
54-2019 12-9-2019 Appropriation NCM
55-2019 12-9-2019 Appropriation NCM
56-2019 12-19-2019 Bond NCM
57-2019 12-19-2019 Patriotic Celebrations
Committee
Ch. 32
§ DL-1 MADISON CODE § DL-1
230:1120
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
58-2019 12-19-2019 Senior Citizen Advisory
Committee
Ch. 161
59-2019 12-19-2019 Recreation Department
Code and Policies
Amendment
Ch. 137
60-2019 12-19-2019 Parks Amendment Ch. 136
61-2019 12-19-2019 Appropriation NCM
Res. No. R
350-2019
12-19-2019 Borough Council Bylaws
Amendment
Ch. A236
1-2020 1-27-2020 Appropriation NCM
2-2020 1-27-2020 Appropriation NCM
3-2020 2-24-2020 Tree Protection Ch. 178
4-2020 2-24-2020 Plastic Bags, Single-Use
Amendment
Ch. 136A
5-2020 2-24-2020 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENTS § DL-1
230:1121