Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Merchantville, in the
County of Camden and State of New Jersey, has caused its ordinances of
a general and permanent nature to be compiled and revised and the same
embodied in a revision and codification thereof known as the "Code of the
Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey."
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-13-1967 by Ord. No. 438]
§ 1-1. Borough Code adopted.
The ordinances of the Borough of Merchantville, in the County of Camden
and State of New Jersey, of a general and permanent nature, as codified
in the following chapters, namely, Chapters 1 to 94, both inclusive, are
ordained as general ordinances and are adopted as the "Code of the
Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey."
§ 1-2. Provisions of Code in effect.
All the provisions of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey,
shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Repeal of certain ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor
and Council (hereinafter referred to as the "Council") and in force on
December 31, 1966, and not contained in the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville, New Jersey, are hereby repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided in § 1-4.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal.
The repeal provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect:
A. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this ordinance.
B. Any prosecution, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
C. Any right of franchise conferred by the Council.
D. Any right, right-of-way or easement acquired or established in any
street, road, highway or other public place within the borough.
E. Any ordinance of the borough providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, acceptance or vacation of
any street, road or highway within the borough.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the borough promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money by or for the borough or authorizing the issuing
of bonds or other evidence of the borough's indebtedness, or any
contract of or obligation assumed by the borough.
G. The annual budget appropriation ordinances or resolutions, and all
ordinances and resolutions appropriating or transferring funds.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Copies of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, has been
filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall remain there for the use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance.
§ 1-6. Publication of Adopting Ordinance; availability of Code for
public inspection.
The Borough Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a newspaper of
general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of the Code of the
Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, shall be maintained in the office of
the Borough Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular
office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance
coupled with the availability of copies of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville, New Jersey, for inspection by the public shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Severability.
Each section of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey and
every part of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and
the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause does not affect the validity or constitutionality of
such other section or part thereof.
H. The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Council not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code of the Borough
of Merchantville, New Jersey.
I. Any ordinance or resolution of the Council fixing the compensation or
salaries of the borough officials and employees or the pay and
compensation of positions, and clerical employments which are not
provided for in the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey,
and which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
J. Any ordinance or resolution of the Council creating employments,
positions or offices and fixing duties therefor which are not provided for
in the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, and which are
not in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
K. Any ordinance of the Council which is not provided for in the Code of
the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, and which are not in conflict
or inconsistent therewith.
L. Any ordinance adopted by the Board of Health of the borough.
M. Any ordinance of the Council adopted upon final passage after the 31st
day of December 1966.
§ 1-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 1-8
1:4
§ 1-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after final passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 1-9. General penalty. [Added 5-27-1997; amended 8-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-06]
A. Unless a specific penalty is provided by New Jersey statute or is
provided elsewhere in this Code or in other ordinances of the Mayor
and Council for a particular violation, any person, firm or corporation
who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this Code, or any
provision of any code or regulation adopted by reference therein or any
order promulgated under such provisions, code or regulation, by doing
any act prohibited or declared unlawful or a violation thereof or who
shall engage in or exercise any business or occupation or do anything
for which a license or permit is required thereby without having a valid
license or permit therefor as required or who shall fail to do any act
required by any such provision or when such provision declares such
failure to be unlawful or to be a violation shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable for a fine not exceeding $2,000.00, or imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination of the penalties so
listed, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court before
whom such violation is heard and conviction made.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation of the Code or of any other ordinance of the Borough,
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both, occurs or continues.
C. The imposition of a fine or imprisonment as punishment for a violation
of the Code or of any other ordinances of the Borough, shall not be
deemed to be in lieu of any other provision therein providing for
revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued thereunder.
D. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the violation of any
ordinance adopted as an amendment of or addition to the Code of the
Borough of Merchantville and in which no other penalty provision is
included.
E. In any case where a fine in excess of $1,250.00 is sought to be imposed
for a housing violation or for a zoning violation, any person, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this
Code, or any provision of any code or regulation adopted by reference
therein or any order promulgated under such provisions, shall be
provided a thirty-day (30) period in which such person, firm or
corporation has an opportunity to cure or abate the condition, and the
person, firm or corporation shall have an opportunity for a hearing
before the court. After the thirty-day (30) period, the higher fine may be
imposed if, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court before
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
whom such violation is heard and conviction made, it is determined that
the abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-9 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 1-9
1:6
Chapter 2
ABANDONED PROPERTIES
§ 2-1. Abandoned property criteria.
A. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one of
the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the Compliance Officer, or such other
public officer designated or appointed by the Borough Council pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation, in the reasonable
judgment of the Compliance Officer, or such other public officer
designated or appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that
same six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of a determination by the Compliance Officer, or such other
public officer designated or appointed by the Borough Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5;
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination by the
Compliance Officer, or such other public officer designated or
appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5;
or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the
Compliance Officer, or such other public officer designated or
appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 for one or more of the following
reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry, leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris or uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:7
§ 2-2. Establishment; abandoned properties list.
grounds has created potential health and safety hazards, and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. so
long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the building was
previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
the time of the determination of abandonment by the Compliance
Officer, or such other public officer designated or appointed by the
Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5.
A. The Compliance Officer, or such other public officer designated or
appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, shall
identify abandoned property within the Borough of Merchantville for
the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list. The abandoned
property list shall include, for each abandoned property identified, the
tax block and lot number, the name of the owner of record, if known,
and the street address of the lot. The Compliance Officer, or such other
public officer designated or appointed by the Borough Council pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, may add properties to the abandoned property list
at any time and may delete properties at any time when he or she finds
that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Borough of Merchantville has purchased or
taken assignment from the Borough of a tax sale certificate which has
been placed on the abandoned property list may be removed if the
owner of the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the
property within 30 days after the property is placed on the list;
provided, however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate
foreclosure proceedings within six months after the property was first
placed on the list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned
property list in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-2.
C. The Compliance Officer, or such other public officer designated or
appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, shall
establish the abandoned property list and any additions or deletions
§ 2-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-2
1:8
thereto by authorizing the publication of the list in the official
newspaper of the Borough of Merchantville, which publication shall
constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after publication, shall
send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail, to the owner of record of every property included on
the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify property
determined to be abandoned, setting forth the owner of record, if
known, the tax lot and block number, and the street address. The
Compliance Officer, or such other public officer designated or
appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, in
consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice, by
regular mail, to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property
tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax
bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64d. When the owner of record is not
known for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not
be mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in the manner
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the
factual basis for the finding of the Compliance Officer, or such other
public officer designated or appointed by the Borough Council pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, that the property is abandoned property, as that
term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and shall specify the
information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases, a copy
of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the Compliance
Officer, or such other public officer designated or appointed by the
Borough Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, in the office of the
Camden County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect
as a formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned
with the name of the Borough of Merchantville as "plaintiff" and the
name of the property owner as "defendant," as though an action had
been commenced by the Borough against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
Borough Council within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the Compliance Officer, or such
other public officer designated or appointed by the Borough Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, shall have 40 days from the date upon
which notice was published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge
the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list. For good
cause shown, the Borough Council shall accept a late filing of an appeal.
Within 30 days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings
contained in the notice, the Borough Council shall schedule a hearing
for redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the list
shall be presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner, through
the submission of an affidavit or certification asserting that the
property is not an abandoned property, can demonstrate that the
property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or
certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation, such
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:9
§ 2-3. Interested parties may request additions to the abandoned
properties list.
as, but not limited to, photographs, repair invoices, bills and
construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the
property in question is not abandoned property as that term is defined
herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The Borough Council shall decide any
timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall
promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular
mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Borough Council pursuant to Subsection D of this
section by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary trial proceeding in the Superior Court, Camden County. Such
action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of
decision mailed by the Borough Council. The sole ground for appeal and
new hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in
question is not an abandoned property, as that term is defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely
basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the court may extend
the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The Borough shall promptly remove any property from the abandoned
property list that has been determined by the Governing Body or on
appeal not to be abandoned and may, in its discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever the Governing Body deems such
removal appropriate under the circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Borough of
Merchantville shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with
respect to properties on the list, at any time after at least one property
has been placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for
appeal with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an
appeal brought by the property owner of that first property.
A. Any interested party may submit a written request to the Borough
Council asserting that any property within the Borough of
Merchantville should be included on the abandoned property list. The
written request must specify the street address and block and lot
number of the property to be included and the grounds for its inclusion.
Within 30 days of receipt of any such request, the Borough Council shall
provide a written response to the party, either indicating that the
property will be added to the list or, if not, the reasons for not adding
the property. For the purposes of this section, the term "interested
parties" shall include any resident of the Borough of Merchantville, any
owner or operator of a business within the Borough of Merchantville or
any organization representing the interests of residents, business
owners or otherwise engaged in furthering the revitalization and
improvement of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
§ 2-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-3
1:10
§ 2-4. Removal of property from abandoned properties list.
B. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the Borough Council shall
provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such hearing. The
party shall provide the Borough Council with notice at least 10 days
before the hearing of its intention to participate and the nature of the
testimony or other information that it proposes to submit at the
hearing.
A. An owner may request removal of his/her/its property from the
abandoned properties list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by
paying all taxes and Borough liens due, including interest and penalties,
and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the Borough
Council, stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost of
the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Borough Council that
the conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the Borough
Council finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned, as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on
the property, the Borough Council may grant an extension of time
of not more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work,
during which time no further proceedings will be taken against the
owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the
Borough, which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:11
§ 2-5. Sale of restricted tax liens.
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other Borough liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list or, if
an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax Sale
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following the
expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The Borough of Merchantville may, at its option, require that the sale of
the tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a
tax sale certificate held by the Borough be subject to the express
condition that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform
and conclude any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the
property from the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55
and to post a bond in favor of the Borough to guarantee the
rehabilitation or repair of the property. The Borough Council may waive
a requirement to post a bond imposed by the Borough for any
purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides
documentation acceptable to the Borough Council that the purchaser,
assignee or transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-80. The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of
the bond shall be added to the amount required to be paid by the owner
for redemption of the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of
the tax sale certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the
property shall be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the Tax
Collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of
moneys expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at the
delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the Borough of Merchantville, shall be
permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of
appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation or
repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement, holding the Borough of Merchantville
harmless, has been filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-5
1:12
§ 2-6. Special tax sale and criteria for bidders.
C. If the Borough of Merchantville acquires the tax sale certificate for a
property on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written
notice to the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the
filing of the notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, the Borough shall be
permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that
caused the property to be included on the abandoned property list. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if, within that ten day
period, the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the Borough, in
writing, that the owner or mortgagee has elected to perform the
remediation itself. When the owner or mortgagee elects to perform the
remediation itself, it shall be required to post bond in favor of the
Borough of Merchantville in order to ensure performance. The amount
and conditions of the bond shall be determined by the Borough Council.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the Borough of Merchantville, as so
certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the
remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and
right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after
the filing of any lien by the Borough, except for Borough taxes, liens and
assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill Compensation
and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together with any interest
thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and recorded as a lien by
the entity incurring the cost with the Camden County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this chapter
shall be considered a public purpose and public use, for which the
power of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
A. The Borough of Merchantville may hold special tax sales with respect to
those properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which
are also on the abandoned property list.
B. The Borough Council shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on
properties at the sale, which may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with Borough plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property, consistent with Borough plans and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the Borough Council may determine are
necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold will be
rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:13
§ 2-7. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
C. The Borough Council may establish minimum bid requirements for a
special tax sale that are less than the full amount of the taxes, interest
and penalties due, to help ensure that the properties will be
rehabilitated or otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
D. The Borough Council may combine properties in said special tax sale
into bid packages and require that bidders place a single bid on each
package, rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that are
submitted.
E. The Borough Council may sell said properties subject to the provision
that, if the purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been
set forth as a condition of sale or misrepresents any material
qualification that has been established as a condition of eligibility to bid
pursuant thereto, then the properties and any interest thereto acquired
by the purchaser shall revert to the Borough, and any amount paid by
the purchaser at the special tax sale shall be forfeit to the Borough.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the Borough may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the Borough pursuant to this section and his/her/its
interest in the property or properties reverts to the Borough, the
Borough may subsequently designate the entity previously designated
as an eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis
of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and
conditions of the special tax sale.
G. The Borough of Merchantville shall provide notice of a special tax sale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms
of sale established by the Borough pursuant to this section. Nothing
shall prohibit the Borough from holding a special tax sale on the same
day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the Borough of Merchantville
acquires a tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property
list at tax sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the
right of redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months
following the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the Borough of Merchantville is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an
action to foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
§ 2-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-7
1:14
§ 2-8. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
§ 2-9. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remedied in
full.
A. If an entity other than the Borough of Merchantville has purchased or
taken assignment from the Borough of a tax sale certificate on a
property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six months,
that property shall not be added to the abandoned property list under
the following limited circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Borough taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either Subsection a or Subsection b of
N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure
proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed abandoned only if
it meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the Borough Council or the
Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of an "abandoned
property" according to the criteria established in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and
N.J.S.A. 55:19- 82.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Borough of
Merchantville may be brought by the Borough in the Superior Court,
§ 2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9
1:15
Camden County. If the court shall find that the property is abandoned
and that the owner or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate
a rehabilitation plan, then the court may authorize the Borough to
take possession and control of the property and to develop its own
rehabilitation plan for the property.
B. Where the Borough has been granted possession and control, the
Borough may commence and maintain further proceedings for the
conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part thereof,
that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost and
expenses of rehabilitation, and for the sale of the property; provided,
however, that the court shall not direct the sale of the property if the
owner applies to the court for reinstatement of control and possession
of the property as permitted by N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the Borough, obtain appropriate construction permits
or, in the alternative, submit formal applications for funding the cost of
rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies providing such funding,
within the initial six-month period, shall be deemed clear evidence that
the owner has failed to take any action to further the rehabilitation of
the property.
D. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the Borough Council or the
court to be the projected cost of rehabilitation.
E. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
§ 2-9 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-9
1:16
§ 2-10. Borough rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
F. Where the court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the Borough Council to act as
monitor of compliance and progress. If the owner fails to carry out any
step in the approved plan, then the Borough may apply to the court to
have the posted bond forfeited, to transfer possession of the building to
the Borough to complete the rehabilitation plan, and to grant
authorization to use the bond proceeds for the rehabilitation. The
owner or other party in interest shall provide bimonthly reports to the
Borough Council on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation
and reuse of the property.
G. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan
and posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. His/her/its plan must be submitted within 60 days following
the court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the court provides the
mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause
shown. If the court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's
plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation.
H. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
bimonthly reports to the court and the Borough Council on its activities
and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. If the
mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material step in the
approved plan, then the Borough Council shall notify the court, which
may order the posted bond forfeit, grant the Borough possession of the
property, and authorize the Borough to use the proceeds of the bond for
rehabilitation of the property.
I. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement or, in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
J. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the Borough may submit a plan to the court which
conforms with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall
designate whether the Borough or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall
undertake the rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19- 90.
A. The Borough Council may designate a qualified rehabilitation entity for
the purpose of exercising the Borough's rights, where that designation
§ 2-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:17
will further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with
Borough plans and objectives.
B. Regardless of whether the Borough exercises its rights directly or the
Borough Council designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to
this section, the Borough shall maintain, safeguard, and maintain
insurance on the property while in possession of such property.
Notwithstanding the Borough's possession of the property, the owner of
the property shall not be relieved of any civil or criminal liability or any
duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the owner.
C. The court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Borough to
rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security interests with
priority over all other liens or mortgages other than municipal liens.
Prior to granting this lien priority, the court must find as follows:
(1) The Borough sought to obtain the necessary financing from the
senior lienholder, which declined to provide such financing on
reasonable terms;
(2) The Borough sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the
senior lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Camden
County.
D. Where the Borough has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to
act on its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Borough Council on its activities and progress
toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The Borough or
qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall provide such
reports to the court as the court determines to be necessary. If the court
finds that the Borough or its designee has failed to take diligent action
toward rehabilitation of the property within one year from the grant of
possession, then the court may request that the Borough designate
another qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights or, if the
Borough fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession and
return possession and control of the property to its owner.
E. The Borough of Merchantville shall file a notice of completion with the
court, and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage
holder or lienholder, at such time as the Borough has determined that
no more than six months remain to the anticipated date on which
rehabilitation will be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of
the Borough Council, attesting that the rehabilitation is anticipated to
be completed within six months, and a statement setting forth the
actions as it plans to undertake consistent with the plan.
§ 2-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 2-11
1:18
§ 2-11. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession of
owner.
§ 2-12. Procedure for Borough of place liens, obtain title and sell
property.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the court's
removal of possession, but no later than 30 days after the Borough of
Merchantville has filed a notice of completion with the court or, in the
event the notice of completion is filed within less than one year of the
grant of possession, within 30 days after the Borough has filed said
notice.
B. The court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the Borough or affect any of the terms or conditions
under which the Borough has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the Borough has filed a
notice of completion or, in any event, within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the court in granting a reinstatement petition, the court
may grant the Borough title or authorize the Borough to sell the
property, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
A. The Borough Council, with the approval of the court, may place a lien
on the property to cover any costs of the Borough in connection with
any proceeding under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., incurred prior to the
grant by the court of an order of possession, which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a Borough lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the
rights and status of a Borough lien pursuant thereto.
B. Where the Borough seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the court shall
approve and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the court.
C. The court may authorize the Borough of Merchantville to sell the
building free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which
event all such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to
the proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, except that municipal
liens shall be paid at settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the
property shall be distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. Upon approval by the court, the Borough shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the court shall approve and may place the
§ 2-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12
1:19
Chapter 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 4-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for the
operation and maintenance of various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and
other emergency alarm devices, whether by direct line, radio, telephone or
other means actuating a device at the police headquarters of the Borough
of Merchantville and/or at the Camden County Communications Center
Lindenwold, New Jersey, and requiring a response thereto by the Police
Department, the Fire Department or other municipal agencies.
§ 4-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and located within the confines of the police
headquarters of the Borough of Merchantville and/or the Camden County
Communications Center and/or any other official location recognized by all
parties herein.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility, or for alerting others about the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others
about the existence of any other condition requiring response of police, fire
or ambulance personnel, and which emits and/or transmits an audible and/
or visual signal or message when actuated. "Alarm systems" include but are
not limited to direct-dial telephone devices, audible alarms and subscriber
alarms.
ALARM SYSTEM, FIRE — Any alarm designed or used for the detection of
fire or other conditions requiring the presence of fire personnel and/or fire
apparatus.
proceeds of sale in escrow with the court. The court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et
seq. shall be available to the Borough with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the Borough has established an abandoned
property list and whether or not the property at issue has been included
on any such list.
§ 2-12 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 4-2
1:20
ALARM SYSTEM, SECURITY — Any alarm system designed or used for the
detection of those conditions requiring the response primarily of the police
or ambulance personnel and not that of fire or fire personnel.
AMBULANCE/RESCUE SQUAD AND/OR PERSONNEL — The Merchantville
Emergency Medical Squad (MEMS).
AUDIBLE ALARM — A device that emits an audible signal from the premises
that it is designed to protect.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Merchantville.
DIRECT-DIAL ALARM — A device that, when actuated, causes a recorded
message to be transmitted, via telephone, to the Merchantville Police
Communications Center and/or the Camden County Communications
Center, stating that emergency response is necessary and/or requested.
EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER — The primary phone number advertised
to the public for requesting emergency service.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal, necessitating response by the
Merchantville Police, the Merchantville Fire Department or the
Merchantville Emergency Medical Squad personnel where an emergency
does not exist; any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or an
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, fire or that which the
alarm system is designed to do, and includes as well alarms caused by the
malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant equipment. An alarm
that has been activated by an external source that is beyond the reasonable
control of the subscriber or malfunction of the alarm console shall not be
considered false.[Amended 12-8-1997]
FIRE and/or FIRE PERSONNEL — The Merchantville Fire Department and\
or the volunteer fire company or companies, and its members, operating the
Merchantville Fire Department.[Amended 12-8-1997]
POLICE — The Merchantville Police Department.
SUBSCRIBER ALARM — An alarm system that is terminated by direct
connections to the Merchantville Police Communications Center and/or
the Camden County Communications Center, Lindenwold, New Jersey, in
accordance with regulations prescribed in separate legislation.
§ 4-3. General regulations.
A. It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms, corporations
or other groups that maintain alarm systems within the borough to
provide current information to the police, consisting of the names and
telephone numbers of responsible persons who may be contacted in
case of emergency or who are authorized to provide service to the
alarm system. Either must be on a twenty-four-hour basis. This
information is to be filed with the Police Department when the alarm
system is initially placed into service and must be revised immediately
whenever changes are necessary.
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:21
§ 4-4. Exceptions. [Amended 12-8-1997]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the general alerting alarms
that may be used by fire personnel, ambulance squads or civil defense
agencies to summon response of their members. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to alarm systems that are affixed to motor vehicles.
§ 4-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-27-1997; 12-8-1997]
Any person, entity, firm, corporation or other group that is found guilty
of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $100.00. Each incident shall be considered as a
separate violation. In addition to any penalty that may be adjudicated by
the court, the Chief of Police may authorize the disconnection of subscriber
alarms from the Police Communications Center after giving 20 days written
notice to the subscriber. In addition to any court penalty adjudicated by the
court, the Chief of the Merchantville Fire Department may authorize the
B. Audible alarms must be silenced within 60 minutes after a designated
responsible person is notified to do so by the police, or the alarm system
may be equipped with a timing device that will automatically silence the
audible alarm within 60 minutes after it is actuated.
C. The direct-dial alarms shall not be connected to the emergency phone
numbers of either the police or fire personnel of the Borough of
Merchantville. A secondary phone will be provided for direct-dial
alarms only (662-0500). Direct-dial alarms must be equipped with a
device that will prevent more than three repeated transmissions of an
alarm for the same emergencies to the Communications Centers of the
police or fire personnel. Recorded messages must also include the
name and telephone number of a responsible person who may be
contacted by the police in case of an emergency on a twenty-four-hour
basis.
D. False alarms.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of all persons, entities, firms,
corporations or other groups that maintain alarm systems within
the borough to prevent the transmission of false alarms through a
program of training and periodic inspection and maintenance of the
system. The maximum permissible number of false alarms from any
one location shall be as follows:
(a) Fire alarms: two false alarms in any sixty-day period or six false
alarms in any one-year period.
(b) Police alarms, including the Merchantville Emergency Medical
Squad: two false alarms in any thirty-day period or eight false
alarms in any one-year period.
(2) False alarms in excess of these standards shall be considered to be
in violation of this chapter.
§ 4-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 4-5
1:22
disconnection of subscriber alarms from the Fire Communications Center
after giving 20 days written notice to the subscriber.
§ 4-6. Applicability.
The provisions contained herein shall apply equally to those alarm systems
that were placed in service prior to or subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter.
§ 4-7. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies only.
§ 4-8. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 90 days after passage and publication.
Chapter 5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8
1:23

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Sales
[Adopted 5-11-1936]
§ 5-1. License required.
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to operate, use or maintain
any store, dwelling or other building of any kind for the sale or exposure for
sale of the beverages authorized by the Act of the Legislature of the State
of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," passed
December 6, 1933, as amended and supplemented, within the Borough of
Merchantville, in the County of Camden and State of New Jersey, without
first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to said act.
Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 33-1 et seq.
§ 5-2. Clerk to issue licenses.
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to sign, issue and
deliver all licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages which heretofore have
been or hereafter may be approved by Borough Council.
§ 5-3. Compliance required.
Every such license shall be subject to the provisions of said act, of this
article and of such police regulations and ordinances of the Borough of
Merchantville relating to the conduct of such business and to the
maintenance of sanitary conditions in or about the place licensed as have
been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
§ 5-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — A person of either sex, any firm or corporation and any club or
association which may be licensed under the provisions of said act.
§ 5-5. License applications.
All applications for any license shall be in the form required by law and as
prepared and furnished by the Borough Clerk, who shall keep a complete
record of such applications and the licenses granted thereunder.
§ 5-6. Number of licenses. [Amended 11-8-1937; 7-14-1997]
Licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Merchantville
shall be limited to one plenary retail consumption license and two plenary
retail distribution licenses, which licenses shall be in the form and subject
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:25
to the regulations which now have been or may thereafter be imposed by
the Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-7. License fees. [Amended 5-11-1959; 4-27-1970; amended
11-23-1992; 7-14-1997; 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
§ 5-8. Hours of operation. [Amended 4-27-1970; 11-23-1992;
7-14-1997]
A. The license fees to be paid for a plenary retail distribution license,
which fees must accompany the application, shall be as set forth in
Chapter 25, Fees. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
B. All license fees shall be paid in cash or by certified check to the order of
the Borough of Merchantville and shall be turned over by the Borough
Clerk, when and as received, to the Borough Treasurer.
C. The license fee to be paid for a plenary retail consumption license,
which fee must accompany the application, shall be as set forth in
Chapter 25, Fees. [Added 7-14-1997; amended 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-06]
Editor's Note: The annual club license fee shall be as set forth in
Chapter 25, Fees.
A. No holder of a plenary retail distribution in the Borough of
Merchantville shall sell, serve, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises as
follows:
(1) On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday,
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m., and 10:00 p.m.
and 11:59 p.m., prevailing time.
(2) On Sundays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon,
and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m., prevailing time,
excepting when Christmas Eve (December 24) and New Year's Eve
(December 31) shall fall on a Sunday, the hours shall be 12:00
midnight to 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on Christmas
Eve (December 24) and the hours shall be 12:00 midnight to 12:00
noon and 10:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on New Year's Eve (December
31).
B. No holder of a plenary retail consumption in the Borough of
Merchantville shall sell, serve, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises as
follows:
(1) On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday,
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., prevailing time;
§ 5-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 5-8
1:26
§ 5-9. Additional sales requiring a license.
No person shall sell or offer or expose for sale or barter, or suffer to
be sold or bartered, any alcoholic beverage at any place in the Borough
of Merchantville without a license first having been obtained as herein
provided.
§ 5-10. License must be displayed.
Every license shall be exposed to public view in a conspicuous place in the
place licensed, and any omission to do so shall be presumptive evidence that
such place is not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
§ 5-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-27-1970; 4-8-1996;
5-27-1997]
In addition to a fine or penalty, a person violating this chapter may be
subject, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, to a suspension of
their privilege to operate a motor vehicle in the State of New Jersey for a
period of up to 90 days.
§ 5-12. Treasurer to keep separate account.
The Borough Treasurer shall keep a separate account of all receipts and
expenditures of fees received under this article.
§ 5-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, and this article shall take effect immediately upon approval by the
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
(2) On Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.,
prevailing time.
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-13
1:27

ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted 10-14-1975 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 5-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any fluid or solid capable of being converted
into a fluid suitable for human consumption and having an alcoholic content
of more than 1/2 of 1% by volume, including alcohol, beer, lager beer,
ale, porter, naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine, fortified
wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and any
brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes or
any mixture of the same and fruit juices.
DISORDERLY PERSON[Added 4-8-1996] — Any person is a disorderly
person who shall:
PRIVATE PLACE — Any place which is not a public place as defined below.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place, either publicly or privately owned, which is or
may be frequented by the public.
§ 5-15. Prohibited acts.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverage or discard any alcoholic
beverage container:
Consume alcoholic beverages:
While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking lot,
public or quasi-public place or in any public conveyance.
(1)
In a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in
any public street, lane or parking lot.
(2)
A.
Discard alcoholic beverage containers upon any street, lane, sidewalk,
public parking lot or quasi-public place or upon any private property
not his own without express permission of the owner.
B.
Aid, abet or permit any person to act in accordance with Subsection A
or B of this definition.
C.
Be on any street, highway, thoroughfare or other public place within the
borough or in any private or public place in an intoxicated state, to the
annoyance of any other person.
D.
A. While in a public place; in a private place of which he is not an owner,
tenant or lawful occupant; or in any public conveyance, without the
permission of any owner, tenant, lawful occupant or any person having
the authority to grant such permission.
§ 5-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-15
1:29
§ 5-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding the sum of $200.00 or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term of not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 5-17. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances and resolutions, insofar as they
are inconsistent with any of the terms and provisions of this article, are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 5-18. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision or part
of this article shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid or inoperative, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the
section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 5-19. When effective.
This article shall take effect following final passage, adoption and
publication on the earliest date allowed by law.
B. While in or on any property owned by the Borough of Merchantville in
the County of Camden and State of New Jersey without the express
permission of the official, entity or body in charge thereof.
C. While in a private motor vehicle in motion on or parked in any public
place, or upon any private place of which he is not an owner, tenant or
lawful occupant, without the express permission of the property owner,
tenant, lawful occupant or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
§ 5-15 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 5-19
1:30
Chapter 8
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 5-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:31

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 8-11-1947]
§ 8-1. License required.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, association or
corporation to place or maintain, or permit to be placed, operated, used
or maintained, in any public or quasi-public place or in any building, store
or other place into which the public is invited or may enter, including
premises used as a clubhouse or clubrooms, within the corporate limits
of the Borough of Merchantville, any coin-controlled amusement device
without first having obtained a license for each such machine or device.
§ 8-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-CONTROLLED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin or slug, operates or may be operated for use as a game,
contest or amusement of any description, and shall include pinball machines
and other coin-controlled devices in which marbles, balls or pellets are
projected or propelled by a spring or plunger or any other means, whereby
such marbles, balls or pellets fall into slots, tracks, grooves or other position
or strike pins or other objects, which machine may be used as an
amusement or a game of skill.
§ 8-3. Issuance and expiration of license; fee. [Amended 11-10-1980
by Ord. No. 562]
The license for the placing, operation, maintenance or use of any such
device shall be issued by the Borough Clerk to, and in the name of, the
owner thereof. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31
of each year. The license fee shall be $50 for such machine or device, which
fee is imposed for the purpose of defraying the cost and the administration
of this article.
§ 8-4. Applications.
Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made in writing to the Borough
Clerk and shall contain the following information: the name, residence and
place of business of the applicant and the address or addresses where each
such machine is to be used or operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the
names and addresses of the officers of the corporation must be furnished.
§ 8-5. Affixing of license to machine or device required.
No such machine or device shall be placed, operated, maintained or used,
or permitted to be placed, operated, maintained or used, in the Borough
of Merchantville until the license required hereby shall be affixed thereto
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:33
in a conspicuous place so that the same may be easily identified. Any such
device or machine which shall not have a license as required herein affixed
thereto shall be deemed to be an unlicensed device or machine. Any person
having supervision or control over any building, store or other place where
the public may enter or any clubhouse or clubroom wherein any such device
or machine without a license affixed thereto is operated, used or maintained
shall be deemed to have permitted such unlicensed device or machine to be
placed, operated, used and maintained therein in violation of the provisions
of this article.
§ 8-6. Numbering of licenses.
Every license issued hereunder shall be numbered and shall disclose on its
face the name and address of the licensee to whom it is issued and the
address of the establishment wherein it shall be located.
§ 8-7. Transfer of license.
The holder of a license issued hereunder shall be permitted to transfer it
from any machine to any other like machine operated on the same premises
for which the license is issued by removing the license from such machine
and affixing it to such other machine. Such holder shall be permitted to
transfer any license issued hereunder from a machine in any establishment
to a like machine in another establishment by surrendering such license to
the Borough Clerk and obtaining a new license for such machine for the
location to which the license is transferred upon payment to the Borough
Clerk of a transfer fee of $1.00.
§ 8-8. Gambling prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any coin-controlled amusement
device licensed hereunder for the purpose of gambling.
§ 8-9. (Reserved)1
§ 8-10. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon due passage and publication according to
law.
1. Editor’s Note: Former § 8-9, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 8-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 8-10
1:34
ARTICLE II
Regulation of Use by Minors
[Adopted 5-25-1959]
§ 8-11. Minimum age limit of users. [Amended 7-12-1982 by Ord.
No. 589]
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 to use
or operate or aid, assist and abet in the operation of any pinball machine
or any other coin-operated amusement machine or device, as defined by
Article I of this chapter, except where such child is accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
amusement devices commonly known as "jukeboxes."
§ 8-12. Responsibility of owner. [Amended 7-12-1982 by Ord. No.
589]
It shall also be unlawful hereafter for any person, firm, association or
corporation upon whose premises, being a public or semipublic place, any
such amusement device (except jukeboxes) is placed or maintained, to
permit any child under the age of 18 to use or operate or aid, assist or
abet in the use of and operation of any pinball machine or other such
amusement device, except where such child is accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
§ 8-13. (Reserved)2
§ 8-14. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon due passage and publication according to
law.
2. Editor’s Note: Former § 8-13, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 8-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-14
1:35
Chapter 9
ANIMALS
§ 9-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any live vertebrate creature including mammals, birds, reptiles,
amphibians and fish, but not humans.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person 18 years of age or older who has
satisfactorily completed the course of study approved by the Commissioner
of Health and Senior Services of the State of New Jersey and the Police
Training Commission as prescribed by paragraphs (1) through (3) of
Subsection a of Section 3 of N.J. P.L. 1983, c. 525 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a); or
who has been employed in the State of New Jersey in the capacity of, and
with similar responsibilities to those required of, a certified animal control
officer pursuant to the provisions of N.J. P.L. 1983, c. 525 for a period of
three years before January 17, 1987.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — An individual or group of individuals
who, with or without salary or compensation, house and care for homeless
animals in the home of an individual or in other facilities, with the intent
of placing the animals in responsible, more permanent homes as soon as
possible.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION FACILITY — The home or other facility
in which an animal rescue organization houses and cares for an animal.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals
are received, housed and distributed, but not a pet store.
AT-LARGE — That an animal is off the property of its owner and (i) the
animal has entered upon the property of another person without
authorization of that person, or (ii) the animal has entered onto public
property, street or right-of-way, unless that animal is restrained by its
owner, or a person caring for the animal on behalf of the owner, with a leash
of no less than six feet in length, or other physical control device, such that
the animal is under the physical control of the owner or person caring for
the animal on behalf of the owner. Nothing in this definition is intended to
prevent dogs being on training leashes or on retractable leashes or being
engaged in other appropriate activities under adequate, responsible adult
supervision where care is taken to assure control as needed is available to
prevent violations of this chapter.
BREEDER — Any person who causes or allows the breeding of a male or
female dog or cat. "Breeder" shall not apply to a person who owns an
unneutered female cat or dog that has borne one litter since the enactment
of this chapter if that cat or dog is spayed subsequent to the birth of that
litter so as to prevent further litters.
CAT — A member of the species Felis catus.
§ 8-14 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-1
1:36
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which is not a community cat which
has attained the age of seven months or, if age cannot be determined, a cat
which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
COMMUNITY CAT — Any free-roaming cat that may be cared for by one
or more residents of the immediate area who is/are known or unknown;
a community cat may or may not be feral. Community cats shall be
distinguished from other cats by being sterilized and ear-tipped; community
cats are exempt from licensing, stray and at-large provisions of this chapter.
COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER — Any person who, in accordance with a
community cat management/TNR program to trap, neuter, vaccinate for
rabies, ear tip and return free roaming cats or feral cats:
COMMUNITY CAT COLONY — A single community cat or a group of
community cats that congregate together outside as a unit. Although not
every cat in a colony may be feral, any nonferal cats that congregate with a
colony shall be deemed part of it.
DOG — A member of the species "Canis familiaris."
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or, if age cannot be determined, a dog which possesses a set of
permanent teeth.
EAR-TIPPING — The straight-line cutting of the tip of one ear of a cat while
the cat is anesthetized. Ear-tipping the left ear is the best and universally
accepted practice; although in the past cats may have been ear-tipped on
the right ear.
FERAL CAT — A cat that is unsocialized to humans and has a temperament
of extreme fear of, and resistance to, contact with humans. Feral cats are
included in the definition of "community cats" as community cats may or
may not be feral. Feral cats are:
FOSTER HOME — Placement by an animal rescue organization of a cat or
dog with an individual or group that is not an animal rescue organization for
the purpose of temporarily caring for the cat or dog, without the individual
Neuters, vaccinates for rabies, ear tips and returns one or more
community cats;
(1)
(2) Provides care, including food, shelter or medical care to the cat; or
Has temporary custody of the cat.
Free-roaming cats cared for by community cat caregivers may or may not be
feral. A community cat caregiver shall not be considered to own, possess, keep
or harbor a community cat.
(3)
(1) Born in the wild; or
(2) Offspring of socialized or feral cats and not socialized; or
Formerly socialized cats that have been abandoned and have reverted
to an unsocialized state.
(3)
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:37
or group assuming ownership, and with the intent of the individual or
group relinquishing the cat or dog to the animal rescue organization or a
suitable owner when one is located. A foster home may provide care to a
cat or dog without the effect of the fostered cat or dog counting toward a
municipality's household pet limit (should one exist); however individuals
or groups providing care in a foster home must comply with all other
provisions of this chapter.
FOWL — Any chicken, turkey, geese, duck, emu, ostrich or any other fowl
customarily found on a farm, and pigeons.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville.
HARBOR — The act of caring for and keeping an animal or the act of
providing premises or a residence to which the animal returns for food,
shelter or care, where the caregiver is providing the primary source of
sustenance for the animal for at least ten days, whichever time is shorter.
Community cat caregivers do not harbor community cats for the purposes
of this chapter, but are subject to the provisions of the chapter pertaining to
community cats.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein-or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
LIVESTOCK — Any bull, cow, calf, heifer, sheep, llama, goat, horse, pony,
swine or any other animal customarily found on a farm.
MICROCHIP — An electronic animal identification device that is inserted
into an animal, typically on the back between the shoulder blades, by a
veterinarian in accordance with professional medical standards.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Merchantville, or the "Borough."
NEUTER — To have a licensed veterinarian surgically sterilize the animal.
For the purposes of this chapter, neuter shall mean to neuter a male animal
or spay a female animal.
NUISANCE — Disturbing the peace by:
(1) Habitual or continuous howling, barking, crying or screaming; or
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of
property against the wishes of the owner of the property, in particular,
the creation of conditions leading to the excessive breeding of fleas or
flies, odors or noises; or
(2)
(3) Habitually chasing motor vehicles or other vehicles; or
(4) Habitually chasing or otherwise molesting passersby; or
(5) Habitually trespassing upon public or private grounds.
§ 9-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-1
1:38
OWNER — Any person, household, firm, corporation, or other organization
who:
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose of
sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather than
for business or research purposes.
PHYSICAL CONTROL — Adequate ability to manage the actions of the
animal to prevent the animal from engaging in biting, physical aggression
towards people or animals, straying, being at-large or other behaviors
regulated by this chapter or State law through the use of a proper leash
attached to an appropriate collar or harness. To maintain physical control,
the owner of the animal must have the animal on a leash not to exceed six
feet at its maximum extension.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs, cats or other
animals seized or captured by a municipality or the agent of a municipality
under the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise. This term is often applied
to a municipal animal control facility or a private or non-profit animal
shelter that contracts with one or more municipalities to hold such animals.
PROPER SHELTER — A structure that:
For the purpose of this chapter: (1) "habitually" means occurring on at least
two separate occasions within a time period of one month; except that barking,
howling, crying or screaming habitually, means making the sound persistently
or continuously for at least 30 minutes occurring at least three separate times
within a period of eight hours; (2) "persistently" or "continuously" shall mean
non-stop utterances for 30 consecutive minutes with interruption of less than
30 seconds at a time.
Possesses, harbors, keeps, has control of, a legal title to, a property
interest in, or permanent custody of any animal regulated by this
chapter; or
(1)
For three days or more has temporary custody of, keeps, possesses, or
exercises control over any animal.
A person must be age 18 or older to be considered the legal owner of an animal.
If a person under age 18 is considered the custodian or caretaker of the animal,
the parent or legal guardian shall be considered the legal owner of the animal.
A community cat caregiver is not an owner of community cats for the purposes
of this chapter but is subject to the provisions pertaining to community cat
caregivers.
(2)
Protects an animal from weather and is sufficiently ventilated and
insulated to provide refuge from precipitation, wind, extreme
temperature and direct sunlight; and
(1)
Is fully enclosed with walls on three sides, with a fourth wall having
an entranceway large enough to allow the animal to enter and exit
(2)
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:39
SEVERE INJURY — Any physical injury that results in one or more broken
bones or one or more lacerations requiring sutures, or an injury requiring
reconstructive or plastic surgery.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs or other animals are received,
housed and distributed.
SPONSOR — An individual or organization which registers with
Merchantville, oversees the implementation of TNR in Merchantville, offers
services to caregivers and community cat colonies, and works to resolve
community cat nuisance complaints in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
STRAY — Any animal that is found to be at-large, whether lost by its owner
or otherwise, or that is on the common areas of apartments, condominiums,
trailer parks or other multi-residential premises, and that does not have
identification tag and for which there is no identifiable owner. The term
"stray" shall not be applied to community cats managed in accordance with
this chapter.
SUFFICIENT FOOD — Access to uncontaminated, palatable food,
appropriate for the species of animal, on a regular, ongoing basis in
quantities sufficient to maintain a regular body weight as determined by
Purina Body Score System or a veterinarian.
SUFFICIENT WATER — Access to clean, potable water on a regular,
ongoing basis in quantities sufficient to prevent the animal from
experiencing dehydration.
TNR — Trap-Neuter-Return.
comfortably, but not so large as to allow all heat to escape in cold
temperatures; and
(3) Has a solid, waterproof roof; and
(4) Has a solid floor that does not sag under the animal's weight; and
Has a door or flap covering the entranceway during temperatures of
40° or below; and
(5)
Is positioned at a sufficient elevation to prevent water from running into
the structure; and
(6)
Is small enough to retain the animal's body heat in cold weather and
large enough for the animal to stand, turn around and lay down in
comfortably; and
(7)
(8) Is sturdy and structurally sound and in good repair; and
(9) If it contains bedding such bedding shall be clean and dry; and
Is surrounded by an area of at least five feet that is clear of debris,
feces, and urine.
(10)
§ 9-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-1
1:40
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which community feral and stray
cats are humanely trapped, spayed or neutered, vaccinated against rabies,
and returned to the location at which they were trapped. A cat may receive
a microchip as part of a TNR Program.
TRAP/HUMANE TRAP — Any trap used to capture stray dogs or cats that is
constructed so that it does not harm the animal.
VETERINARIAN — An individual who is licensed to engage in the practice
of veterinary medicine in the State of New Jersey.
§ 9-2. General provisions.
§ 9-3. Responsibilities of owners of animals.
§ 9-4. Community cat management initiatives; TNR Program.
A. No person shall keep an animal on a property in a manner that causes
one or more of the following: unsanitary conditions; infestation by
insects or rodents; physical conditions that endanger the health or
safety of humans.
B. No person shall maintain or feed any animal, domesticated or wild, in a
manner that causes one or more of the following: unsanitary conditions;
infestation by insects or rodents; physical conditions that endanger the
health or safety of humans.
C. Community cat colonies shall be permitted, and caregivers shall be
entitled to maintain them, in accordance with the terms and conditions
of this chapter.
A. Owners of animals shall provide for those animals sufficient food;
sufficient water; proper shelter and protection from weather; sufficient
space for exercise; veterinary care as needed to prevent suffering;
grooming as needed to prevent suffering; and humane care and
treatment.
B. The owner of a domesticated animal shall exercise reasonable care to
guard against the animal creating a nuisance.
C. The owner of a sexually intact (unneutered) domesticated animal shall
not permit his/her animal to roam unsupervised.
D. An owner shall not abandon a domesticated animal in any private or
public place.
E. An owner of a domesticated animal shall ensure that the animal is not
at-large.
A. Purpose: The Borough believes that the safest place for pet cats is
indoors. The Borough also recognizes that feral and community cats, as
defined in this chapter, are not, in the vast majority of cases, suitable to
be taken indoors as pets, and their home is outdoors. The Borough
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:41
§ 9-5. Trapping of cats by non-community cat caregivers.
Trapping of community cats by those who are not community cat caregivers
as defined in this chapter, sponsors, animal control officers employed by
the municipality, or members of law enforcement, is prohibited unless the
person trapping the cats is doing so for the purpose of providing medical
attention for a sick or injured cat or for the purpose of TNR. Persons
further recognizes the need for innovation in addressing the issues
presented by community cats. To that end, the Borough finds that
properly managed community cats are part of the solution to reducing
the numbers of feral cats in the Borough and the rate of euthanasia
of cats in area shelters. Community cat colonies shall be permitted in
Merchantville as part of a community cat management/TNR Program in
accordance with the following provisions.
B. Sponsors of TNR Programs: Merchantville shall select a private
nonprofit 50l(c)(3) animal welfare organization to serve as the lead
sponsor of the community cat management/TNR program. The lead
sponsor shall oversee the activities of secondary sponsors and
community cat caregivers in accordance with a Memorandum of
Understanding between Merchantville and the selected non-profit
organization. Individuals and organizations may apply to the lead
sponsor to serve as additional program sponsors. Any person or entity
intending to undertake the responsibilities of secondary sponsor shall
advise the lead sponsor in writing and provide his/her/its address, email
address and telephone number.
C. The lead sponsor shall designate two individuals, labelled as "primary
feeder" and "secondary feeder," each of whom shall bear the
responsibility of feeding the identified community cat colony. No other
person shall feed the identified community cat colony unless so
designated by the lead sponsor.
D. Community cat caregivers: Community cat caregivers must ensure
community cats are sterilized, vaccinated against the threat of rabies,
and ear-tipped, and must cooperate with the municipality and the
sponsor to abate any nuisance. Community cat caregivers are
encouraged to register with a sponsor and follow best practices of
community cat care.
E. Location of community cat colonies: All managed community cat
colonies must be maintained in compliance with trespassing and
property laws.
F. Requirements for exemptions from certain provisions of this chapter:
All cats that are part of an approved TNR/community cat program
pursuant to this chapter must be sterilized, vaccinated against the
threat of rabies, and ear-tipped for easy identification. If these
requirements are met the community cat is exempted from licensing,
stray and at-large provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-5
1:42
who trap free-roaming cats for the purpose of TNR must comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-6. Disposition ear-tipped community cats.
A. Injured or sick ear-tipped cats trapped by animal control officer: If an
animal control officer traps an injured or sick ear-tipped cat that
requires medical attention, the animal control officer shall take the cat
to a pound, to scan the cat for a microchip. If a microchip is found which
identifies the cat or cat's colony, the officer shall contact the sponsor or
community cat caregiver of the cat who shall then arrange for medical
attention. If the injured or sick cat does not have a microchip and
cannot otherwise be identified by the animal control officer, the animal
control officer shall contact the sponsor who will arrange for the cat to
receive medical attention and, return the cat to the appropriate colony
or place the cat in another appropriate placement.
B. Ear-tipped cats inadvertently trapped by animal control: An animal
control officer who traps an apparently healthy ear-tipped cat shall
immediately release the cat.
C. Ear-tipped cats deliberately trapped by animal control; community cat
caretaker/sponsor responsible for nuisance abatement: An animal
control officer, who deliberately traps an ear-tipped cat, shall scan the
cat for a microchip.
(1) If a full scan is not possible in the field due to fractious behavior,
the officer shall take the cat to a shelter or holding facility to scan
the cat for a microchip. If a microchip is found which identifies the
cat or cat's colony, or if the officer is able to identify the cat by
another means, the officer shall contact the sponsor or community
cat caregiver of the cat with a description of the cat, the microchip
number, the location where the cat was trapped, and the nuisance
complaint which caused the animal control officer to set the trap.
The caregiver or sponsor shall retrieve the cat and return the cat to
its colony and undertake nuisance abatement efforts.
(2) If the caregiver or sponsor is not able to immediately take custody
of the cat, the officer shall return the cat to the appropriate colony.
(3) If the cat does not have a microchip and cannot otherwise be
identified by the sponsor or a community cat caregiver, the animal
control officer shall contact the sponsor so the cat can be placed in
an appropriate colony placement.
D. Community cats suspected to be rabid: If a trapped community cat is
suspected of being rabid, the animal shall be immediately reported to
the Board of Health and to the Department of Health and Senior
Services, and shall be quarantined, observed, and otherwise handled
and dealt with as appropriate for an animal suspected of being rabid or
§ 9-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:43
§ 9-7. Resolution of complaints; procedures.
§ 9-8. Enforcement of community cat management initiative/TNR
Program.
Merchantville shall have the following rights:
as required by the Department of Health and Senior Services for such
animals.
A. The requirements of this section notwithstanding, animal control
officers and police officers may investigate any nuisance complaint. If
an animal control officer or police officer determines that an ear-tipped
community cat is causing a nuisance as defined by this section, the
animal control officer or police officer shall contact the sponsor. The
sponsor shall begin nuisance abatement procedures within 48 hours
and make all reasonable efforts to resolve the nuisance in as short a
time period as possible, not to exceed 60 days. If the sponsor fails to
resolve the nuisance or remove the cat within 60 days, the animal
control officer may remove the cat. If an animal control officer removes
a community cat, the municipality must notify the sponsor or
community cat caregiver and allow the sponsor or caregiver to retrieve
the cat from the pound for adoption or relocation. If an animal control
officer or police officer reasonably determines that a cat is injured or
poses a significant threat to public health, the officer may reduce the
time that the sponsor has to resolve the complaint, as necessary to
protect the cat and public health, before taking further action. In the
case of an emergency, the animal control officer or police officer may
remove the cat, but within 24 hours the municipality must provide the
sponsor with notice of the cat's whereabouts and allow the sponsor an
opportunity to retrieve the cat for treatment, return, or relocation.
B. Factors to be considered during the nuisance abatement process shall
include:
(1) Recognition of the value of wildlife;
(2) Recognition of the value of TNR in managing community cat
colonies;
(3) The availability of devices and strategies to minimize nuisance
behavior by community cats that may have caused the complaint.
A. The right to seize or remove cats from a colony which have not been
vaccinated against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
B. The right to seize or remove a cat from a colony which is creating a
nuisance as defined in this chapter, after the community cat caregiver
and sponsor have been given 60 days to abate the nuisance or remove
and relocate the cat and have failed to do so. The caregiver must begin
nuisance abatement procedures within 48 hours after being notified of
§ 9-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-8
1:44
§ 9-9. Trapping requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use inhumane methods to capture
dogs or cats. Traps and the trapping of dogs or cats must meet the following
requirements:
§ 9-10. Trap to euthanize.
The practice of trapping cats and/or dogs for the purpose of euthanizing
the animal shall be unlawful except in cases of serious disease or injury
as determined by a licensed veterinarian. Further, it shall be unlawful
to employ or to be employed for the express purpose of trapping and
killing free-roaming cats and dogs as a means to eliminate a nuisance. This
section shall not prohibit an animal control officer or police officer from
carrying out their lawful duties as otherwise specifically permitted under
this chapter.
§ 9-11. Animals at-large prohibited.
No owner or person having temporary custody of any animal shall permit
the animal to be, or fail to provide physical control to restrain the animal
from being, at-large. Dogs on leashes extending beyond six feet shall be
considered at-large for provisions of this chapter, but it shall only be a
violation if the owner or person having temporary custody of the dog on a
leash extending beyond six feet is also violating another provision of this
chapter.
a nuisance by an animal control officer and must take all reasonable
steps to resolve the nuisance in as short a time as possible, not to
exceed 60 days.
C. The right to seize or remove a cat or colony of cats when the community
cat caregiver regularly fails to comply with the colony care
requirements of this chapter and the sponsor has not been able to
obtain a replacement or substitute caregiver within 30 days of the
Merchantville's notice to the caregiver and sponsor of failure to comply
with this chapter. If one or more cats are in danger due to a caregiver's
lack of compliance, the sponsor may work with other local caregivers to
find a suitable replacement caregiver or relocate the cats.
A. Traps shall not be left unattended for more than two hours;
B. Traps shall not be left set overnight unless traps are checked at least
every two hours;
C. Traps shall not be left unattended for any length of time in
temperatures below 45° Fahrenheit or above 80° Fahrenheit; in rain or
snow; or in any other extreme weather; and
D. Traps utilized to capture dogs or cats shall be humane traps.
A. A dog shall be considered exempt from the at-large provision if:
§ 9-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-11
1:45
§ 9-12. Abandonment of animal.
No person may desert or abandon any animal at any public or private
location. The practice of TNR and the provision of care to a community cat
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter do not constitute desertion
or abandonment of the community cat. However, the placement of a cat at a
community cat colony by a person other than the community cat caregiver
or sponsor constitutes abandonment.
§ 9-13. Control of waste and clean-up; exemption.
(1) The dog is engaged in the performance of duties while under the
supervision and control of law enforcement officials performing law
enforcement work; or
(2) The dog is engaged in any legal hunt or training procedure,
including training or exhibiting in legal sports such as obedience
trials, conformation shows, field trials, hunting/retrieving trials and
herding trials; however, such dogs at all other times and in all other
respects shall be subject to this chapter; or
(3) The dog is in a Merchantville or County-designated or legally
established, private "off-leash" dog park and is under the
supervision of the owner or a responsible person.
B. A cat shall be considered exempt from these provisions if:
(1) The cat is part of an approved community cat management/TNR
program in accordance with this chapter.
A. No person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, walking or in
custody or charge of any dog shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such
dog to soil, defile, defecate or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, school
ground or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any
public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property; provided however, that it shall
be a complete defense to a violation of this section that such person
immediately removed and disposed of all feces and droppings deposited
by said dog in a suitable and sanitary manner.
B. Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, walking or in
custody or charge of any dog shall have in his or her possession
appropriate sanitary means to remove immediately any feces and
droppings which may be deposited by such dog on or in the areas
enumerated or described in Subsection A, above. Such means shall
include, but are not limited to a scooper, shovel, container, disposal bag,
wrapper or other implement.
C. Disposal in a suitable and sanitary manner shall include but shall not be
limited to taking the removed feces and droppings home in a container,
disposal bag or wrapper and placing the same in a trash can or
§ 9-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-13
1:46
§ 9-14. Licensing of dogs and cats; license and registration tag
required; placing tag on dog or cat; wearing tag; lost tag or
registration certificate.
§ 9-15. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification
of exemption; requirement for license.
Neither the Borough Clerk or other official designated by the Borough
Council to license dogs and cats therein shall grant any such license and
official metal registration tag for any dog or cat unless the owner or
custodian thereof provides evidence that the dog or cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by
and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Health and Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health and Senior Services. Such
vaccination shall be repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the
State Department of Health and Senior Services, and shall be administered
by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted
by law to do the same. Proof of inoculation for dogs shall be in the form
prescribed by the State Department of Health and Senior Services in its
regulations. Proof of inoculation for cats shall be on a certificate or form
containing the rabies vaccine lot number and expiration date and the
signature of the administering veterinarian.
removing the same from the container, bag or wrapper and depositing
the same in the sanitary sewer. In no event shall disposal in a suitable
and sanitary manner include the placement of unwrapped feces or
droppings in a trash can, or the placement or disposal into a storm
sewer or the burial of said feces or droppings on or in property or areas
enumerated and described in Subsection A above.
D. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any owner or
keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
A. Any person residing in Merchantville who shall own, keep or harbor a
dog or cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the
Borough Clerk or other official designated by the Borough Council
thereof to license dogs and cats, a license and official metal registration
tag for each such dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored. Any such
person shall place upon each such dog or cat a collar or harness with
the registration tag securely fastened thereto. Any such dog or cat must
wear the registration tag any time the dog or cat is not upon its owner's
property. Upon proof by affidavit of the loss of a certificate or metal tag,
the Borough Clerk shall issue a new certificate or tag upon payment of a
fee of $20.
B. These licensing requirements shall not apply to community cats in an
approved community cat management/TNR program.
§ 9-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-16
1:47
§ 9-16. License and registration fees; expiration date of license and
registration; other fees. [Amended 11-14-16 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
Editor's Note: See also Chapter 25, Fees, § 25-14.
The owner applying for the license and registration tag shall pay the
following fees:
§ 9-17. "Seeing eye," "service" and "hearing ear" dogs.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeingeye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known
as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs herein,
A. A license fee of $18 for a neutered dog or cat, and a license fee of $23
for an unneutered dog or cat.
B. In addition to the fees assessed for each neutered and unneutered dog
licensed, Merchantville shall also collect and forward $1.20 to the State
of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.
C. For each unneutered dog licensed, the municipality shall collect and
forward an additional $3 to the State of New Jersey for deposit in the
Animal Population Control Fund pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-1S.3b.
D. Owners shall apply for a license and pay the appropriate license and
registration fees before January 31 of each calendar year.
E. A late fee of $20 shall be charged for each license not applied for by
January 31 of each calendar year. A noncompliance fee of $50 shall be
charged for each cat or dog found to be unlicensed.
F. Any person applying for a license and registration tag for a dog
determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq. of the laws of the State of New Jersey shall pay an
annual fee of $700.
G. Any person, firm or corporation may keep, possess or have custody and
control of four dogs or cats, or any combination thereof amounting to
four animals, but not including newborn dogs or cats less than six
months of age who is/are the progeny of an animal or animals legally on
the premises at the time of the progeny's birth, within the territorial
jurisdiction of this Borough, but in no event shall the combination
thereof total more than four animals to one property.
H. Any person, firm or corporation wishing to keep, possess or have
custody and control of a fifth or more dog or cat under this section may
make application to the Board of Health of the Borough of
Merchantville which, after the appropriate investigation, will make a
recommendation to the Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville as to whether a permit should issue to the applicant to
keep, possess or have custody and control of a fifth or more dog or cat.
§ 9-16 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-17
1:48
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 9-18. Time for applying for license.
The owner of any newly-acquired dog or cat of licensing age or of any dog
or cat which attains licensing age shall make application for license and
registration tag for such dog or cat within 10 days after such acquisition or
age attainment.
§ 9-19. Dogs and cats brought from outside of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 9-20. Application; contents; preservation of information,
registration numbers.
The license and registration application shall state the breed, sex, age,
color and markings of the dog or cat for which license and registration
are sought, whether it is of a long-or short-haired variety, whether it has
been neutered, and, if a dog, whether it has been surgically debarked
or silenced; also the name, street and post office address and telephone
number of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog or
cat. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog or cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Borough Clerk or other local official designated to license dogs and cats
in Merchantville. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.
§ 9-21. Removing tag from dog or cat without owner's consent;
attaching tag to another dog or cat.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
A. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog or cat owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag
shall be accepted by all municipalities as evidence of compliance with
this section. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into
Merchantville any dog or cat licensed in another State for the current
year, and bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the State for a period of more than 90 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog or cat unless such dog or cat is licensed under another section of
this chapter.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into Merchantville
any dog or cat that is not licensed in any jurisdiction and shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within Merchantville for a period of
more than 30 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag for each such dog or cat unless such dog or cat be licensed under
this chapter.
§ 9-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-21
1:49
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for
which it was not issued.
§ 9-22. Vaccinations.
§ 9-23. Unlicensed dog or cat presumed unvaccinated.
§ 9-24. Canvass of dogs and cats; report.
The Borough Clerk, or any person appointed for the purpose by the Borough
Council, shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs and cats
owned, kept or harbored within the Borough limits and shall report, on or
before September 1 of the year in which the census is taken, to the Borough
Council, the local Board of Health, and to the State Department of Health
and Human Services the results thereof. Community cats shall be excluded
from the canvass.
§ 9-25. License for kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound.
A. No person in Merchantville shall own, possess, harbor or have in
custody any dog or cat over seven months of age unless such dog or cat
has been vaccinated or inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian. Such vaccination or inoculation shall consist of an antirabies
vaccine of standard and accepted quality and formula, the
duration of which shall be noted on the vaccination certificate or tag.
Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health and Senior Services, and
shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
B. A cat or dog will be considered exempt from this provision if a licensed
veterinarian certifies in writing that the animal's infirmity, other
physical condition, or regimen of therapy exempts it from vaccination
against rabies.
A. Any unlicensed dog or cat that is older than seven months is presumed
to be unvaccinated. This presumption can be rebutted only by a current
rabies vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian or issued by an
approved governmental agency.
B. A community cat that has been ear-tipped is presumed to have been
vaccinated against rabies at least once.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Borough Clerk (or other
official designated to license dogs) where such establishment is located,
for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. The
application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose or purposes for
which it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by
documentation from the local municipal and health authorities showing
§ 9-21 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-25
1:50
compliance with the local and State rules and regulations governing
location of and sanitation at such establishments.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year, and be subject
to revocation by Merchantville on recommendation of the State
Department of Health and Senior Services or the local Board of Health
for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department or local Board governing the same, after the owner has
been afforded a hearing by either the State Department or local Board,
except as provided by state law.
C. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments. Such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
D. The license for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject to
review by Merchantville, upon recommendation by the State
Department of Health and Senior Services or the local health authority
for failure by the kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound to comply with the
rules and regulations of the State Department or local Health authority
governing kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds, or if the kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound meets the criteria for recommended suspension
or revocation as provided by State law.
E. Merchantville, based on the criteria for the recommendation of the
local health authority provided by State law, may suspend the license
for 90 days or may revoke the license if it is determined at a hearing
that the pet shop, kennel, shelter or pound:
(1) Failed to maintain proper hygiene and exercise reasonable care in
safeguarding the health of animals in its custody or
(2) Sold a substantial number of animals that the kennel or pet shop
knew, or reasonably should have known, to be unfit for purchase.
F. The owner of a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound must submit to a
yearly inspection by municipal animal control officer, municipal health
officer and/or code enforcement officer. In the event of a complaint or
problem, inspection may occur every thirty (30) days until the problem
is resolved. The municipality may inspect daily or weekly if deemed
necessary to protect the health and welfare of the animals or humans,
or in accordance with any judicial ruling if court proceedings are
initiated.
G. Every kennel or pet shop licensed by Merchantville shall submit
annually and no later than May 1 of each year records of the total
number of cats and dogs, respectively, sold by the pet shop or kennel
each year, and Merchantville shall provide this information to the local
health authority.
§ 9-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-26
1:51
§ 9-26. License fees for kennels and pet shops; no fee for shelter or
pound.
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $100, and for more than 10 dogs $150. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $50. No license fee shall be charged for a
shelter or pound. Additional permit and fees shall be required for facilities
that breed cats or dogs as described in this chapter.
§ 9-27. Kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; permitting dogs to
go off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 9-28. List of licensed kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
The Borough Clerk, or other official designated to license dogs in
Merchantville, shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of all
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the
licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address
of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 9-29. Revocation or denial of license for individual dog, individual
cat or kennel.
Merchantville may deny a license to, or revoke a license from, any person
found violating or refusing to comply with any part of the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to:
§ 9-30. Breeding permits; administration.
A. Violating any animal control laws or regulations, any zoning or health
and safety laws or any regulations relating to the keeping of animals;
or
B. Failing to keep and maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the
premises on which the animals are kept; or
C. Acting in an inhumane or cruel manner in the treatment of the animals;
or
D. Failing to provide any animal with sufficient food, sufficient water,
proper shelter or veterinary care; or
E. Failing to substantially comply with all conditions of the license; or
F. Providing false information in the license application or failing to
cooperate with inspection of the premises required by this chapter; or
G. Failing to obtain a breeding permit for breeding cats or dogs as
described in this chapter.
§ 9-26 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-30
1:52
A. Upon the enactment of this chapter, no person who owns keeps or
harbors an unneutered dog or cat shall cause or allow the production of
more than one litter of puppies or kittens by any male or female dog or
cat without first obtaining a breeding permit issued by Merchantville.
Such breeding permit is required in addition to any license, registration
or permit required under by federal or state law, or Borough ordinance.
B. Merchantville shall administer a permit program to allow breeding of
cats and dogs consistent with the criteria and according to the
procedures contained in this chapter.
C. Each applicant who is issued a permit to breed cats or dogs under this
section shall pay a breeding permit fee of $50 per year for owning,
keeping or harboring one unneutered female that has already borne
one litter since the enactment of this chapter and/or one unneutered
male and one unneutered female. For applicants owning, keeping or
harboring four or more dogs or cats, the fee shall be $100 per year.
D. Breeding permits shall be valid for twelve months, renewable on an
annual basis. All breeding permits shall contain the following terms and
conditions and be subject to the following requirements:
(1) No offspring may be sold or adopted and permanently placed until
reaching an age of at least eight weeks.
(2) No offspring may be sold or adopted until immunized against
common diseases (feline pan leukopenia, rhinotrachitis, calicivirus
for cats; canine distemper, adenovirus type 2, parvovirus, Para
influenza for dogs), or until they have begun a course of disease
prevention under the direction of a State of New Jersey licensed
veterinarian.
(3) Any permit holder advertising to the public the availability of any
animal for adoption or sale must prominently display the permit
number in any publications in which they advertise. Further, the
permit number must be provided to any person adopting or
purchasing an animal bred by the permit holder.
(4) The breeding permit holder shall adhere to minimum standards
regarding the care and keeping of animals developed and approved
by the State of New Jersey and this chapter.
(5) The permit holder shall submit to a yearly inspection by an animal
control officer, municipal health officer and/or code enforcement
officer. In the event of a complaint or problem, inspection may
occur every 30 days until the problem is resolved. Merchantville
may inspect daily or weekly if deemed necessary to protect the
health and welfare of the animals or humans, or in accordance with
any judicial ruling if court proceedings are initiated.
(6) If within one year of placement a new owner becomes unable or
unwilling to continue ownership and responsibility for an animal
§ 9-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-30
1:53
§ 9-31. Application for and issuance of breeding permit.
The application shall include the name of the applicant, his or her residence
address and telephone number, the address of the proposed location where
the animals are to be kept if different from applicant's address, and a
description of the housing facilities for the keeping of the animals. The
application shall also state the number of unneutered dogs and/or cats
to be kept. Merchantville may require the applicant to provide any other
information it reasonably deems necessary to properly evaluate the
application.
which is the offspring of a cat or dog of the permit holder, the
permit holder shall assist in placement of the animal. If no suitable
placement can be found within 30 days, the permit holder shall
accept return of the animal and shall become fully responsible for
its care.
A. An application for a breeding permit shall include a signed statement
from the applicant attesting that:
(1) Keeping of the animals at the proposed location will not violate any
federal, state or local law;
(2) Appropriate facilities of sufficient size exist at the proposed
location to safely and adequately secure, feed, house, exercise and
maintain the animals;
(3) The proposed location consists of a lot or lots of sufficient size to
safely and adequately house, maintain and exercise the animals
without disturbance to adjacent property owners or the public;
(4) Possession and maintenance of the animals at the proposed
location will not result in the animals being subject to neglect,
cruelty, or abuse;
(5) The applicant has neither had any animal license or permit
revoked, nor has been convicted of any violation of any provision of
this chapter or any other State or local law pertaining to the
maintenance and treatment of animals, within the past five years;
(6) The keeping and maintenance of the animal will not create a public
or private nuisance or endanger the public health, safety or
welfare; and
(7) The keeping of the animals at the proposed location complies with
all Merchantville zoning regulations.
B. Merchantville may investigate or require any further information or
documentation which would assist in determining whether the
statements made by the applicant are correct and whether the permit
should be issued.
§ 9-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-32
1:54
§ 9-32. Breeding permit conditions.
§ 9-33. Inspections relating to a breeding permit.
§ 9-34. Expiration and renewal of breeding permits.
A. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be made expressly subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The permit holder shall provide veterinary care as needed and
make every effort to keep all animals free of disease and parasites;
(2) The permit holder shall keep the animals' living quarters clean and
sanitary, shall provide sufficient food, sufficient water, appropriate
exercise and proper shelter;
(3) Any structures housing animals shall be of a sufficient size to
ensure the health, safety and comfort of the animals as per New
Jersey law and shall be placed at least six feet from any property
boundaries in residential areas;
(4) Any other conditions which Merchantville or the Department of
Health and Senior Services or the State of New Jersey determines
is reasonably necessary to protect the welfare of the animals kept
or the public, health, safety or welfare.
B. The breeding permit fee established under this chapter shall be paid by
the applicant prior to issuance of the permit. Such fee shall be paid
each time a permit is issued or renewed.
A. The Borough, or an animal control officer or law enforcement officer,
may require any breeding permit holder to produce for inspection any
required animal license, permit or certificate of vaccination.
B. The Borough, or an animal control officer or law enforcement officer
may, with 48 hours' notice to the permit holder, conduct such
inspections of the premises upon which animals are kept under a
breeding permit, as necessary to insure compliance with the conditions
of the permit.
C. Such inspection of the premises shall be on a yearly basis and/or may
result from concerns stemming from the direct observations of an
animal control officer, law enforcement officer or upon a nonanonymous
compliant.
A. Breeding permits issued under this chapter shall expire one year after
issuance.
B. Breeding permits may be renewed on an annual basis upon filing of a
new application containing updated information and payment of the
annual breeding permit fee established by this chapter.
§ 9-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-34
1:55
§ 9-35. Revocation of breeding permit.
§ 9-36. Sale or adoption of cats or dogs or wolf hybrids.
C. No breeding permit shall be renewed if the Borough, or an animal
control officer or law enforcement officer, has received two or more
substantiated complaints concerning the location or manner of keeping
of the animals or determines that the findings set forth in section
cannot be made or that any of the grounds for revocation described in
this chapter exist.
A. Any breeding permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked if
an animal control officer or law enforcement officer has reasonable
cause to believe any of the following to be true:
(1) The permittee has violated any ordinances or statutes relating to
the keeping, care or use of any animal including, but not limited to,
those contained in this chapter and those contained in the statutes
of the State of New Jersey;
(2) The permittee is in violation of any State health or safety law or
regulation regarding animal care or control;
(3) The permittee has failed to comply with any condition or
requirement of the permit or has failed to pay any fee imposed
under this code;
(4) The permittee refused to allow inspection, upon forty-eight hours
written notice, of any animal covered by the permit or the premises
on which the animal is kept;
(5) The permittee has transferred, sold or otherwise disposed of the
animal for which the permit was issued;
(6) The permittee has acted in an inhumane or cruel manner in the
treatment of animals; or
(7) The permittee provided false information in the license application.
B. If, after inspection, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer
concludes that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has
occurred, the officer may modify the terms of the permit or revoke the
permit. The officer shall cause written notice thereafter be transmitted
by mail to the address of the permittee. Said notice shall specify the
grounds for modification or revocation of the permit.
A. Any person who provides or offers to the public, whether or not for
compensation, any cat or dog, or wolf hybrid shall provide to their
clients, free of charge, information, relating to pet care and ownership,
including information where applicable, on Borough ordinances
pertaining to animal control. This required information will be prepared
and provided by the Borough upon request.
§ 9-34 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-36
1:56
§ 9-37. Disposition of fees collected.
B. Any person offering cats, dogs, or wolf hybrids for sale or adoption shall
disclose to any purchaser information regarding the licensing,
registration or permit requirements of the Borough applicable to such
animal.
C. No person shall offer for sale or adoption any cat, dog, or wolf hybrid on
any public street, sidewalk or public park unless such person first
obtains a business license to sell pets or is a recognized pet rescue/
adoption agency.
D. Prior to release for adoption, any animal adopted from any shelter,
animal rescue organization or pound shall be spayed or neutered unless
the shelter or pound obtains a certificate from a licensed veterinarian
certifying as to the health reasons for failing to alter such animal.
A. License fees and other money collected or received under the
provisions of this chapter, except for those fees which are forwarded to
the State of New Jersey, or which are received as donations pursuant to
the request for donation on the dog and cat license application form,
shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer and shall be placed in a
special account separate from any of the other accounts and shall be
used for the following purposes:
(1) For collecting, keeping and impounding of dogs and cats liable to
seizure under this chapter;
(2) For local prevention and control of rabies;
(3) For payment of damage to or losses of poultry and domestic
animals, except dogs and cats, caused by unknown dog or dogs;
(4) For canvass of unlicensed dogs as prescribed by the State of New
Jersey;
(5) For administering the provisions of this chapter; and
(6) For providing dog and cat control in the Borough of Merchantville.
B. Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the said
third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from such special account to the general
funds of the Borough of Merchantville any amount then in such account
which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account
during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
C. Fees collected or received under the provisions of this chapter which
are to be forwarded to the State of New Jersey shall be forwarded
within 30 days after collection by the Borough Clerk to the State
Department of Health and Senior Services.
§ 9-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-37
1:57
§ 9-38. Impounding or taking dogs or other animals into custody;
grounds.
The animal control officer appointed for the purpose by the Borough shall
take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, and thereafter offered for adoption or given appropriate final
disposition as provided in this section:
§ 9-39. Animal control officer shall attempt to return animals to
owners or caregivers in the field.
D. Money received as donations pursuant to the request for donations on
the dog and cat license application form shall be placed into a separate
account and used solely for:
(1) Neutering or other veterinary care of impounded animals;
(2) Neutering or other veterinary care of community cats; and
(3) Neutering or other veterinary care of cats or dogs whose owners
receive a means-tested public benefit.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person charged with the
care of the dog, which is reasonably believed to be a stray dog; or
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or the person charged with the
care of the dog without a current registration tag on its collar or
elsewhere; or
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or the person
charged with the care of the dog; or
D. Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid; or
E. Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner or the person
charged with its care that is reported to, or observed by, a certified
animal control officer to be ill, injured, or creating a threat to public
health, safety or welfare.
F. An exception to the provisions of this section is made for any cat or cats
that are part of an approved community cat management/TNR
program, which shall be handled subject to the provisions of this
chapter pertaining to community cats.
A. Upon capturing an animal that bears a registration tag or private ID tag
or tattoo, an animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to
contact the owner or caregiver listed on the tag or associated with the
registration or tattoo and shall make every reasonable effort to return
the animal to its owner or caregiver while in the field; that is, without
transporting the animal to an animal control facility. If it is not
reasonably possible to return the animal to the owner or caregiver
while in the field, the animal control officer will follow normal
§ 9-37 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-39
1:58
§ 9-40. Attempts by shelter to identify owner or caregiver based on
microchip prior to adoption, euthanasia.
§ 9-41. Notice to owner/caregiver of impoundment.
notification and impounding procedures according to the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Upon capturing an animal that does not bear a registration tag or
private ID tag, the animal control officer shall carefully scan the animal
for a microchip using a universal scanner. If a microchip is found, the
animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to contact the
microchip company to obtain contact information for the owner or
caregiver and shall then make every reasonable effort to contact the
owner or caregiver and return the animal to its owner or caregiver
while in the field; that is, without transporting the animal to the animal
control facility. If it is not reasonably safe or possible to return the
animal to the owner or caregiver while in the field, the animal control
officer will follow notification and impounding procedures according to
the provisions of this chapter.
C. The impounding shelter and/or animal control officer may make a
reasonable inquiry in the immediate vicinity in which a stray animal is
picked up in order to locate the owner or caregiver, if any, of a stray
animal.
A. When a shelter, pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or
animal rescue organization facility receives a cat or dog for which the
identity of the owner or caregiver is not known, the shelter or rescue
organization shall carefully scan the animal for microchip identification
using a universal scanner.
B. Prior to release of any cat or dog for adoption, transfer to another
facility or foster home, or euthanasia of the cat or dog, the shelter,
pound, kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or animal rescue
organization facility shall, if the identity of the owner or caregiver is not
known, scan the cat or dog for microchip identification.
C. If either scan required pursuant to Subsection A or B of this section
reveals information concerning the owner or caregiver of the cat or
dog, the shelter, pound, kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or
animal rescue organization facility shall immediately seek to contact
and notify the owner or caregiver of the whereabouts of the cat or dog.
Furthermore, if microchip identification is found, the shelter, pound,
kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or animal rescue organization
facility shall hold the animal for at least seven days after the notification
to the owner or caregiver.
A. If any animal so seized bears a microchip or wears a collar or harness
having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of
any person, or bears a registration tag or a private ID tag, or the owner
§ 9-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-41
1:59
§ 9-42. Holding period established; adoption; other disposition of
animal.
or the caregiver or the person keeping or harboring said animal is
known, any person authorized by the Borough Council shall forthwith
serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, harness or
tag, or on the person whose contact information is associated with the
microchip, or on the owner or the caregiver or the person keeping or
harboring said animal, if known, a notice in writing stating that the
animal has been seized and will be liable to be offered for adoption
or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the
notice.
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar,
harness, microchip or tag, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at the person's usual or last known place of
abode or at the address given on the collar, harness, microchip or tag.
C. In the case of an impounded ear-tipped cat, if the community cat
caregiver is not known, the sponsor shall be notified. The sponsor is
authorized to reclaim an ear-tipped cat on behalf of the caregiver.
A. An animal shelter, pound, or kennel operating as an animal shelter or
pound receiving an animal from a certified animal control officer for the
Borough, or from any other individual, group, or organization, shall
hold the animal for at least seven days, and excluding official holidays
recognized by Camden County or when the shelter is otherwise closed
to the public due to an unexpected event, before offering it for adoption,
or euthanizing, relocating, or sterilizing the animal except if:
(1) The animal is surrendered voluntarily by its owner to the animal
shelter, pound, or kennel operating as an animal shelter or pound,
in which case the provisions of "voluntary surrender by owner"
section shall apply; or
(2) The animal is suspected of being rabid, in which case the animal
shall be immediately reported to the executive officer of the local
Board of Health and to the Department of Health and Senior
Services, and shall be quarantined, observed, and otherwise
handled and dealt with as appropriate for an animal suspected of
being rabid or as required by the Department of Health and Senior
Services for such animals; or
(3) The animal is an ear-tipped community cat, in which case the
provisions of the "disposition of ear-tipped community cats" section
of this chapter shall apply.
B. Except as otherwise provided for under Subsection A(1) of § 9-43,
Voluntary surrender by owner, under § 9-6, Disposition of ear-tipped
§ 9-41 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-42
1:60
§ 9-43. Voluntary surrender by owner.
community cats, and under Subsection E of this section, no shelter,
pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound receiving an animal
from a certified animal control officer may transfer the animal to an
animal rescue organization facility or a foster home until the shelter,
pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound has held the animal
for at least seven days.
C. If the animal remains unclaimed, is not claimed due to the failure of the
owner or other person to comply with the requirements of this section,
or is not adopted after seven days after the date on which notice is
served pursuant to § 9-41, Notice to owner or caregiver of
impoundment or, if no notice can be served, not less than seven days
after the date on which the animal was impounded, the impounded
animal may be offered for adoption, placed in a foster home, transferred
to another shelter, pound, kennel operating as a shelter or pound, or
animal rescue organization facility, or humanely euthanized.
D. At the time of adoption, the right of ownership in the animal shall
transfer to the new owner.
E. Feral cats brought in by the public or by animal control officers or other
law enforcement officials in traps for the purpose of TNR shall be
spayed/neutered, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped on the left ear,
and returned to the location at which they were trapped/caught. The
sponsor shall be notified of the location of the neutered and returned
feral cat. If return to the location at which a cat was trapped is
considered truly dangerous to the cat's well-being, or return is
otherwise deemed impossible; the cat will be relocated with the
approval by the animal control officer or sponsor.
A. If an animal shelter, pound or kennel operating as an animal shelter or
pound is not required to hold an animal for at least seven days pursuant
to Subsection A(1) of § 9-42, the animal shelter, pound, or kennel
operating as an animal shelter or pound:
(1) Shall offer the animal for adoption for at least seven days before
euthanizing it; or
(2) May transfer the animal to an animal rescue organization facility or
a foster home prior to offering it for adoption if such a transfer is
determined to be in the best interest of the animal by the shelter,
pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound.
B. Every owner who voluntarily surrenders an animal must provide photo
identification and sign a form acknowledging that the surrender is
voluntary and acknowledging the discretion of the animal shelter to
dispose of the animal. The Borough, pounds, animal control officers and
shelters are not required by State law to accept owner-surrendered
animals. The animal shelter shall not be liable for the disposition of any
§ 9-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-43
1:61
§ 9-44. Proper identification for redemption.
If the owner or the person charged with the care of the animal seeks to
claim it within seven days, or after the seven days have elapsed but before
the animal has been adopted or euthanized, the shelter, pound, or kennel
operating as a shelter or pound shall, in the case of a cat or dog, release
it to the owner or person charged with its care, provided the owner or
person charged with the care of the animal provides proof of ownership,
which may include a valid cat or dog license, registration, rabies inoculation
certificate, documentation from the owner's veterinarian that the cat or
dog has received regular care from that veterinarian, or a photograph of
the animal. If a person provides a photograph of the animal as proof of
ownership, the person must also provide personal photo identification.
§ 9-45. Proper identification for adoption.
In order to adopt an animal from an animal control shelter, pound, or kennel
operating as a shelter or pound, a person must be at least 18 years of age
and provide photo identification.
§ 9-46. Rabies vaccination required for adoption or redemption.
All dogs, cats and ferrets must have current rabies vaccinations in order to
be redeemed or adopted. This requirement may only be waived if the owner
can produce to the animal control shelter a rabies vaccination certificate
from a veterinarian and any other information necessary in order for the
animal control shelter to determine that the animal has a current
vaccination or if the owner produces written certification from a licensed
veterinarian that the animal's infirmity, other physical condition, or regimen
of therapy exempts it from vaccination against rabies. To comply with this
requirement, an animal control shelter may vaccinate any animal in its
custody.
voluntarily surrendered animal after receipt of the animal from its
owner.
C. Owners surrendering animals shall be responsible for paying an intake
fee, and should the animal(s) not be current on vaccination required by
the shelter, vaccination fees shall also be paid by the owner wishing to
surrender his/her animal(s). The animal shelter may also require
owners surrendering unaltered animals to be responsible for paying
fees for spaying/neutering the animal(s).
D. Owners wishing to surrender an animal with the request for euthanasia
shall be allowed to do so at the discretion of the animal shelter. It is not
the policy or practice of animal shelters to supply "on-demand"
euthanasia procedures, but in the interest of relieving a suffering
animal, an animal shelter may provide the service for a fee or at no
charge, at its sole discretion.
§ 9-43 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-47
1:62
§ 9-47. Licensing at adoption or redemption from an animal control
shelter or pound.
In addition to any applicable fees required by this chapter for adoption or
redemption:
§ 9-48. Sterilization of animals being adopted.
§ 9-49. Redemption by owner; owner to bear expenses.
A. If a cat or dog being redeemed is currently licensed and registered, the
owner must present the license and registration at the time of
redemption.
B. If a person redeeming a cat or dog resides in the State of New Jersey
and does not present proof of a current license and registration at the
time of redemption, he or she must sign a statement indicating an
understanding that the pound will forward information about the
redemption, including but not limited to the owner's name, address,
phone number, e-mail address and animal description, to the
municipality in which the redeemer resides. The municipality in which
the owner resides may use this information to contact the owner about
obtaining a license for the cat or dog.
C. This provision shall not apply to a sponsor or community cat caregiver
redeeming an ear-tipped community cat.
A. An animal adopted, transferred or given away from any animal control
facility, animal shelter or rescue organization or private individual in
Camden County seeking to adopt, transfer, exchange, foster, give away
or otherwise find a home for homeless or unwanted animals, shall be
sterilized by a veterinarian prior to the adoption. The animal shelter or
rescue organization may require the new pet owner to pay for the cost
of sterilization.
B. This requirement shall not apply when a veterinarian determines that
sterilization would endanger the animal's health due to its age,
infirmity, disability or illness. In such case, the owner or adopter shall
sign a written agreement that sterilization shall be performed as soon
as health permits, or the veterinarian shall provide a written statement
indicating that sterilization is not advised due to age or other concerns.
A. The owner of any animal, be it domestic, exotic, wild or farm animal,
that is apprehended or impounded by animal control or police, is
responsible for any damages or expenses pertaining to it.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the owner of any
apprehended or impounded animal may redeem the animal upon
payment to the impounding shelter of expenses or damages pertaining
to the animal including, but not limited to:
(1) An intake and/or reclaim fee for each animal redeemed;
§ 9-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-49
1:63
§ 9-50. "Adoption fee" option for unaltered cats and dogs
impounded for being at-large.
In lieu of paying the fees associated with impound (itemized above in
Subsection B(1) through (4) in § 9-49 (Redemption by owner; owner to
bear expenses), an owner or caregiver reclaiming an unaltered cat or dog
that was impounded for being at-large can choose to pay the equivalent of
the municipality's or pound's adoption fee for dogs or cats. The adoption
fee includes spaying/neutering, microchip, applicable vaccines, and a
heartworm test.
§ 9-51. Habitual nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any person having temporary custody,
of an animal or animals to permit the animal(s), either willfully or through
failure to exercise due care or control, to commit a habitual nuisance as
defined in § 9-1 of this chapter.
§ 9-52. Noxious odors.
No person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or in custody or charge
of any dog or cat shall cause, suffer, permit or allow the accumulation of
dog or cat feces or droppings upon his or her property or upon property
(2) A boarding/maintenance fee, not to exceed $_______, per animal,
per day;3
(3) All veterinary charges, drug and medical expenses and other
expenses for the care or treatment of the animal;
(4) The cost of microchip implantation and a rabies vaccine, if
applicable;
(5) The cost of license and registration, if applicable;
(6) All outstanding fines and final judgments, except for any fine of
which a timely appeal is pending.
C. At the request of the owner the impounding shelter shall provide an
itemized list of charges.
(1) If the owner or caregiver chooses to pay the equivalent of the adoption
fee the owner or caregiver is still responsible for paying the fees
itemized in Subsections B(5) and (6) in § 9-49 "Redemption by owner;
owner to bear expenses."
(2) If an owner or caregiver chooses to reclaim his/her unaltered cat or
dog, and if that animal is picked up for being at-large 3 times in a
calendar year, the animal is declared a public nuisance and neutering,
at the owner's expense, becomes mandatory.
3. Editor's Note: The fee shall be established by the Borough.
§ 9-49 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-52
1:64
occupied by him or her to the extent that the odor may be noticeable to
any adjoining property owner or owners or that it creates or results in
an attraction for vermin breeding or any other public health nuisance to
adjoining property owners and neighbors.
§ 9-53. Tethering of dogs.
§ 9-54. Controlling poisonous substances.
A. It is unlawful to chain or tether unneutered dogs in any manner and/or
at any time within the Borough of Merchantville.
B. Neutered dogs may be tethered under the following circumstances:
(1) The tether must be at least 15 feet long and have operative swivel
on both ends, weigh no more than l/8 of the dog's weight and be
attached to a properly fitting collar or harness.
(2) The collar used for tethering may not be a choke chain collar, slip
collar or prong collar. The tether must allow the dog access to
proper shelter, sufficient food and sufficient water.
(3) The tether may not be used in any area where it may become
tangled around objects, such as, but not limited to, a tree, pole,
fence, or stake.
(4) The tether cannot inhibit the movement of the animal's limbs or
cause injury, harm, entanglement or strangulation.
(5) The tether must restrain the dog within the bounds of the owner's
or caregiver's property.
(6) The tether must terminate no less than five feet from any fence,
pool, wall, vehicle, tree, or other object or obstruction upon which
any animal may harm itself.
(7) Dogs may be tethered for no more than four consecutive hours in
any twenty-four hour period of time and never between sunset and
sunrise.
C. When a violation of this provision occurs, an animal control officer or
law enforcement officer is authorized to document the circumstances
and evidence, take reasonable measures to remove the animal from the
tether, take the tether as evidence, and take the animal to the pound.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or negligently place or
leave any poison or poisonous substances injurious to domestic animals
in any place accessible to domestic animals or to recklessly or
negligently expose any non-vermin animal to poison or poisonous
substances. Nothing in this section is intended to address the
unintentional poisoning of an animal due to the animal's ingestion of
plants that are naturally growing, potted or part of a maintained
landscape, nor shall it include unintentional poisoning of an animal due
§ 9-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-54
1:65
§ 9-55. Potentially dangerous dogs.
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog or dogs, either male or
female, within the boundaries of the Borough of Merchantville who has been
adjudicated to be a "potentially dangerous dog" by the Municipal Court of
the Borough of Merchantville, or by any Court of competent jurisdiction
within the State of New Jersey, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-24, shall apply
for and procure from the Borough Clerk a license and official red metal
registration tag for such dog and pay for the said license a fee as directed
in § 9-16F of this chapter. Additionally, the applicant shall also pay any
additional fee or fees imposed by statute for the benefit of a special fund or
funds, pertaining to dogs, such fee or fees to be disposed of as provided by
statute.
§ 9-56. Keeping of livestock and fowl prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, stable,
breed or quarter livestock or fowl as defined in § 9-1 of this chapter within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Merchantville. This term shall not
include the keeping of cats, dogs or other domestic animals within the limits
of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 9-56.1. Chickens permitted. [Added 9-12-16 by Ord. No. 2016-12;
amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 9-56 of this chapter, the keeping of
backyard chickens shall be permitted in the Borough of Merchantville
subject to the rules and regulations as specified in §§ 9-56.1 through 9-56.5
of this chapter.
§ 9-56.2. Location; number restricted. [Added 9-12-16 by Ord. No.
2016-12; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
to the animal's ingestion of bugs, reptiles, and other animals. For the
purposes of this section, "recklessly" shall mean that a reasonable
person should have known under the given circumstances that he or
she was exposing the animal to poison or a poisonous substance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed an animal any controlled
substance without the authorization of a veterinarian, or to impair the
physical condition of an animal by non-therapeutic administration of a
drug or narcotic not legally permitted or licensed for the purpose for
which it is administered. This provision does not apply to animal control
officers or veterinarians in the performance of their duties.
A. The following shall be eligible to the keep backyard chickens in the
Borough of Merchantville, subject to the rules and regulations as
specified in §§ 9-56.1 through 9-56.5 of this chapter: residents of singlefamily
homes or residents of "twin" homes or "row" homes which meet
the criteria set forth in this section.
§ 9-54 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-56.2
1:66
§ 9-56.3. Chicken license required; fee; term; classes. [Added
9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
19-07]
Consistent with the provisions of this chapter, no person shall keep chickens
on his/her property without first obtaining a license from the Borough
Clerk's office and paying the required fee therefor. No license shall be
issued unless the applicant therefor has demonstrated compliance with all
criteria set forth in this section.
B. Any household issued a license for the keeping of backyard chickens
prior to the adoption of this amendment shall retain said license. Any
other household wanting to participate may be considered on an
individual basis by the Chicken Advisory Board established pursuant to
§ 9-57 in conjunction with the liaison to the governing body.
C. There shall be a limit of eight chickens per license. No roosters are
permitted.
D. The coop and enclosed run shall not exceed six feet in height and be
kept at least 10 feet from the habitable portion of the neighboring
residential dwelling. Garages, attached or otherwise, and accessory
buildings shall not be considered a "residential dwelling" for purposes
of calculating the required distance. Chickens may roam outside of the
coop area in a backyard suitably fenced to keep them contained,
provided that a person age 18 or older is present the entire time.
A. An annual fee of $25 shall be paid for each license issued under this
section for one to eight chickens. Licenses shall be renewed annually
and shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year.
B. The applicant must reside on the property in which the chickens subject
to the license are to be housed. If applicant is a renter and/or tenant
and/or occupier of the property where chickens are to be housed, the
applicant must have completed the "Property Owner/Landlord
Permission Affidavit" portion of the license application, properly
executed by the property owner or landlord and duly notarized.
C. A new licensee, who was maintaining chickens at the time of the
passage of this section, may be issued a license for more than the
permitted number of chickens to allow such person(s) to come into
compliance with this section through the natural expiration of their
chickens.
D. No license shall be issued unless the applicant desiring to keep
backyard chickens has taken a class on the basics of raising backyard
chickens acceptable to the Chicken Advisory Board. Proof of completion
of such class must be presented with the completed application. The
Chicken Advisory Board will provide a class or refer the applicant to an
acceptable backyard chicken keeping class as needed. A member of the
§ 9-56.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-56.3
1:67
§ 9-56.4. Requirements for coops; slaughter of chickens; waste.
[Added 9-12-16 by Ord. No. 2016-12; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
19-07]
The following regulations and conditions for the keeping and housing of
chickens shall be complied with:
§ 9-56.5. Chicken Advisory Board; complaints. [Added 9-12-16 by
Ord. No. 2016-12; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
Chicken Advisory Board will review the application with the applicant
prior to final submission.
A. The coop shall be the appropriate size for the number of chickens.
B. The coop shall be dry and well-ventilated with windows to admit
sunlight.
C. The coop must be kept clean.
D. The coop and enclosed run must be made predator-proof.
E. Clean water must be provided, and food must be kept tightly closed in a
metal container away from the coop and run at night.
F. The yard in the area where the coop is located shall be clean and free
from odors.
G. There shall be no slaughter of chickens in Merchantville.
H. Waste will be handled in such a way as proper composting to prevent
offensive odors or disposed in an environmentally friendly manner.
I. There shall be no selling of eggs.
A. A Chicken Advisory Board consisting of five members of the community
shall be formed and maintained. The Chair and members of this Board
will be appointed to a two-year term by the Mayor, with advice and
consent of Borough Council. The Chair and Board members shall select
the Vice Chair and Secretary of the Board. The Board shall meet on a
regular basis and keep minutes, which shall be submitted along with
quarterly reports to the Borough Council. These reports will include
any activities of the Board, as well as any complaints from residents
concerning backyard chickens and the resolution, if any, of those
complaints.
B. When a complaint is received by the Borough, it will be forwarded to
the Board for investigation by the Board. If the Board finds a violation of
this chapter, solutions will be discussed with the offending resident to
allow him/her to meet the requirements of this chapter as soon as
possible. However, if, after 15 days, the violation has not been
remedied, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer will be notified so
that enforcement proceedings can be implemented. The Chicken
§ 9-56.3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 9-56.5
1:68
§ 9-56.6. Revocation of chicken license; appeals. [Added 9-12-16 by
Ord. No. 2016-12; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-07]
Subject to the provisions of § 9-56.5B of this chapter, the Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby empowered to revoke the license held by any person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter. A licensee may appeal the
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer revoking his/her license to the
Chicken Advisory Board, by filing an appeal, in writing, to the Chicken
Advisory Board within five days of the effective date of the license
revocation. Within 10 days of its receipt of such an appeal, the Chicken
Advisory Board shall schedule a hearing to determine if the license issued
under this chapter should be reinstated. Notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served, in writing, upon the licensee. The Chicken
Advisory Board shall only reinstate the license issued under this chapter
upon proof by the licensee that the violation(s) of the provision(s) of this
chapter have been cured.
§ 9-57. Violations; penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for
penalties or any combination thereof as set forth in § 1-9 of the Code of the
Borough of Merchantville, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court before whom such violation is heard and conviction made. Each day
that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation,
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 12
BICYCLES
§ 12-1. Equipment required for nighttime operation. [Amended
5-27-1997]
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to rear. In addition to the
red lamp, a red reflector may be mounted on the rear which shall be visible
from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front
of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
§ 12-2. (Reserved)4
Advisory Board will assist anyone desiring to no longer participate in
the backyard chicken program to relocate his/her chickens.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 12-2, Equipment required for night operation, was repealed
5-27-1997.
§ 9-56.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:69
§ 12-3. Audible signal required. [Amended 5-27-1997]
No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet,
except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
§ 12-4. Fancy riding prohibited.
The rider of any bicycle shall not allow the same to proceed in any street
by inertia momentum, with his feet removed from the pedals, nor shall such
rider remove both hands from the handlebars while riding the bicycle nor
practice or perform any trick or fancy riding in any street or highway of
the Borough of Merchantville, nor shall be carry upon his bicycle any other
person.
§ 12-5. Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk provided that nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed or construed to prevent the use of velocipedes or
similar machines by children on any sidewalk.
§ 12-6. Hitching rides prohibited. [Amended 5-27-1997]
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skates, sled or toy vehicle shall
attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway and no operator
of any vehicle shall knowingly allow person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,
skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to the vehicle.
§ 12-7. (Reserved)5
§ 12-8. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 21 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency only.
§ 12-9. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon due passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 13
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
5. Editor's Note: Former § 12-7, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 12-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 12-9
1:70
ARTICLE I
Board of Health
[Adopted 7-5-1892]
§ 13-1. Establishment; authority.
There shall be a Board of Health established in the Borough of
Merchantville organized in accordance with the provisions of the Act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act to establish in this
State a Board of Health, and a Bureau of Vital Statistics, and to define their
respective powers and duties," approved March 31, 1887.6
§ 13-2. Terms of office. [Amended 5-11-1931]
Said Board shall be composed of five members, residents of the borough,
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by Borough Council. The members
of the Board of Health first appointed in pursuance of this Article shall hold
their office as follows: one until December 31, 1931, two until December
31, 1932, and the remaining members, until December 31, 1933: provided,
however, that except to fill an unexpired term, all appointments thereafter
shall be for the term of three years or until their successors are appointed
and qualified. If any vacancy shall occur in said Board by reason of the
resignation, death or inability of a member to fulfill the duties of his office,
or his removal from the borough, such vacancy shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor, confirmed by Borough Council, but for the
unexpired term only.
§ 13-3. Nomination of members. [Amended 5-11-1931]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor, at the organization meeting of the borough
in each year, or at the next regular meeting thereafter, to nominate to
Borough Council the names of persons to fill vacancies caused by the
expiration of the terms of any member or members of said Board; provided,
however, that nominations to fill vacancies for an unexpired term may be
made at any time.
§ 13-4. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
6. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1947, c. 177. See N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4
1:71

ARTICLE II
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 2-9-1942]
§ 13-5. Establishment. [Amended 1-26-1970; 2-27-1989]
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental tree
and shrubbery upon and on the streets, highways, public places, parks and
parkways of the Borough of Merchantville shall hereafter be exercised by
a Commission consisting of seven residents of the borough which shall be
known as the "Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Merchantville."
The members of such Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor or other
chief executive officer of the borough within 60 days after this Article shall
become effective and shall serve without compensation.
§ 13-6. Terms of office. [Amended 1-26-1970]
The terms of office of the Commissioners first appointed shall commence
upon the day of their appointment and be for the respective periods of
three, four and five years from January 1 next succeeding such
appointment, the terms of each appointee to be designated in his
appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall
be for the full term of five years, to take effect on January 1. Any vacancy
occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor or other
chief executive officer.
§ 13-6.1. New members. [Added 1-26-1970; amended 2-27-1989]
The purpose of this amendment is to increase the Shade Tree Commission
from five to seven members. This amendment is not intended nor should
be construed or interpreted as revoking the appointments of the members
currently serving or in altering their terms of office. One of the new
appointees shall be appointed for a term of four years and the other new
appointee shall be appointed for a term of five years from January 1 next
succeeding such appointments. The terms of each appointee shall be
designated in his appointment and shall be for such a period of time that the
appointee's term shall not expire on the same date as any member currently
serving or the other appointee.
§ 13-7. Organization.
Such Commission shall organize, within 30 days after the appointment of its
total membership, for the remainder of this calendar year, and thereafter
annually by the election of one of its members as President and the
appointment of a Secretary, who need not be a member.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-8
1:73
§ 13-8. Authorization.
Such Commission shall exercise the powers conferred and perform the
duties imposed upon it by Chapter 64 of Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated of the State of New Jersey of 1937 (N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to 40:64-14),
as amended and supplemented, and the funds to be used by said
Commission shall be raised in the manner provided by said act, its
supplements and amendments.
§ 13-9. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon due passage and publication according to
law.
§ 13-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 13-9
1:74
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)7
§ 13-10. through § 13-14. (Reserved)
7. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Board of Assessments, adopted 6-9-1930, was repealed
5-27-1997.
§ 13-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-10
1:75
Chapter 14
BRUSH, WEEDS AND TREES
§ 14-1. Duty to remove or abate.
§ 14-2. Notice; personal service.
The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his designee, shall serve
written notice upon any such person described in Section 14-1, describing
the condition of the premises and demanding that the condition be abated
within 10 days of receipt of said notice, or an appropriate Complaint shall
be filed in violation of this chapter, subjecting said person, upon conviction,
to a fine not to exceed $500.00.
§ 14-3. Notice; alternate service by posting.
In the event that personal service cannot be made because the owner or
agent is not a resident of the Borough of Merchantville, or in the event that
service by Certified Mail is unaccepted, then the Director of the Department
of Public Works or his designee shall post said notice in a conspicuous place
on the premises.
§ 14-4. Removal or abatement by Borough.
Where the owner, tenant or other person set forth in Section 14-1 above,
shall have refused and neglected to remove or destroy any such brush,
weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage,
trash or debris within 10 days after receipt of notice to remove or destroy
the same, or upon the expiration of ten days following posting of notice as
provided in Section 14-3 above, the Director of the Department of Public
A. Whenever it shall be deemed for the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard, the Director of the
Department of Public Works, or his designee, shall require any owner,
tenant, occupant, managing agent, executor, administrator, or other
similar person, to remove or destroy brush, weeds (including ragweed),
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage,
trash and debris, within 10 days after receipt of notice to remove or
destroy the same.
B. No person shall cause any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash or debris, to be removed
from the property of said owner upon any city or county right of way or
easement or upon neighboring property. All such obnoxious growth and
debris shall be collected and either removed from the premises or
accumulated in trash cans, bags or other similar containers, for
removal by any appropriate sanitation service, the property shall be
cleared within the entire perimeter of the property, and extend to the
curb or gutter line of the adjoining roadway, as the case may be.
§ 13-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 14-4
1:76
Works, or his designee, shall cause same to be removed, at the expense of
the owner, tenant, occupant, managing agent, executor, administrator, or
other similar person, as the case may be.
§ 14-5. Lien by Borough for services rendered.
In all cases where such conditions are abated by the Director of the
Department of Public Works, this Director or his designee shall certify the
cost thereof to the Council of the Borough of Merchantville, which shall
examine the certificate, and if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against said land. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such land and shall be added to and become a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced
by the Borough of Merchantville Tax Collector.
§ 14-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 15
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 15-1. Construction Code Department.
A. Any owner, tenant, occupant, managing agent, executor, administrator
or other similar person who shall have refused or neglected to remove
or destroy any such brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash or debris, after service of the 10
day notice as herein provided, or any person who violates any provision
of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, upon
conviction in the Borough of Merchantville Municipal Court.
B. The imposition and collection of a fine imposed hereunder, shall not bar
the right of the Borough of Merchantville to collect the cost of removal
in the manner as permitted herein, or by summary action, in a court of
law, and the remedy herein provided shall be cumulative.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Merchantville a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Merchantville Construction Code Department," consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
§ 14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:77
§ 15-2. Construction Official.
§ 15-3. Subcode officials.
amended (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1, provided
that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection
agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.
More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq. to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
A. Creation. There is hereby created in the Borough the office of
Construction Official, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council.
B. Term. The Construction Official shall be appointed for a term of four
years in accordance with Section 8 of the Uniform Construction Code
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126).
C. Duties. The Construction Official is the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency as defined in the Act and shall have the powers, duties
and obligations as provided in the Act and the code.
D. Qualifications of the person appointed to the office of Construction
Official shall be as required in the Act and the code.
A. Creation. There are hereby created the following subcode official
positions, which shall be filled by appointment by the Borough Council:
(1) Building Subcode Official.
(2) Electrical Subcode Official.
(3) Plumbing Subcode Official.
(4) Fire Protection Subcode Official.
(5) Other such inspectors shall include Energy Official,
Premanufactured Home Official and Asbestos Official.
B. Term. The subcode officials shall be appointed for terms of four years.
C. Duties. The subcode officials shall have the powers, duties and
obligations as provided in the Act and the code. The subcode officials
need not work exclusively for the enforcing agency. The subcode
officials shall be primarily responsible to the Construction Official.
D. Qualifications. The subcode officials shall possess those qualifications
which are required in the Act and the code. An individual may serve as a
subcode official under one or more subcodes, provided that such
individual is so qualified.
§ 15-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 15-4
1:78
§ 15-4. Construction Board of Appeals.
A person who is aggrieved by any ruling, action, order, or decision of a
local enforcing agency that enforces either the State Uniform Construction
Code or the Uniform Fire Code, including, without limitation, any refusal
to grant an application or failure or refusal to act upon an application, may
file an application for a hearing with the Secretary of the Camden County
Construction Board of Appeals in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23A-2.1 et seq.
§ 15-5. Enforcing agency center; central permit office.
§ 15-6. Responsibility of personnel to Construction Official.
All personnel appointed in accordance with the Act and the code are
primarily responsible to the Construction Official and are subject to the
procedures and policies of the enforcing agency as defined in the Act. Dayto-
day procedures which are necessary to coordinate personnel so as to
enable the enforcing agency to perform within the provisions of the Act and
the code shall be established by the Construction Official.
§ 15-7. Prior approvals.
The issuance of a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall
be conditioned upon the prior approvals, as such term is defined and
enumerated in N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.4, and the following approvals:
§ 15-8. Permit required; collection of fee prior to issuance of
permit.
A permit shall be required for all construction except for ordinary repairs
as provided for in Section 5:23-2.7 of the State Uniform Construction Code
which do not violate any of the regulations. The fees for such permits shall
be as hereinafter provided and shall be collected prior to the issuance of the
permit.
A. The public shall have the right to do business under the Act and the
code at one enforcing agency center known and designated as the
"Borough of Merchantville, Borough Hall, 1 West Maple Avenue,
Merchantville, New Jersey 08109."
B. The central permit office shall be located at the above enforcing agency
center and shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the Act
and the code.
A. Merchantville Borough Engineer;
B. Camden County Department of Health;
C. Merchantville Sewer Utility; and
D. Merchantville/Pennsauken Water Commission.
§ 15-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-8
1:79
Chapter 16
BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
§ 16-1. Officer designated to exercise powers.
The Chairman of the Committee of Public Safety be and he is hereby
designated as the public officer to exercise powers prescribed by this
chapter and by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
§ 16-2. Causes for determination.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he finds that such conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such buildings, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of such municipality. Such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; and uncleanliness.
§ 16-3. Powers of public officer.
The public officer may exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of
this chapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:
§ 16-4. Service of orders or complaints.
Complaints or orders issued by said public officer shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered mail or if the whereabouts of
such person is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained, then the
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The officer,
agent and employee to whom the powers and functions of the public
officer have been delegated are hereby authorized to exercise the
powers contained in § 16-3 A, B and C.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 15-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 16-4
1:80
serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by
publishing the same once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the county and circulating in the
borough. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the
County Clerk.
§ 16-5. Procedure upon receipt of petition.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority,
or by at least five (5) residents of the municipality, charging that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it
appears to the public officer, on his own motion, that any building is unfit
for human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in, such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a
place therein fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days
after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ 16-6. Determination in writing.
§ 16-7. Compliance required; failure to comply.
A. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof, and parties in interest, an order requiring the repair, alteration
or improvement of the said building to be made by the owner, within a
reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order or at the
option of the owner to vacate or have the said building vacated and
closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on
§ 16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-7
1:81
§ 16-8. Disposition of costs incurred.
§ 16-9. Severability.
In the event that any provision or provisions of this chapter, as applied to
any persons or circumstances, is held to be invalid, the remaining provisions
of the ordinance and the application of such provisions to persons or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be
affected thereby.
the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
municipality, and the cost of the repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the
cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
public officer, shall be secured in such a manner as may be directed by
such court and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of
the court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may within sixty (60) days from the date of filing of the lien certificate
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
§ 16-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 16-10
1:82
§ 16-10. Definitions.
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this chapter shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Merchantville charged
with governing the municipality.
OWNER — The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in possession
thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the Borough of
Merchantville, County of Camden, State of New Jersey, relating to health,
fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the
Borough of Merchantville.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer or officers who are authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter.
§ 16-11. Repealer; when effective.
Ordinance No. 236 and Ordinance No. 300 are hereby repealed, and this
chapter shall take effect upon due passage and publication according to law.
Chapter 18
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
§ 18-1. Form of claims.8
All bills or claims against the borough shall be in writing, fully itemized and
duly certified by the person claiming payment that it is correct and must be
presented on such voucher forms as provided by the borough.
§ 18-2. Certification.
No claims, bills or demands shall be considered for payment unless the
voucher or bill includes a certification by a designated borough employee,
agent and/or Councilperson who may be accountable therefor that the
goods were received in good order and that the services were satisfactorily
rendered to the Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey, and that these goods
and services are consistent with agreed-to specifications and price.
8. Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., as amended.
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:83
§ 18-3. Submission to Clerk.
Any person claiming demand from the borough must present such duly
certified claim (voucher) to the Borough Clerk on or before the Thursday
preceding the second Monday of the month in order to be considered for
approval/payment at the formal meeting of the Borough Council on the
second Monday of each month, which shall be the only meeting during
the month at which bills will be approved for payment. During December,
bills will be approved for payment at each Borough Council meeting held
on the second and fourth Mondays. In emergency situations, bills may be
approved for payment at other formal meetings of the Borough Council
upon a resolution approved by majority of the entire membership of the
Borough Council.
§ 18-4. Examination and review of claims.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to examine all bills or claims
submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper administrative
procedures have been followed. Each such bill or claim shall then be
carefully reviewed, checked and approved for budget charges and
classification by or under the direction of the borough official or department
head responsible for the budget item affected.
§ 18-5. Compliance with Rules of Council; auditing and
recommendations.
All purchases of goods and services resulting in claims for payment must
adhere to the formally approved Rules of Council of the Borough of
Merchantville. The Treasurer-Collector shall be responsible for auditing and
making recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 18-6. Review and approval by Director of Accounts and Auditing.
§ 18-7. Approval or rejection by Council.
Vouchers (claims) shall be considered by the Council, which may approve
the same, except that said Council may reject any claim presented to it,
stating the reason for such rejection. Any tie vote may be broken by vote of
A. Bills or claims previously approved by the respective department heads
shall then be presented to the Director of Accounts and Auditing or, in
his absence, the Director of Finance for review and approval. After such
approval is given, the claims shall be filed with the Borough Treasurer
who shall then present these claims to the Council at the regular formal
meeting held on the second Monday of each month. (See § 18-3 of this
chapter.)
B. Vouchers not approved by the Director of Accounts and Auditing will be
discussed with the respective department director and, if need be, with
the Council for resolution.
§ 18-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 18-7
1:84
the Mayor. Any rejected claim shall be referred back to the Borough Clerk
with such instructions as the Council may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 18-8. Recording.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes, indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved
the same, with appropriate records as to any claims disapproved or
rejected. The Borough Treasurer shall record all claims in an appropriate
claims register.
§ 18-9. Authorization for payment.
Authorization to issue the checks and pay the amount of approved vouchers
shall be by resolution of the Borough Council. The Director of Accounts and
Auditing or, in his absence, the Director of Finance shall sign a listing of all
vouchers approved for payment indicating he has examined and approved
same.
§ 18-10. Payroll procedures.
With regard to payroll, the appropriate department head or such other
officer or employee as may be designated by resolution of the Council shall
prepare the necessary time vouchers for all employees, which payroll shall
be duly certified by the person authorized to certify that the services have
been rendered and the amount specified is in fact due and owing to the
employee. Said payroll, after approval by the department head responsible
therefor, shall be paid in due course.
§ 18-11. Preparation of checks; payment.
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the Treasurer (Collector) who shall forthwith prepare
the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which checks shall be signed
by the Mayor or, in his absence, the President of the Borough Council
and thereafter signed by the Treasurer (Collector). After preparing checks
for the payment of claims, he shall thereafter dispose the checks to the
claimants.
§ 18-12. Filing; availability for public inspection.
All bills, vouchers and paid checks shall be filed in a safe place and be made
available for public inspection whenever requested, but in the presence of a
borough official.
Chapter 18A
CRANE OPERATION AND LICENSING
§ 18-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18A-1
1:85
§ 18A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSION — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — Shall be defined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through
45:26-17 (Licensure of Crane Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the
Crane Operator Licensure Act and the 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in
Construction also known as OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC) lattice boom truck cranes
(LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab), Tower
cranes and Overhead cranes.
§ 18A-2. General Requirements.
A. Five (5) days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the Borough of
Merchantville, a permit shall be obtained. In emergent situations the
Construction Code Official may waive this requirement in his or her
own discretion if the operator meets the balance of the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The permit will be maintained with the Borough of Merchantville as
well as with the crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be
produced on the work site when requested.
C. The following documents must first be provided to the Borough of
Merchantville in order to be granted a permit:
(1) Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO); or
§ 18A-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 18A-2
1:86
§ 18A-3. Registration of cranes; crane inspection; licensure of crane
operators pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7.
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP); or
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification;
(2) New Jersey Crane License;
(3) Current Medical Examiner's Card;
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection; (Crane
owner);
(5) Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily Injury:
[i] For any one (1) person in the amount of $500,000.00;
[ii] For any occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000.00.
(b) Property Damage:
[i] For any one (1) accident in the amount of $500,000.00;
[ii] For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of
$2,000,000.00.
(6) Proof that crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program;
(7) Proof of completion of Signal Person Qualification or Certification
course;
(8) Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this section, the Construction Code
Official shall issue or deny the requested permit within five (5)
business days. If the application is denied the reasons for the denial
are furnished to the application in writing.
A. No person shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself for
employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act,
present or represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as
such under the provisions of this chapter.
B. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
(TLL, Swing Cab) & (TSS, Fixed Cab), Tower cranes and Overhead
cranes.
C. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the Borough of
Merchantville, an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
§ 18A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18A-3
1:87
§ 18A-4. Fee schedule.
The permit fee for each crane shall be five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Each
permit is valid for sixty (60) days and may be extended and/or renewed
provided that compliance with the requirements of this chapter continues
to be met. Fee for an extended or renewal permit is two hundred, fifty
($250.00) dollars for each sixty-day extension.
§ 18A-5. Notification of accident or safety issue - required.
The owner of the building shall immediately notify the Borough of
Merchantville of every accident causing personal injury or damage to
property involving a construction crane covered by this chapter and shall
afford the municipal official every facility for investigating such accident.
When an accident involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction
of any part of the apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device until
after an examination by the Borough of Merchantville is made and approval
of the equipment for continued use is granted. It shall be the duty of the
Borough of Merchantville to make a prompt examination into the cause of
the accident and to enter a full and complete report thereof in the records
of the Borough of Merchantville. Such records shall be open for public
inspection during regular business hours.
§ 18A-6. Safety equipment - required.
(1) Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies;
(3) Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience; and
(4) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
D. The crane operator should reside in the Borough of Merchantville. If
not, the crane operator should reside in Camden County. The crane
operator shall reside in New Jersey.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to property working order.
§ 18A-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 18A-6
1:88
§ 18A-7. Administration; enforcement.
§ 18A-8. Unsafe cranes.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Mayor and/or
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville must be adhered to at
all times.
D. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee if such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include but not be limited to all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and breaking mechanisms.
E. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
Borough of Merchantville. Attached to such record of inspection shall
be a written designation naming the competent employee or authorized
agent. Such attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee
of such.
F. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
G. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
A. The Mayor and/or Borough Council may issue rules and regulations for
the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Official or any other law enforcement officer within the Borough
of Merchantville.
A. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate
maintenance shall be deemed in unsafe condition by the Municipal
Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or removed or made
safe, as the Municipal Engineer deems necessary and as provided for in
this section.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
C. If an unsafe condition is found, the Municipal Engineer shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the crane, a written notice that
describes the condition being unsafe and specifies the required repairs
or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition. Such notice
§ 18A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18A-8
1:89
§ 18A-9. Violations; penalties.
Chapter 19
CURFEW
§ 19-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of the Curfew Ordinance the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the presence tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the
Municipal Engineer exceptions or rejection of the terms of the order.
D. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy is delivered to the
owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to
the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested.
If a certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter has
not been delivered, a copy shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
on the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the crane shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
E. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Municipal Engineer may
be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or
additions are made during restoration of such equipment, such repairs,
alterations or additions shall comply with all applicable codes.
F. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
an order to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with Section 18A-9 of this chapter.
A. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars and
no more than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars for each violation. Each
day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars nor more than twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars
for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 18A-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 19-1
1:90
JUVENILE OR MINOR — Juvenile or minor is any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT — Parent is any person having legal custody of a juvenile (i) as
a natural or adoptive parent, (ii) as a legal guardian, (iii) as a person who
stands in loco parentis or (iv) as a person to whom legal custody has been
given by order of court.
PUBLIC PLACE — Public place means any place to which the public has
access, including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public
transportation facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or
any other public building, structure or area.
REMAIN — Remain means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily
upon any public place, including the congregating of groups (or of
interacting minors) totaling four or more persons in which any juvenile
involved would not be using the public places for ordinary or serious
purposes such as mere passage or going home or shopping or engaging
in specific Borough, school or church sponsored activities. To implement
that thought with additional precision and precaution, numerous exceptions
are expressly defined in this chapter so that this is not a mere prohibit
or presence type curfew ordinance. More and more exceptions become
available with increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in
the interest of reasonable regulation.
TIME OF NIGHT — Time of night referred to herein is based upon the
prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
Borough, prima facie the time then observed in the Borough Administrative
Offices and police station.
YEARS OF AGE — Years of age continues from one birthday, such as
the seventeenth to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the
eighteenth birthday, making it clear that seventeen or less years treated as
equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen years of age."
§ 19-2. Curfew for Juveniles.
It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be or
remain in or upon the public places within the Borough of Merchantville at
night during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
§ 19-3. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases, a minor located upon a public place
during the nocturnal hours for minors, their parents and their fellowcitizens
shall not, however, be considered in violation of this chapter.
A. At 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday nights, and
B. At 10:00 p.m. on all other nights.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:91
§ 19-4. Parental Responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to be or remain upon
any public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or
otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term "knowingly" includes
knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning
the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody. It is intended
to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. In case of reasonable necessity for the juvenile remaining upon the
public places but only after the juvenile's parent has communicated to
the Chief of Police or the person designated by the Chief of Police to
receive such notifications the facts establishing the reasonable
necessity relating to specified public places at a designated time for a
described purpose including points of origin and destination. A copy of
the communication, or of the police record thereof, duly certified by the
Police Department to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the
time it was received and of the names and addresses of the parent and
juvenile, shall be admissible evidence.
D. When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides, or on either side of or across the street from the place where
the juvenile resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has
given permission for the juvenile to be there.
E. When returning home from and within one (1) hour after the
termination of a school or Borough sponsored activity, or an activity of a
religious or other voluntary association.
F. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. It is the intention of this provision to
clearly exempt bona fide interstate movements along major routes
through Merchantville Borough and interstate travel beginning or
ending in Merchantville Borough.
G. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations such as
provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided but
here reemphasized will be considered by Borough Council as warranted
by future experience illuminated by the views of student government
associations, school personnel, citizens, associations, parents, officers
and person in authority concerned positively with juveniles as well as
with juvenile delinquency.
§ 19-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 19-4
1:92
shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to
the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
§ 19-5. Enforcement Procedure.
A. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a parent, or
guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances, for
example, a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and address
may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. In any event the police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written
report with the Chief of Police or shall participate to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible in the preparation of a report on
the curfew violation. It is not the intention of this section to require
incident reports that will prevent police officers from performing their
primary police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably
possible and may be completed by police departmental personnel other
than sworn police officers.
C. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the
extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance
by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an
adult, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility for caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
D. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the Chief of Police shall by
certified mail, send to a parent or guardian, written notice of the
violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full
enforcement of this chapter, including enforcement of parental
responsibility and of applicable penalties.
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is upon the public
place in violation of this chapter, the officer shall notify the juvenile that
he or she is in violation of this chapter and shall require the juvenile to
provide his or her name, address and telephone number and how to
contact his or parent or guardian.
B. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convicting
evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer shall, in the first
instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
C. The normal procedure shall then be to take the juvenile to the police
station where a parent or guardian shall immediately be notified to
come for the juvenile whereupon they shall be questioned. This is
intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:93
§ 19-6. Halloween.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, it shall
be unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon the
public places of the Borough of Merchantville after the hour of 7:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, on the 29th day of October, the 30th day of October, and the
31st day of October, until 6:00 a.m. the following morning, unless exempted
from this section under Section 19-3 of this chapter.
§ 19-7. Notice.
Notice of the existence of this chapter and the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in, on or at such public and quasi-public
places as may be determined by the Chief of Police, in order that the
public may be constantly informed of the existence of this chapter and its
regulations.
§ 19-8. Penalties.
Any person, as defined in Section 19-1, convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, and
may be required to perform community service of up to 10 days. As provided
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52, whenever both a juvenile and the juvenile's parent or
guardian violate this chapter, they may be required to perform community
service together.
Chapter 19A
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM
§ 19A-1. Eligible positions.
The following positions are deemed to be eligible for and shall participate
in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program:
§ 19A-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the person designated
there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and
uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making available
experienced personnel and access to information and records.
A. Borough Solicitor;
B. Borough Engineer;
C. Members of Merchantville Planning Board.
§ 19-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 19A-2
1:94
§ 19A-3. Implementation of Program.
Chapter 20
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
§ 20-1. Permit required; fee; application.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
A. This chapter shall be implemented, construed and subject to the
aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as
amended from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents
from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
B. Should any part or parts of this chapter be held to be invalid by any
competent court of law, such invalidity shall only affect the part or parts
held to be invalid, and all other parts shall remain in effect.
C. A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions & Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Permit required. [Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-02]
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall remove or demolish or
commence the removal or demolition of any building or structure in
the Borough of Merchantville without first filing with the Building
Inspector an application in writing and obtaining a permit therefor.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Building Inspector shall
determine if a required Certificate of Appropriateness has been
issued by the Historic Preservation Commission as defined in
Article VIIIB of Chapter 94 of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 19A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:95
§ 20-2. Method of demolition. [Amended 1-26-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02]
§ 20-3. Safety measures.
B. There shall be a fee as set forth in Chapter 25, Fees. [Amended
4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
C. The application for the permit shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is not the
fee owner of the property, the name and address of the fee owner. If
the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of a
responsible corporate officer shall appear.
(2) A performance bond guaranteeing completion of demolition in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) A certified statement of the proposed work schedule with the
approximate number of working days required to complete the
work, but in no case in excess of 30 days. Upon application, the
Borough Council, for good cause shown, may extend the maximum
number of days for completion beyond 30 days.
D. [Amended 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-14; Deleted 10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-19]
A. In demolishing any structure or part thereof, story after story shall be
removed in a manner that is practical and consistent with demolition
practices at the time the permit is issued. The Building Inspector shall
approve the method of demolition. In addition to the safety measures as
described in Section 20-3 of this chapter, such approval shall consider
the orientation of the structure to be demolished to nearby structures,
pedestrian walkways and streets; the area available to undertake the
demolition; and consideration of any needed coordination with local
and county authorities relative to pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow
and safety. The material to be removed shall be properly wet to
minimize the dust incident to its removal.
B. Demolition, removal and disposal of building materials and/or other
building site debris shall be in accordance with any and all
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and/or any other State, Federal and/or other agency having
jurisdiction related to the disposal of such materials.
A. When any structure abutting a public street or sidewalk is to be
demolished, an appropriate fence or sidewalk bridge, or both, shall be
provided as required and approved by the Building Inspector.
B. All required sidewalk bridges shall be dustproof and lighted between
sunset and sunrise.
§ 20-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 20-3
1:96
§ 20-4. Procedure following demolition.
When a building has been demolished and no building permit obtained for
another building operation, the lot shall be filled, graded and maintained in
conformity to the established street grades at curb level. The lot shall be
maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish and all other unsafe or
hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public, and
provisions shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to
any foundation on the premises or on private or public property.
§ 20-5. Failure to complete work.
If any demolition contractor fails to complete the work for which a permit
has been issued within 10 days after the expiration of the time period
specified in the statement submitted in support of the permit application
under § 20-1C(3) of this chapter, the Borough Council, after the service
of a three-day written notice, shall declare the contractor in default and
proceed to have the demolition completed by exercising its rights under the
performance bond.
§ 20-6. Insurance.
Any contractor engaged in the demolition of a building or structure or any
part thereof within the Borough of Merchantville shall file with the Borough
Clerk evidence of the contractor's financial responsibility in the form of a
certificate of insurance, specifying demolition purposes. Liability insurance
covering bodily injury to persons with limits of at least $100,000.00 per
person with an aggregate of at least $300,000.00 shall be provided; also,
liability insurance covering property damage of at least $50,000.00 per
accident, with an aggregate of at least $100,000.00, and in addition a
completion of performance bond as called for by § 20-1C(2). The certificate
of insurance shall provide that the borough and its agents shall be saved
harmless from any claim or claims resulting from the operations of the
demolition which are caused by the negligence of the applicant, its agents
or employees.
§ 20-7. (Reserved)9
§ 20-8. Damage to paving.
Curbs, sidewalks and street paving are not to be removed or damaged. Any
broken sidewalks or flagstone pavement that is removed or damaged during
excavation shall be replaced or repaved in a good and workmanlike manner.
C. Safety measures shall be provided for all workmen and there shall be
suitable protection for the general public.
D. No explosives shall be utilized in the demolition of any building or
structure.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 20-7, Utilities, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-8
1:97
The applicant or the person in charge of demolition shall be responsible
at all times for keeping the borough's streets contiguous to the site of
demolition clean of all debris resulting from the operations connected with
demolition. The applicant or the person in charge of demolition shall be
liable for repair and restoration of any public streets which may be damaged
during the course of excavation and shall pay all costs resulting therefrom,
including but not limited to engineering fees.
§ 20-9. Exceptions.
Sections 20-1C(2), 20-6 and 20-7 of this chapter shall not apply to a
residence property owner who personally removes or demolishes a garage,
barn or shed located on his property, provided that said garage, barn or
shed is located at least 25 feet from the sidewalk line, and such demolition
can be accomplished without undue hazards.
§ 20-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, in addition to the remedy provided in § 20-5 hereof, upon conviction
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the
Camden County Jail not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every day on
which any violation exists shall be a separate violation.
§ 20-11. Severability.
If for any reason any section or any part of a section, paragraph or provision
of this chapter shall be questioned in any court and shall be held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not be held to affect any other
section nor any part of a section, paragraph or provision of this chapter.
§ 20-12. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, to the extent
of such inconsistencies, be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 20-13. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon the passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 20A
DONATION CLOTHING BINS
§ 20A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the enforcement of P.L. 2007,
c. 209.
§ 20-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 20A-2
1:98
§ 20A-2. Definitions relative to charitable clothing bins.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 20A-3. Requirements for placement, use of clothing bin for
solicitation purposes.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation
purposes, unless all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The person has obtained a permit, issued by the Borough Clerk's
Office, valid for a specified period of time, from the Borough of
Merchantville in which the donation clothing bin will be placed, in
accordance with the following:
(a) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
[1] The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely
as possible;
[2] The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin would be used,
sold, or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds
of collected donations would be allocated or spent;
[3] The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection A (2) of this section, of
any entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin; and
[4] Written consent from the property owner to place the bin
on his property;
(b) The Borough of Merchantville shall not grant an application for
a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it
determines that the placement of the bin could constitute a
safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to,
the placement of a donation clothing bin within one hundred
(100) yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells,
fuel or other flammable liquids or gases;
(c) The Borough of Merchantville fee for such application, is
twenty-five dollars ($25.) per bin, to offset the costs involved in
enforcing Chapter 20A of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville entitled "Donation Clothing Bins," pursuant to
P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C. 40:48-2.60 et seq.);
§ 20A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20A-3
1:99
(d) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed
by the Borough of Merchantville for such renewal, not to
exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.) annually, to offset the costs
involved in enforcing Chapter 20A of the Code of the Borough
of Merchantville entitled "Donation Clothing Bins," pursuant to
P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C. 40:48-2.60 et seq.). Such application shall
include:
[1] The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as
possible, and, if the person intends to move it, the new
location where the bin would be situated after the renewal
is granted and written consent from the property owner to
place the bin on his property;
[2] The manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations have been allocated or spent, and any changes
the person anticipates it may make in these processes
during the period covered by the renewal; and
[3] The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section, of any
entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which
may do so during the period covered by the renewal; and
(e) The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly
and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation
clothing bin, in addition to the information required pursuant
to Subsection A(1)(d) of this section;
(2) The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a
bona fide office where a representative of the person or other
entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone information line
during normal business hours for the purpose of offering
information concerning the person or other entity. For the purposes
of this subsection, an answering machine or service unrelated to
the person does not constitute a bona fide office; and
(3) The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(a) The name and address of the registered person who owns the
bin, and of any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
(b) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
§ 20A-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 20A-3
1:100
§ 20A-4. Receipt, investigation of complaints relative to donation
clothing bin.
The Borough of Merchantville in which the donation clothing bin has been
placed shall receive and investigate, within thirty (30) days, any complaints
from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the Chief of Police
or his designee that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in any act
or practice in violation of Section 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C. 40:48-2.61),
the person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if
the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Borough Council is not
requested within forty-five (45) days, the bin will be seized or removed by
the Chief of Police or his designee at the expense of the person who placed
the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold
at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means
used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed
to the exterior of the bin itself.
In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within forty-five (45) days of the posting of
the warning, the Chief of Police or his designee may seize the bin, remove
it, or have it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected
via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the borough.
§ 20A-5. Additional penalties, remedies.
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin;
(c) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the
bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily
understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person
who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations; and
(d) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Borough Clerk in the most recent permit or renewal
application pursuant to Subsection A(1)(a)[2] and Subsection
A(1)(d)[2] of this section, indicating the manner in which the
person anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
A. In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of Chapter 81 of the
Code of the Borough of Merchantville entitled "Donation Clothing Bins"
§ 20A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20A-5
1:101
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Chapter 21, Dogs, was repealed in entirety by
Ordinance No. 2015-04. See Chapter 9, Animals.]
Prior ordinance history: Ordinances of 7-10-1944, 4-23-1951, 10-27-1952,
9-12-1966, 2-10-1986, 12-27-2005, Ordinance Nos. 546, 2003-11, 2013-06.
Chapter 21A
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
§ 21A-1. Drug-Free School Zone Map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about October
1, 1982, by Remington, Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted
as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board
and of the areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such school
property. (A copy of said map is attached hereto as Exhibit A.10)
pursuant to P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
(1) Subject to a penalty of up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.) for
each violation. The Borough of Merchantville may bring this action
in the Municipal Court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding
under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (C.
2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to
the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Merchantville; and
(2) Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin
for solicitation purposes pursuant to Section 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209
(C. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of
Chapter 20A of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville entitled
"Donation Clothing Bins," pursuant to P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C.
40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the Merchantville Borough Clerk's
Office to have that person's eligibility restored. The Borough of
Merchantville may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(a) Acts within the public interest; and
(b) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with
the provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (C. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent
intentions.
§ 20A-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 21A-2
1:102
§ 21A-2. Map as official record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map, approved and adopted pursuant to § 21A-1
of this chapter, shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within one thousand (1,000)
feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or School Board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free
School Zones.
§ 21A-3. Changes in boundaries or location.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Borough Engineer and the Borough
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 21A-4. Filing of copies; purchase of copies.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 21A-1 of
this chapter and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 21A-5. Purpose and use of map.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 21A-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of the state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board.
10.Editor's Note: Said map is available for inspection in the office of the Chief of Police
during regular business hours.
§ 21A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21A-5
1:103
Chapter 22
EMERGENCY WATER REGULATIONS
§ 22-1. Purpose; intent.
Protracted periods of high temperatures and limited rainfall may cause
excessive demands upon the water system of the Merchantville-Pennsauken
Water Commission, and a temporary lack of sufficient water capacity may
result in a lowering of the normal water levels of the sources of water supply
to the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission, and the excessive use
of water during the spring, summer and fall months caused by the
sprinkling of lawns, filling of swimming pools, car washing and other similar
uses not related to the use of water for domestic and sanitary purposes
and fire protection may cause a serious reduction in adequate pressure in
the water distribution systems of the franchise area of the Merchantville-
Pennsauken Water Commission, which includes residents of this
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by a school or School
Board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that
being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44,11 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 21A-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
School Board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
School Board or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44,12 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of the Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
§ 21A-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 22-1
1:104
municipality. In the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this municipality, it is necessary to take all reasonable
precautions and measures promptly to conserve water and maintain such
water pressure as is necessary for sanitary, domestic and fire-fighting
purposes.
§ 22-2. Notification of emergency.
In case of an emergency where the available supply or water becomes
dangerously low, the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission will
notify the Mayor, in writing, of the existence of a water emergency. The
notification shall state that an emergency exists requiring the
implementation of such measures for the conservation of water for domestic
and sanitary purposes and fire protection as are specified in §§ 22-3 and
22-4.
§ 22-3. Emergency limitations on nonessential water use.
§ 22-4. Prohibition of certain uses of water during emergency
conditions.
The use and withdrawal of water by any person during a water emergency
for the following purposes is hereby prohibited:
A. The declaration of an emergency shall specify whether the emergency
is one requiring full curtailment or partial curtailment of nonessential
water usage, as defined herein:
(1) "Full curtailment of nonessential water usage" shall mean an
absolute prohibition of the use of water from the Merchantville-
Pennsauken Water Commission system for the sprinkling of lawns,
car washing and other related uses until the emergency shall be
terminated by declaration of the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water
Commission.
(2) "Partial curtailment of nonessential water usage" shall mean the
prohibition of the use of water from the Merchantville-Pennsauken
Water Commission system for sprinkling of lawns, filling of
swimming pools, car washing and other related uses or any of the
foregoing on certain days of the week and/or the foregoing on
certain hours of the day. The terms of the partial curtailment shall
be set forth in the declaration.
B. In case of any such emergency declaration as is described herein, the
terms of the curtailment may be modified by amendment from time to
time on any change in emergency conditions.
A. Watering yards: the sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery,
trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables,
flowers or any other vegetation.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4
1:105
§ 22-5. Publishing of notice of declaration.
Immediately following the passage of any of the emergency declarations
hereinbefore described, a copy of the declaration shall be published in the
Courier Post and one (1) other newspaper circulated in the municipality and
posted throughout the municipality in the municipal building and the offices
of the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission.
§ 22-6. Effect of declaration.
The declaration of any emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users upon the filing of the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk and
the publication thereof in at least one (1) newspaper circulated in the
municipality.
§ 22-7. Termination of declaration.
The declaration of emergency shall continue in full force and effect, except
as amended, until terminated by a resolution of termination adopted by the
Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission.
§ 22-8. Inspections.
During the water emergency, all premises receiving water from the
Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission system shall be subject to
inspection between sunrise and sunset by the Commission's employees or
any other person duly authorized and appointed by the municipality or
Commission to perform inspections to cover compliance during the water
emergency. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to hinder,
obstruct, delay, resist or prevent any such inspection as is described herein.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the power of the Police Department
to conduct a search of any premises at any time when they have probable
cause to believe that a violation of this section has been committed.
B. Washing mobile equipment: the washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers
or any other type of mobile equipment.
C. Cleaning outdoor surfaces: the washing of sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, porches and other outdoor surfaces.
D. Cleaning buildings: the washing of the outside of dwellings; the
washing of the inside and outside of office buildings.
E. Cleaning equipment and machinery: the washing and cleaning of any
business or industrial equipment and machinery.
F. Ornamental fountains: the operation of any ornamental fountain or
other structure making a similar use of water.
G. Swimming pools: the filling of swimming and wading pools.
§ 22-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 22-9
1:106
§ 22-9. Water use during emergency prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to use water from
the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission water system at any time
during the water emergency in a manner prohibited by any declaration
issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 22-10. Continued usage deemed health hazard; notice;
abatement; costs.
In the event that there is on any premises a continuing usage of water
from the Merchantville-Pennsauken Water Commission water system by any
person in a manner prohibited by any declaration issued pursuant to this
chapter, such continuing usage is hereby declared to be health hazard. The
owner, occupant and/or operator of the premises whereon the violation is
occurring shall be served with written notice of the violation by the delivery
to any such owner, occupant and/or operator or the agent or employee of
any of same actually on the premises. If no such person is present, the
notice shall be posted on the premises. If, after the passage of one (1) hour
from the delivery or posting of such notice the health hazard has not been
abated, any employee of the municipality or the Merchantville-Pennsauken
Water Commission is hereby authorized to enter upon the premises to
abate the health hazard. Thereafter, the municipality or Commission, as the
case may be, shall assess the costs of such abatement against the owner,
operator and/or occupant of the premises.
§ 22-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of violating §§ 22-3 or 22-4 shall be subject to a
maximum fine of:
(1) One hundred dollars ($100.) for the first offense.
(2) Three hundred dollars ($300.) for the second offense.
(3) Five hundred dollars ($500.) for the third offense.
B. Any person found guilty of violating § 22-10 shall be subject to a fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.) for each twenty-four hour period or part
thereof in which it can be proven that the violation occurred.
C. Any person found guilty of renewing a continuing violation after it has
been abated shall be subject to up to ninety (90) days' imprisonment.
D. No person shall be fined for any violation of any declaration issued
pursuant to this chapter if such violation occurs less than forty-eight
(48) hours after the passage of the declaration.
E. It shall be a complete defense to a charge of violating this chapter if it
can be shown that the defendant should not reasonably have known the
violation was occurring because it was due to a latent defect in
plumbing or other water conduct.
§ 22-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-11
1:107
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 23, Electrical Code, adopted 6-12-1967 by Ord. No. 441,
was repealed 2-24-1997.]
Chapter 24
EXCAVATIONS
§ 24-1. Permit required; fee; deposit; bond.
(See also Chapter 25, Fees)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, partnership,
association or corporation to disturb, cut, break into, excavate or open
any of the roads, streets, avenues, thoroughfares, alleys, sidewalks or
highways in the Borough of Merchantville without first having obtained
a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk and having paid a permit fee
of $100.00, which permit fee shall accompany the application therefor
and shall not be refundable. [Amended 4-22-1996]
B. Every application for such permit shall also be accompanied by the sum
of $200.00, which shall be deposited with the Borough Clerk and which
shall be refundable at the request of the applicant for such permit after
restoration of the area has been completed in a manner and condition
satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works. [Amended
4-22-1996]
C. The foregoing permit shall be good for a period of six months from the
date of issue.
D. Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:2-13, municipal corporation
or authority, joint municipal authority or commission may file a bond in
the amount of $10,000.00 with the Borough Clerk in lieu of the cash
deposit of $200.00 which is required with each application. The filing of
such a bond shall eliminate the necessity for such an organization to
provide the specified cash deposit regardless of the number of
applications made by or outstanding to it. Said bond shall be issued
annually by a bonding company, surety company or corporation or
organization approved by the Borough Council. Said bond shall be
conditioned upon the restoration of the surface and foundation of the
road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley or highway for which the
permit was granted in a manner prescribed in § 24-7 hereof, and the
bond shall continue in full force and effect for a period of two years
after the completion of the work and construction of the permanent
patch or patches.
§ 22-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 24-1
1:108
§ 24-2. Application requirements.
E. Prior to the issuance of any permit under this section, the application
for such a permit may be reviewed by the Borough Engineer. [Added
4-22-1996]
F. Size of disturbed segment. [Added 4-22-1996]
(1) For purposes of § 24-1A, a permit shall be required for any
excavation or opening of 100 linear feet or less parallel to the
nearest adjacent curb. Any excavation or opening greater than one
hundred linear feet or less parallel to the nearest adjacent curb
shall require a separate permit for each one-hundred-linear-foot
segment of disturbance, cut, break, excavation or opening on or
into any of the roads, streets, avenues, thoroughfares, alleys,
sidewalks or highways in the Borough of Merchantville.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 24-1F(1), any and all
excavations performed by any municipally owned utility shall
require one permit for any excavation or opening on or into any of
the roads, streets, avenues, thoroughfares, alleys, sidewalks or
highways in the Borough of Merchantville.
A. A separate application shall be filed for and a separate permit shall be
obtained for each and every opening, and the permit fee and deposit
required by § 24-1 hereof shall accompany each separate application.
For the purposes of this section, a series of excavations made for the
installation of a continuous pipe, conduit or other line by boring or
jacking methods shall be deemed a single opening and shall require
only a single permit for the entire installation.
B. Each application shall state:
(1) The kind and character of the proposed excavation.
(2) The location of the proposed opening.
(3) The size and depth of the proposed opening.
(4) The type of existing paving.
(5) The name of the contractor who will repave or restore the street.
(6) The name and address of the applicant.
(7) The name and address of the owner in behalf of whom or which the
application is made.
(8) The date of the application and the anticipated completion date of
the work to be undertaken under the permit.
C. Said application shall be signed by the applicant guaranteeing complete
conformance with this chapter and shall be accompanied by a plan or
sketch showing the location of the proposed opening.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:109
§ 24-3. Emergencies.
In the event of a sudden and emergent break of any water, sewer, gas, oil
or other underground line or facilities which endangers the life, health or
safety of the public or where immediate repair is imperative to prevent
loss or damage to streets or property or discontinuance of service, it shall
not be necessary to obtain a permit before commencing such repair or
before opening the surface of the street. The making of any such opening or
excavation shall be reported to the Police Department and to the Borough
Clerk within 24 hours thereafter, and an application for a permit therefor
shall be made within 48 hours thereafter.
§ 24-4. Tunneling.
A permit as described herein shall be required for any tunneling under the
surface of any street for any purpose whatsoever, regardless of whether or
not it involves an opening in the surface of the street. Any such tunneling
shall not be commenced or undertaken until the Borough Engineer has
recommended in writing to the Superintendent of Public Works that it be
permitted, and such shall be accomplished only under the supervision of the
Borough Engineer, whose services shall be paid for by the applicant.
§ 24-5. Scheduling of work.
Where the excavation is to extend the full width of the road, only one-half
(1/2) of it shall be made at one time and shall be backfilled before the other
half is excavated so as not to interrupt traffic. The excavation and backfilling
shall be made within seven days.
§ 24-6. Method of opening.
§ 24-7. Backfill and patching.
A. The sides of each opening shall be perpendicular at the top and
converge toward the bottom, so that the width at the bottom shall be
less than the width at the surface of the pavement.
B. Streets with a bituminous surface shall be cut cleanly with an air
hammer before beginning excavation.
A. Upon completion of the excavation of the work to be accomplished
therein, and prior to replacing any of the material removed therefrom
or placing fill material therein, the applicant shall request that the
Superintendent of Public Works perform an inspection thereof. No
material or fill shall be placed in the excavation until permission to fill
the excavation has been given by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. Backfill material shall be such as is approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works. Such backfill material may not necessarily be the
material removed in the excavation, but shall be a granular material
§ 24-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 24-7
1:110
such as to provide a base free of settlement. All backfill must be
tamped.
C. Before patching, concrete surface pavements shall be saw-cut. Where
pavement patching includes the construction of a concrete base or
surface course, the concrete patch shall extend over undisturbed
subgrade for a width of not less than one foot on each side of the
excavation.
(1) Temporary patch. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
apply a temporary patch to the street when said applicant has
completed the backfill of the excavation. Said patch may be
temporary in nature and it is not necessary that the patch be
inspected by the Superintendent of Public Works. In all streets, the
temporary patch shall be bituminous cold patch, two inches in
thickness. Said cold patch shall be maintained by the applicant at
an even level with the road surface until application of the
permanent patch.
(2) Permanent patch. The applicant shall install or cause to be installed
a permanent patch after six months of application of the temporary
patch. The permanent patch shall be of all new materials, and the
finished patch shall be equal to or superior to the best adjacent
pavement, including all base and surface course. Prior to
installation of the permanent patch, the Superintendent of Public
Works shall perform an inspection. No permanent patch shall be
applied until such an inspection has been performed and
permission has been given by the Superintendent of Public Works
to install same. Said permanent patch shall be installed within 30
days after permission to install same has been granted by the
Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent shall have the
right at any time when he has reason to believe that such is
necessary, to guarantee that satisfactory fill material has been
utilized, or that it has been properly placed in the excavation, or
that a permanent patch has been properly applied and is of
satisfactory material, to require that a portion or portions of the
surface and base materials be excavated for an additional
inspection or that a reasonable number of test holes be drilled.
Either of these acts shall be accomplished at the expense of the
applicant. The applicant shall be required to maintain the
permanent patch in good repair and at a level with the surrounding
street for a period of two years from the date of installation.
D. Reconstruction of roads. [Added 4-22-1996]
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to reconstruct the
entire road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk and\or
highway, the length of which to be determined by the Borough
Engineer, if the excavation and\or opening of the same causes:
[Amended 10-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-09]
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:111
(a) The disturbance of twenty (20%) percent or greater of the
width of the road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk
and\or highway, as determined by the Borough Engineer; or
(b) Any disturbance of the width of the road, street, avenue,
thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk and\or highway which occurs
within 10 years of the reconstruction, repaving and\or
replacement of the road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley,
sidewalk and\or highway by the Borough or any other public,
quasi-public or private entity, under the conditions as follows:
[1] The reconstruction, repaving and\or replacement of the
road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk and\or
highway must replace in kind and match the material
finish, color, texture and pattern, as well as the
specifications, of the road, street, avenue, thoroughfare,
alley, sidewalk and\or highway being reconstructed,
repaved and\or replaced;
[2] The reconstruction, repaving and\or replacement of the
road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk and\or
highway will not change the flow of water on the road,
street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk and\or
highway, unless demonstrated to improve the condition,
nor shall said reconstruction, repaving and\or replacement
create any hardship on adjoining properties.
[3] The length of the reconstruction, repaving and\or
replacement of the road, street, avenue, thoroughfare,
alley, sidewalk and\or highway shall be solely and
exclusively determined by the Borough Engineer, the
length of which shall be no less than the distance between
adjacent intersections, as identified by the Borough
Engineer.
[4] The criteria as required under subsections [1] and [2] of
Section 24-7(D)(1)(b) shall be solely and exclusively
determined by the Borough Engineer.
(c) This section shall not be construed as requiring the Borough of
Merchantville, or any of its subparts, to reconstruct, repave
and\or replace any of road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley,
sidewalk and\or highway which the Borough may cause to open
to effect emergency repairs.
(2) The reconstruction of any road, street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley,
sidewalk and/or highway as required by § 24-7D(1) shall be
performed according to the specifications of and at the direction of
the Borough Engineer.
§ 24-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 24-7
1:112
§ 24-8. Public safety.
The permittee shall be under a duty to properly guard the excavation and
stored materials and equipment by the erection of suitable barriers by day
and approved-type lights or flares by night. He shall be liable for any neglect
to safeguard the traveling public.
§ 24-9. Supervision.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or such other officer
as the Mayor and Council may designate shall:
§ 24-10. Enforcement.
§ 24-11. (Reserved)13
§ 24-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be punished either by imprisonment in the county jail, or in any
place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any
term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $200.00, or both, in
the discretion of the court. In default of the payment of any fine imposed
under this ordinance, any person convicted of a violation hereof may, in the
discretion of the court by which said person was convicted, be imprisoned
in the county jail or place of detention provided by the municipality for any
term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 24-13. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, to the extent
of such inconsistencies, be and the same are hereby repealed.
(3) Any and all excavations performed by any municipally owned utility
be and hereby are exempt from the responsibilities created under
§ 24-7D(1).
A. Ascertain whether the permits required by this ordinance have been
issued.
B. Supervise all excavations and backfilling.
C. Report all violations of this ordinance to the Police Department.
A. The Police Department shall enforce the regulations covering storage of
materials, erection of suitable barriers, warning signs and lights or
flares and all other provisions of this ordinance, so as to safeguard the
traveling public.
B. The Police Department shall prosecute all violations of this ordinance.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 24-11, Default, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-14
1:113
§ 24-14. Severability.
If for any reason any section or any part of a section, paragraph or provision
of this ordinance shall be questioned in any court and shall be held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not be held to affect any other
section nor any part of a section, paragraph or provision of this ordinance.
§ 24-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon due passage and publication according
to law.
Chapter 25
FEES
§ 24-14 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 24-15
1:114
ARTICLE I
Photocopying and Reports
§ 25-1. Purpose.
New Jersey has adopted the Open Public Records Act which has as its
general purpose making government records more available to the public
than they have been in the past. In certain instances, the production of
archived records or records in a format which is not the usual format
maintained by the municipality or other special circumstances would be
costly and time consuming. The New Jersey Public Records Act permits the
municipality to require the payment of fees, special service charges and/
or special charges as a prerequisite to the production of records requiring
extraordinary time and effort, special equipment or special formatting.
§ 25-2. Ordinary requests for information.
The statutory fee schedule shall apply to routine requests under the Open
Public Records Act. The fees of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 are hereby incorporated
herein as such fee schedule presently exists or as such fees might appear
in future modifications or amendments of the statute. At present time, fees
under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 for routine copies of municipal documents are:
§ 25-3. No research or interpretation may be compelled.
Nothing in this article shall require the custodian of documents or any other
municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate, or interpret documents
which are subject to production under the New Jersey Open Public Records
Act.
§ 25-4. Special services charges; special charges authorized.
A. Letter size pages or smaller: $0.05 per page.
B. Legal size page or larger: $0.07 per page.
C. If actual costs to produce the paper copy exceeds the $0.05 and/or
$0.07 rates, the actual costs of duplication will be charged.
D. Actual postage for any documents sent by mail.
E. Actual costs for the envelope for any documents sent by mail.
F. Photographs will be photocopied at the actual cost. If requests are
made for supplicate photographs, the actual cost of making the
photographs shall be charged.
G. Duplication of videotapes, computer disc, CD-ROM and/or DVD will be
charged the actual costs to provide this record.
H. Any document that has to be retrieved from the off-site record archive
facility will be charged the actual costs to retrieve this document.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:115
§ 25-5. Fees, special services charges and special charges when
charged; amounts authorized.
A. Charges authorized. The Borough Clerk or other custodian or keeper of
documents qualifying for mandatory production as "governmental
records" under the New Jersey Public Records Act shall be entitled to
special service charges and/or special charges as set forth in Section
25-5 below.
B. Requests to be in writing. Any requests for documents shall be made to
the Borough Clerk on a form established by the Borough Clerk for such
purposes.
C. Advance notice of fees; special service charges and special charges;
deposit. Any requester of government records which are eligible for the
imposition of a special charge or special service charge under Section
25-5 below shall receive advance notice of the amount of fees and
charges before any work is started. The Borough Clerk shall require
prepayment of such charges before causing the work to begin.
A. Duplication or other work beyond capability of municipal-in-house work
force. Whenever the in-house municipal work force or available
municipal equipment is insufficient to duplicate or produce government
records in a timely fashion, the Borough Clerk may cause such
duplication or production to be accomplished by outside vendors such
as copy centers or producers of digital images. If the costs of such
duplication or production charged by such vendors exceeds the routine
charges set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the actual direct cost of same
without any additional surcharge for labor costs shall be paid.
B. Special service charges authorized. Whenever government records
cannot be reproduced by regular copying equipment or fulfillment of
the request would involve extraordinary expenditure of time and effort
to accommodate the request (for example, where a large number of
records must be recovered from storage or substantial staff time is
required to review, sort and assemble records), charges may be
imposed as follows:
(1) The actual cost (materials and supplies but no staff labor) of
duplication or reproduction; plus
(2) A special service charge of $25 per hour or the actual direct cost of
labor (if less) shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time
predicted to be utilized to respond to the request.
(3) Rates for in-house production of prints or blueprints. Any prints or
blueprints produced in-house in response to a governmental
records request shall be produced for actual cost of labor and
materials for reproduction of such prints or blueprints.
§ 25-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-5
1:116
§ 25-6. Application of copyright laws.
The Borough of Merchantville may be compelled by New Jersey Law to
produce or duplicate governmental records but no compliance with these
legal obligations shall be deemed to constitute a license, sublicense or
waiver of copyright laws.
§ 25-7. Custodians of records; collection of fees.
The Chief of Police or some responsible police officer designated by him
shall be custodian of Police Department records. The Borough Clerk shall
be custodian of all other records of the Borough of Merchantville. These
officials shall reproduce or cause to be reproduced requested copies of
records in their custody and shall collect the fees and charges designated
in Section 25-2. Such fees and charges shall be delivered to the Borough
Treasurer within forty-eight (48) hours of their receipt.
§ 25-8. Effect on other legislation.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from examining and
making copies of any public record, not otherwise restricted, without
charge as provided in Chapter 73 of the Laws of New Jersey 1963. (N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.)
§ 25-9. Exceptions.
There shall be no charge for copies of reports or other documents which the
borough shall be required to give and/or make for any public officer or law
enforcement authority or which may be given to aid any public officer or
law enforcement authority in the enforcement of the law.
C. Cost of GIS data. The cost of any GIS data owned by the Borough of
Merchantville shall be actual cost of labor and materials for
reproduction of such data.
D. Digital records. If a request for governmental records involves
production or conversion of digital or computerized records or film
which is:
(1) In a medium not routinely used by the agency (i.e., electronic or
film);
(2) Not routinely developed or maintained by an agency; or
(3) Requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information technology;
(4) Then requester shall pay fees and special charges as follows:
(a) Direct costs (no overhead) to comply with the request; plus
(b) Special charges; the cost of technology and labor actually
incurred.
§ 25-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9
1:117

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code; Fees
[Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
§ 25-10. Fees.
A. The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the
number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes
and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates provided herein plus
any special fees and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
(1) Building Subcode fees.
(a) The minimum fee shall be $75.
(b) New construction fees.
[1] Fees for Subcodes B, H, I-1, I-3, M, E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-5, U, and I shall be $0.034 times cubic feet of volume.
[a] Garden-type sheds.
[b] 100 to 200 square feet: $75 minimum fee.
[c] Over 201 square feet: $200 minimum fee.
[d] Exceptions: open structures (roofs without walls)
accessory to one- and two-family dwellings: $100
minimum fee.
[2] Fees for Subcodes A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1, and S-2
shall be $0.034 times cubic feet of volume.
[3] Farm use buildings, exclusively used for storage of food or
grain or the sheltering of livestock: $0.0008 times cubic
feet of volume. The maximum fee is $1,145.
(c) Renovations, alterations and repairs.
[1] Open deck structures.
[a] Under 100 square feet: $75 minimum fee.
[b] 100 square feet to 200 square feet: $100 minimum
fee.
[c] 201 one square feet to 400 square feet: $150 minimum
fee.
[d] 401 square feet and over: $200 minimum fee.
[2] Estimated cost up to and including $50,000: $30 per
$1,000.
§ 25-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:119
[3] Estimated cost of $50,001: $23 per $1,000 (additional fee).
[4] (Reserved)
[5] Handicapped fees. Pursuant to the authority under N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e, no construction permit fee shall be required
for the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
improvement or repair of a structure and related devices
installed or erected for the sole purpose of promoting
accessibility by the handicapped, "handicapped" being
defined under N.J.S.A. 52:27d-126e, and conforming to the
current N.J.A.C. 5:23.7 Barrier Free Code, and any
subsequent amendments or additions thereto. By waiving
of the fees, it in no way waives the right of the enforcing
agency to request plans for the purpose of reviewing plans
for code compliance.
(d) Demolition.
[1] Structures of less than 5,000 square feet and less than 30
feet in height, one- and two-family residences (R-3) and
structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings
used exclusively for storage of food or grain or sheltering
of livestock: $82.
[2] All other groups: $120.
(e) Signs: square foot surface area of sign times $2.50. The
minimum fee is $75.
(f) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the
amount of $0.34 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and
structures of all use groups and types of construction as
classified in Articles 3 and 4 of the Building Subcode.
(g) Fees for renovations and alterations and repairs or site
construction, including sidewalks and aprons, shall be based
on the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the
amount of $30 per $1,000. Above $50,000, the additional fee
shall be in the amount of $23 per $1,000 of estimated cost
above $50,000. The applicant shall submit to the Construction
Official such data as may be available produced by the
architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating
firm, or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The Construction Official shall
make the final decision regarding estimated cost.
(h) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for
new construction for the added portion.
§ 25-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-10
1:120
(i) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed separately in accordance with Subsection A(1)(f)
and (g) above.
(j) The fee for tents, in excess of 900 square feet or 30 feet in any
dimension, shall be $116.
(k) The fee for roofing work on Use Groups R-3 and R-4 structures
shall be $75.
(l) The fee for siding work on Use Groups R-3 and R-4 structures
shall be $65.
(2) Plumbing Subcode fees.
(a) Minimum fee shall be $75.
(b) The fee shall be in the amount of $15 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the gas or oil piping
system except as indicated in Subsection A(2)(c) below.
(c) Additional fees shall apply to the following devices. The fee
shall be $92 per special device for the following: grease traps,
oil separators, refrigeration units, utility service connections,
backflow preventors equipped with test ports (double check
valve assembly, reduced pressure zone and pressure vacuum
breaker backflow preventors), steam boilers, hot-water boilers
(excluding those for domestic heating), active solar systems,
sewer pumps and interceptors. There shall be no inspection fee
charged for gas service entrances.
(3) Electrical Subcode fees.
(a) Minimum fee: $75. For from one to 50 receptacles or fixtures,
the fee shall be $65. For each 25 receptacles or fixtures in
addition to this, the fee shall be in the amount of $15. For the
purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall
include lighting outlets, convenience receptacles, smoke and
motors or devices of less than or equal to one horsepower or
one kilowatt.
(b) For each motor or electrical device greater than one
horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower, and for
transformers and generators greater than one kilowatt and
less than or equal to 10 kilowatts, the fee shall be $15.
(c) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10
horsepower and less than or equal to 50 horsepower, for each
service panel, service entrance or subpanel less than or equal
to 200 amperes, for each transformer and generator greater
than 10 kilowatts and less than or equal to 45 kilowatts, and for
each utility load management device, the fee shall be $75.
§ 25-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:121
(d) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50
horsepower and less than or equal to 100 horsepower, for each
service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than 200
amperes and less than or equal to 1,000 amperes, and for
transformers and generators greater than 45 kilowatts and
less than or equal to 112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $120.
(e) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance or
subpanel greater than 1,000 amperes, and for each
transformer or generator greater than 112.5 kilowatts, the fee
shall be $575.
(f) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except
those in plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control
equipment, generators, transformers and all heating, cooking
or other devices consuming electrical current.
(g) The fee for aboveground swimming pools shall be $75.
(h) The fee for in-ground swimming pools shall be $125.
(4) Fire Subcode fees.
(a) Minimum fee: $75.
(b) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums.
[1] The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $82; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $151; for 101 to and
including 200 heads, the fee shall be $289; for 201 to and
including 400 heads, the fee shall be $748; and for 401 to
and including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,036; the fee
for over 1,000 heads shall be $1,323.
[2] The fee for one to 12 detectors shall be $75; for each 25
detectors in addition to this, the fee shall be in the amount
of $25.
[3] The fee for each standpipe shall be $289.
[4] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall
be $116.
[5] The fee for each gas-fired or oil-fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $75.
[6] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $75.
[7] The fee for each incinerator shall be $460.
§ 25-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-10
1:122
[8] The fee for each crematorium shall be $460.
(5) Fees for certificates and other permits.
(a) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $82 for Use
Groups R-3 and R-4; the fee for all other use groups shall be
$151.
(b) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount
of $2.50 per square foot of surface area of the sign, computed
on one side only for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall
be $75.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for Use Group R-3 and
R-5 structures shall be $75.
(d) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for all other use groups
shall be 10% of the total permit fee, with a minimum charge of
$65. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c) shall be $120.
(e) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use group shall be $120. The fee for plan review of a
building for compliance under the alternate systems and
nondepletable energy source provisions of the Energy Subcode
shall be $274 for one- and two-family homes (Use Group R-3 of
the Building Subcode) and for light commercial structures
having the temperature controlled from a single point and
$1,369 for all other structures.
(f) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-10 shall be $594 for Class I structures and $120
for Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of
an application for a variation shall be $229 for Class I
structures and $65 for Class II and Class III.
(g) The fee for lead hazard abatement work shall be $140.
(h) For cross-connections and backflow preventors that are
subject to testing, requiring reinspection annually, the fee shall
be $75.
(i) Mechanical systems. The fee for a mechanical inspection in a
Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure by a mechanical inspector shall
be $75 for the first device and $15 for each additional device.
No separate fee shall be charged for gas, fuel oil or water
piping connections associated with the mechanical equipment
inspected.
(j) Tanks, in-ground or aboveground: on-site inspection fee shall
be $82.
§ 25-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:123
(k) The Building Subcode permit fee for construction and
installation for an aboveground swimming pool shall be $75.
(l) The fee for a bonding/grounding inspection and certificate as
required for public swimming pools, spas and hot tubs by P.L.
1998, c. 13714, shall be $75.
(6) Minimum fee. In any case, the minimum fee for a construction
permit, in part or total, shall be $75, with the following exceptions
as determined by the Construction Office:
(a) Sheds and other small renovations or accessory structures on
Use Group R-3 and R-4 property: the charge for each such
structure or renovation shall be $75.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Water heater: The fee for inspecting a replacement water
heater in a Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure shall be $45.
(d) Flatwork: concrete patios, slabs, driveways, and walkways
(does not include sidewalk and aprons) shall be $35.
B. Third-party agencies. In the event that a third-party agency is used for
any one of the subcodes, an administrative surcharge of 15% shall be
added per subcode.
C. Discontinuance of building project. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.27, in
case of a discontinuance of a building project, plan review fees are not
refundable.
D. Exemptions. The only exemptions to fees are for municipal buildings or
use of buildings for municipal business and buildings of Use Group A-4.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133.2.
§ 25-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-10
1:124
ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Fees
§ 25-11. Fees for certified records.
The following fees shall be charged for each certified copy the following
records:
§ 25-12. Municipal Court fees.
§ 25-13. Community Center rental fees.
A. Marriage License (issuance): $28.
B. Affidavit of Domestic Partnership (issuance): $28.
C. Burial Permits (issuance): $5.
D. Certified Copies of Birth, Marriage and Death Certificates: $10 each.
E. Certifications (Birth, Marriage and Death): $10 each.
F. Affidavit of Domestic Partnership — certified copy: $10 each.
G. Notary Public fees: $1 per document.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Merchantville
Borough Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal
Prosecutor.
B. The following fees as set forth in Section 25-2 of this chapter shall be
payable by the requestor to the Borough of Merchantville for the
discovery provided.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Merchantville (e.g. another police department), the actual
costs paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
A. Rental — Sunday through Thursday
(1) Resident - $25 per hour and $150 security deposit, plus any cost for
insurance for alcoholic beverages.
(2) Nonresident - $25 per hour and $150 security deposit, plus any cost
for insurance for alcoholic beverages.
B. Rental — Friday and Saturday
(1) $600 for five (5) hour rental and $150 security deposit plus any cost
for insurance for alcohol beverages.
(2) Residents may rent one time during the calendar year for $300 and
$150 security deposit plus any cost for insurance for alcohol
beverages.
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-13
1:125
§ 25-14. Municipal fees. [Amended 9-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2016-14;
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07; 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15;
3-27-17 by Ord. No. 2017-03; 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10;
5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
Alcoholic beverage licenses
Annual license: plenary retail consumption $1,375
Annual license: plenary retail distribution $1,375
Annual license: club $100
Amusements and amusement devices
Bingo (each) $20
Raffle-50/50 (each) $20
Fire prevention inspection fees
Multifamily units
R1=up to 3 units $55
R2=4 to 7 units $90
R3=8 to 35 units $125
R4=6 to 65 units $225
R5=66 to 100 units $325
R6=over 100 units $425
Single business buildings
SB1=1-floor business $35
SB2=2-floor business $65
SB3=3-floor business $85
SB4=4-floor business $150
SB5=building over 10,000 square feet $175
Multiple business buildings
MB1=individual business $35
MB2=common area $65
MB=each floor $65
Historic Preservation Commission review
Certificate of appropriateness for new
construction of a principal or accessory structure
Application fee $100
C. There will be a $60 clean up fee for all rentals.
D. Meetings — Sunday through Thursday - $45.
E. Lessons — Sunday through Thursday - $25 per hour if fee is being
charged; free if no fee is being charged then rental is free.
§ 25-13 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-14
1:126
Escrow $300
Certificate of appropriateness for removal,
demolition, alterations, relocation or additions to
any building or structure
Application fee $100
Escrow $300
Certificate of appropriateness for any
replacement, alteration in, or addition of signs,
shutters, outdoor displays, fences, hedges,
awnings, off-street driveways and parking
materials or exterior lighting
Application fee $100
Escrow $150
Other reviews, including requests for advice or
letters of interpretation
Application fee $50
Escrow $300
License for temporary locale
Dumpster/container permit (10-day) $25
5-day renewal (up to 3 times) $15
Peddling and soliciting
License issued for a 3-month period $50
Property resale inspection certificates
Residential resale inspection fee $50 per unit ($300
max.)
Commercial resale inspection fee $50 per unit ($300
max.)
Reinspection fee
First reinspection No charge
Second and subsequent reinspections $25
Zoning permits issued by Zoning Officer
Zoning permit for uses, structures, improvements $50
Residential wheelchair ramp No charge
Certificate of legal nonconforming use $25
Joint Land Use Board fees
Appeal of the decision of Zoning Officer
Application fee $150
Escrow $500
Interpretation of Zoning Map or Ordinance
§ 25-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-14
1:127
Application fee $150
Escrow $500
Certificate of legal nonconforming use
Application fee $150
Escrow $500
C variance
Application fee $150
Escrow for fences $300
Escrow for all other C variances $750
D variances [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)]
Application fee $300
Escrow $600
Minor site plan triggered by "change of use" or
"conditional use" with no exterior changes or site
alterations
Application fee $50
Escrow $300
Minor site plan (all other minor site plans)
Application fee $150
Escrow $1,000
Major site plan
Application fee for preliminary review $300
Escrow for preliminary review $1,500 plus $500 per
acre ($2,000 min.)
Application fee for final review $300
Escrow for final review $1,000
Minor subdivision
Application fee $300
Escrow $750 plus $250 per
lot ($1,250 min.)
Major subdivision
Application fee for preliminary review $500
Escrow for preliminary review $1,500 plus $250 per
lot ($2,500 min.)
Application fee for final review $300
Escrow for final review $2,000
200-foot list of property owners for public notice $10
Recycling container
§ 25-14 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-14
1:128
First container No charge
Additional container(s) $10 each
Returned checks $25
Sewers
Permit to make connection with sewer system $1,207
Sign permit application fee
Business $50
Dangerous sign administration fee $100
Smoke and CO detectors and fire extinguisher
inspections
More than 10 business days $35
Fewer than 10 but more than 4 business days $70
4 business days or fewer $125
If reinspection required/per reinspection $10
The Borough of Merchantville hereby adopts the
fee structure of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs for the State Uniform
Construction Code, as authorized by New Jersey
regulations.
On file
The above hereby incorporates N.J.A.C. 5:23-4:20
as currently in place and any future amendments
and/or appropriate regulatory provision pertinent
to the fee structure.
Street openings
Permit fee $20-$100
Bond for street opening
Deposit in lieu of bond for street opening
Summer parks and playgrounds program -
registration
Borough residents $175 per child
Nonresidents $200 per child
2nd child or more $25 discount each
child
Swimming pools
Basic permit fee for wading pool $5
Permit fee $20
Tax Collector's office
Certificate of redemption
First request No charge
§ 25-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-14
1:129
Additional requests $25
Duplicate tax sale certificate $100
Tax search fee
First request No charge
Second request No charge
Third request $50
Copy of Master Plan on CD Borough's cost
§ 25-15. Rental inspection fees; Rental Certificate of Occupancy.
[Adopted 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15] (See also Chapter 66,
Section 66-11)
At the time of the filing of the application for inspection under Chapter 66
of the Code, and, prior to the issuance of a Rental Certificate of Inspection,
the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance with the
following:
§ 25-16. Defaulted Mortgage Property [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-03] (See also Chapter 60B)
Registration of defaulted mortgage property $500
A. An application fee of $150 per rental unit in rental facilities per
inspection period pursuant to property inspections required.
B. Change of occupancy. An application fee of $50 per rental unit in rental
facilities per inspection period pursuant to property inspections
required upon a change in occupancy.
C. Reinspections. Fees for the reinspection of rental units shall be charged
pursuant to property inspections performed under this chapter as
follows:
(1) For the first reinspection, there shall be no fee.
(2) For the second reinspection, there shall be a fee of $20.
(3) For the third and each subsequent reinspection, there shall be a fee
of $30.
D. Late fee. If any fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of its due date, a
late fee surcharge of $20 shall be assessed in addition to any fees
outstanding.
E. When owner is a senior citizen. If the owner of the property is a senior
citizen who resides in a unit of the rental facility and rents out the
remaining unit(s), and would otherwise qualify under the State of New
Jersey property tax deduction under N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be
no fee.
§ 25-14 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 25-16
1:130
Chapter 27
FILLING STATIONS AND INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
§ 27-1. Permit required. [Amended 3-11-1935]
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, establish, operate
or maintain any building or other structure within the Borough of
Merchantville for the storage, sale or disposal of gasoline, naphtha or other
inflammable or combustible materials or liquids without first securing a
permit therefor from Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville:
provided, however, that no such building or other structure shall be erected,
established or used for such purposes, nor shall any inflammable or
combustible materials or liquids be stored, sold or otherwise disposed of
within 250 feet in any direction of any church building or school building or
50 feet from all other buildings within the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 27-2. Application.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, establish, operate or
maintain any building or other structure for the storage, sale or disposal
of inflammable or combustible liquids in the Borough of Merchantville shall
first make written application to Borough Council setting forth the name,
residence and occupation of the applicant, the character of building or
structure intended to be erected and the kind and character of inflammable
or combustible liquids to be stored, used or sold thereon or therefrom,
which application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the proposed
location of said building or other structure and all buildings or other
structures within 250 feet in any direction thereof.
§ 27-3. Issuance of permit. [Amended 4-10-1939]
Upon such application being delivered to the Clerk of the Borough of
Merchantville, he shall present the same to the Borough Council at its
next regular meeting, and said Borough Council shall refer the same to
the Department of Records and Licenses to determine if the application
complies with this chapter. Upon its report that it does so comply, Borough
Council shall direct the Borough Clerk to issue a permit therefor upon the
payment of the fee hereinafter provided.
§ 27-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 27-1, 27-2 and 27-3 of this chapter shall not apply to
gasoline service stations or public garages established and operating before
the passage hereof, except that no such gasoline service station can be
enlarged in size or capacity or in any way extended beyond its present
limits without a permit therefor as provided in § 27-1 hereof; nor shall any
garage where gasoline may have been sold prior to the passage hereof
be permitted to increase, enlarge or extend its equipment for the sale of
gasoline or other inflammable or combustible liquids or materials without
§ 25-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:131
securing such permit as herein provided. This chapter shall not apply to
private dwellings or to private garages wherein inflammable or combustible
liquids are used solely by the owner of such dwelling or for domestic or
other purposes.
§ 27-5. Operating license; fee.
Any person, firm or corporation now or hereafter operating any service
or filling station or building where benzine, naphtha, gasoline or other
inflammable or combustible liquids or materials are sold to the public
shall hereafter be required to procure a license for the operation and
maintenance of any such filling station or the gasoline pumps attached to
such building or premises, which license may be granted by the Borough
Clerk, upon written application made to him, stating the location, number
of tanks and pumps, amount of gasoline or other inflammable liquid to be
stored in the tanks of any such gasoline filling station or building giving
such service. Upon the fee being paid therefor as hereafter provided, the
Borough Clerk shall issue said license. The license fees as provided in this
chapter shall be as follows: For a service station or building having one
gasoline pump the sum of $5.00 per annum and for each additional pump,
the sum of $2.00 per annum. Any such license shall expire on the 31st day
of December in the year in which the same is issued and if applied for after
the first day of July in any year, shall be issued for 1/2 the annual fees. The
provisions of this chapter shall not alter or supersede any of the provisions
of Ordinance No. 108 of the borough relating to garages and the licensing
thereof.
§ 27-5.1. Hours of operation. [Added 10-14-1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
service station or filling station or any other business in which benzine,
naphtha, gasoline or other inflammable or combustible liquids or materials
are sold to the public after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. The
aforesaid prohibition, operating a service station or gasoline station during
the aforesaid hours, shall be on a daily basis 365 days per year.
§ 27-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine not exceeding $100.00,
as the Magistrate before whom the conviction may be had shall in his
discretion deem proper, and upon such conviction, any license or permit
heretofore or hereafter granted under the terms and provisions of this
chapter may be annulled or revoked by Borough Council upon due notice to
the holder thereof and hearing had thereon, and in such case Council may
refuse to grant any further permit to construct or license to operate any
such establishment.
§ 27-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 27-7
1:132
§ 27-7. Revocation of license or permit. [Amended 5-27-1997]
In addition to any fines or penalties, upon conviction, any license or permit
heretofore or hereafter granted under the terms and provisions of this
chapter may be annulled or revoked by Borough Council upon due notice to
the holder and hearing, and in such case Council may refuse to grant any
further permit to construct or license to operate any such establishment.
Chapter 28
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 28-1. Certificate of Search required prior to payment of claims.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall
pay any claims for fire damages in excess of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) on any real property or improvements located within
the Borough of Merchantville unless or until the insured person submits an
official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12,
certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable against said property have been
paid or the Borough of Merchantville submits a certified copy of a resolution
in accordance with Section 28-2.
§ 28-2. Installment payments.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
17:36-11, may enter into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged
property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of
the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65, if
the Borough Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be
used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurer receiving
a certified copy of such a resolution or agreement from the Borough Council
of the Borough of Merchantville is authorized to make full payment on the
claim to the insured person.
§ 28-3. Payment of liens and other charges; appeals.
Unless a resolution pursuant to Section 28-2 above is received, any insurer
issuing fire insurance policies on property in the Borough of Merchantville
is authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for fire
damages in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), to pay
to the Borough of Merchantville the amount of the liens appearing on the
official certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges as may
be certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that if appeal is
or has been taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an appeal
on the assessed evaluation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the
insurance company shall follow the procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 17:36-10,
§ 27-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-3
1:133
setting forth the escrow to be held by the court pending disposition of said
appeal.
Chapter 29
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 29-1. Local enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983 c. 383), the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) shall be enforced by
the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 29-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Merchantville Fire Department
through its Bureau of Fire Prevention which is hereby created. The Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall hereinafter be known as the local enforcing agency.
§ 29-3. Duties of the Local Enforcing Agency.
§ 29-4. Organization; Fire Official.
§ 29-5. Fire Official and Inspectors; appointments, qualifications,
term of office, removal.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures, and premises within the established boundaries
of the Borough of Merchantville other than one and two unit owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures, and premises owned or operated by Federal
Government, interstate agencies or the State.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by Section 29-2 of this
chapter shall be under the direct supervision and control of a Fire
Official who shall report to the Fire Commissioner or his designee.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have at least one paid part-time
Fire Official and as many part-time inspectors as required by the Fire
Official.
A. Appointment and qualifications of the Fire Official. The Fire Official
shall be appointed by the Governing Body from a list of three names
submitted by the Chief of the Niagara Fire Company. In the event there
are no qualified personnel in the Fire Company, the Governing Body can
hire from outside of the Fire Company. Following are the qualifications
to be eligible for the Fire Official: Firefighter I, State of New Jersey Fire
§ 28-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 29-5
1:134
§ 29-6. Life hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by 29-2 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform
Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
§ 29-7. Non-life hazard uses; fees.
Official Cert, Incident Management Level 2, Fire Investigation classes,
and five (5) years of experience in the fire service.
B. Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and others employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the Governing Body upon recommendation of the Fire
Official. Inspectors must be Firefighter I certified and complete a fire
inspector's class and a fire investigation class. All life hazard use
inspectors shall be certified by the State.
C. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of a minimum of
three years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. The fire
inspectors shall serve a term of one year. Any vacancy shall be filled for
the unexpired term.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the agency shall be subject to removal by the Governing Body for just
cause. Before removal from office, all persons shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the Governing Body or a hearing officer
designated by the same.
A. In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of Fire
Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year and pay an
annual registration fee.
(1) Residential uses (includes buildings with dwelling units not listed
as life hazard by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety, except onefamily
or two-family owner-occupied units):
R1 One to three units $55.00
R2 Three to seven units $90.00
R3 Eight to thirty-five units $125.00
R4 Thirty-six to sixty-five units $225.00
R5 Sixty-six to one hundred units $325.00
R6 Over one hundred units $425.00
(2) Single business buildings:
(a) Buildings under 10,000 square feet
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-7
1:135
§ 29-8. Permits, certificate of code status and miscellaneous fees;
fire lane violations; certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm.
SB1 One floor business $35.00
SB2 Two floor business $50.00
SB3 Three floor business $75.00
SB4 Four floor business $150.00
(b) Buildings over 10,000 square feet
SB5 $175.00
(3) Multiple business buildings:
MB1 Each individual business $35.00
MB2 Common Area $65.00
MB3 Each Floor $100.00
B. Residential uses shall be inspected and charged a $25.00 fee upon
change of tenant.
C. Uses not classified above that are subject to the Uniform Fire Code will
be classified as single business uses.
D. Uses required to register with the State as life hazard uses shall not be
required to register under this section.
E. All vacant buildings will be charged and inspected according to the
previous use of the building.
F. All abandoned properties shall be inspected and secured as required by
Section 311 of N.J.A.C. 5:70-3, and billed to the owner or a lien to the
property.
G. The following building or structure, if classified as a non-life-hazard,
although not exempt from registration or inspection, will be exempt
from paying an inspection fee as pursuant to the act:
(1) Municipally-owned buildings; and
(2) House of worship (excluding rooms for public assembly, i.e.,
meeting halls, social halls, rental halls).
A. The application fees for the permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7 (a) shall
be as provided by State regulation and are currently as follows:
Type 1: $42.00
Type 2: $166.00
Type 3: $331.00
§ 29-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 29-8
1:136
§ 29-9. Fire lanes.
§ 29-10. Insurance reports.
All owners, lessees or tenants of any building or structure damaged by
fire and subject to assistance from the Fire Department of the Borough of
Merchantville shall report to the Fire Department the name and address of
the fire insurance carrier, the name and address of the insurance agent on
such policy and policy limits of coverage. This information shall be supplied
to the Fire Official within five days of the date of the fire in question.
§ 29-11. Adoption of National Fire Code, 1981 Edition.
There is further adopted by the Borough of Merchantville, in the County
of Camden and the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
and explosion, the 16 volumes of the 1981 Edition of the National Fire Code,
including Life Safety Code 101, as compiled by the National Fire Protection
Association. Three (3) copies of said code and any amendments, additions
Type 4: $497.00
B. The cost for the issuance of a Certificate of Fire Code Status shall be
$35.00.
C. The cost for a Fire Investigation Report shall be $50.00 and copies of
any pictures shall be $25.00.
D. The fine for parking in a fire lane shall be $100.00.
E. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm (CSDCMAC)
as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, shall be based upon the amount of time
remaining before the change of occupant is expected, as follows:
(1) Requests for CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days prior
to the change of occupant: $35.00.
(2) Requests for CSDCMAC received four to 10 business days prior to
the change of occupant: $70.00.
(3) Requests for a CSDCMAC received fewer than 4 business days
prior to the change of occupant: $125.00.
A. Fire lanes will be established and maintained in accordance with
Section 503 of N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.
B. Any occupied or unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of
the provisions of Section 503 of N.J.A.C. 5:70-3, and hindering firefighting
operations shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace. The Fire
Official may fine and provide for the removal and storage of such
vehicle. The cost of such removal and storage shall be paid for by the
owner of said vehicle before he may regain possession of same.
§ 29-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-11
1:137
or modifications thereto, as herein set forth, have been and now are filed in
the Office of the Borough Clerk for the use of and examination by the public.
§ 29-12. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Camden County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 29-13. Enforcement; violations.
Enforcement, violations, and penalties shall be managed in conformity with
the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 29-14. Payment of fire claims by insurance companies.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall
pay any claims for fire damages in excess of two thousand, five hundred
dollars ($2,500.) on any real property or improvements located within the
Borough of Merchantville unless or until the insured person submits an
official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
et seq., certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or
charges levied and assessed and due and payable against said property
have been paid or the Borough of Merchantville submits a certified copy of
a resolution permitting same.
Chapter 30
FIRES
§ 30-1. Fires on streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to kindle any fire or fires on any of the improved public
streets in the borough.
§ 30-2. Fires on occupied lots prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful to kindle any fire or fires on any lot or parcel of land
upon which a dwelling is situated, unless same be kindled and maintained
in a proper container suitable therefor and unless said fire shall be
safeguarded by the personal attention of some responsible person above the
age of 14 years who shall have not less than two buckets of water at his
immediate disposal for use in case said fire shall become dangerous.
§ 30-3. Fires on unoccupied lots prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful to kindle any fire or fires or maintain the same on any
vacant lot or parcel of land not connected or used in conjunction with a
§ 29-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 30-3
1:138
dwelling, unless there shall be present at all times during said fire at least
two adult persons with suitable means to control said fire.
§ 30-4. (Reserved)15
§ 30-5. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 129 and all other ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent
herewith are, to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed, and this
chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 31
FIREMEN
§ 31-1. Creation of position; definition.
The position of paid fireman is hereby created in the Borough of
Merchantville, New Jersey.
PAID FIREMAN — Any person who may hereafter be appointed to such
position by the Council of the Borough of Merchantville and who shall be
regularly employed by the borough at a fixed annual salary for the purpose
of extinguishing fires and protecting persons and property therefrom.
§ 31-2. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed a paid fireman in the Paid Division Fire
Department of the Borough of Merchantville unless he:
A. Is a citizen of the United States.
B. Is sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey
that he is eligible to enter the retirement system.
C. Able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. Is of good moral character. No person shall be so appointed who has
been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude which, in the
judgment of the Council of the Borough of Merchantville, would be
prejudicial to the morale of the Fire Department.
E. Is 21 years of age and under the age of 35 years.
F. Is physically and mentally sound and emotionally stable and possesses
the necessary ability to understand and obey orders and to perform the
duties required of a paid fireman of the Merchantville Fire Department
15.Editor's Note: Former § 30-4, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-2
1:139
§ 31-3. Temporary firemen.
The Council of the Borough of Merchantville may, however, employ persons
to perform the duties of fireman temporarily in case of emergency, or for
parts of years, where their services are not needed throughout the entire
year and discharge them at the expiration of such temporary employment.
They may be compensated for such services at such rates as the Council
may from time to time establish by ordinance and resolution.
§ 31-4. Salary.16
The annual salary of the paid fireman shall be such as the Council of the
Borough of Merchantville may hereafter establish by ordinance and salary
resolution.
§ 31-5. Absence from duty without permission.
No paid fireman shall absent himself from duty without the permission of
the Director of Fire Prevention.
§ 31-6. Charges against paid fireman.
The Director of Fire Prevention may relieve the paid fireman from active
duty pending the preference of formal charges against him and public
examination thereof by the Council. A copy of any charges preferred against
the paid fireman shall also be filed with the Council of the Borough of
Merchantville by filing a copy thereof in the office of the Borough Clerk. If
the paid fireman shall be relieved from duty pending trial on charges, such
trial shall be commenced within 30 days after service of a copy thereof upon
him.
§ 31-7. Duties.
The duties of a paid fireman shall be as follows:
to the satisfaction of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville. [Amended 11-10-1997]
G. Is the holder of an automobile driver's license issued by the State of
New Jersey.
A. To answer and respond to alarms of fire and to aid in extinguishment of
fire.
B. When so ordered, to respond to emergency calls and to render first aid
and assistance to those in need thereof.
C. When so ordered, to make inspections of properties and assist in fire
prevention.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 31-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 31-7
1:140
§ 31-8. Supervision. [Amended 11-10-1997; 12-14-1998]
The paid fireman shall be under the supervision and subject to the direction
of the Director of Fire and, during his absence, of the Fire Administrator of
the Merchantville Fire Department.
§ 31-9. Duty hours. [Amended 12-14-1998]
The duty hours of the paid fireman shall be established by the Director of
Fire and, during his absence, the Fire Administrator of the Merchantville
Fire Department.
§ 31-10. Repealer.
Any ordinance or portions of any ordinance now in effect which are contrary
to any of the provisions hereof are hereby repealed.
§ 31-11. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be declared invalid, the same shall not
affect the enforceability of the other provisions hereof.
§ 31-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication in
accordance with law.
Chapter 32
(RESERVED)
See Chapter 29, Fire Prevention.
D. To familiarize himself thoroughly with all forms of fire apparatus and
equipment.
E. When so ordered, to engage in drills and the operation of fire
equipment.
F. When so ordered, to attend fire schools and courses of study in Fire
Department procedure.
G. When so specifically appointed or assigned, to drive Fire Department
apparatus and to operate pumps and other equipment.
H. As directed by the Director of Fire Prevention, to clean, supervise and
otherwise care for the Fire Department quarters and all fire apparatus
and equipment therein.
I. To perform such other duties as may be ordered by the Director of Fire
Prevention, or other officer in command thereof, and as set forth in the
rules and regulations governing the paid fireman.
§ 31-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-12
1:141
Chapter 33
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Editor's Note: Former Ch. 33, Food Handling, adopted 6-14-1962 by
the Board of Health, was repealed 2-24-1997.
§ 33-1. Firefighting equipment owned by Borough.
The Borough of Merchantville is the owner of all the firefighting apparatus
and equipment of the Merchantville Fire Department, as established in the
Borough of Merchantville by this chapter.
§ 33-2. Establishment of Fire Department.
A person or persons may be employed who shall constitute the paid Fire
Department of the Borough of Merchantville; said person or persons shall
work in conjunction with the volunteer fire company of the Borough of
Merchantville, as directed by the Director of Fire and shall be referred to as
the Merchantville Fire Department.
§ 33-3. Fire Administrator.
A person having years of experience in fighting fires shall be appointed
to act as the Fire Administrator of the Merchantville Fire Department.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, shall
appoint the Fire Administrator of the Merchantville Fire Department. The
Fire Administrator shall promote a high standard of fire protection for the
Borough of Merchantville while providing supervision and guidance for the
employees of the Merchantville Fire Department and volunteers acting is
such capacity. The Fire Administrator shall hold his office for one (1) year,
or until his successor is appointed.
The Fire Administrator shall be responsible for and charged with the duty
of the supervision of the care and maintenance of the apparatus and
equipment used for firefighting and fire prevention purposes and also with
the supervision of the care and maintenance of the building used for
housing such apparatus and equipment. Before any apparatus is removed
from the Fire House, except in case of fire, the permission of the Fire
Administrator must be obtained. It shall also be his duty to determine and
fix the length of time that any apparatus may be absent from the Fire House.
He shall also be responsible for and charged with the care and custody
of the supplies used for fire prevention purposes and of the oil and gas
supplies which may, from time to time, be placed in his charge for the
general use of motor vehicles used for public purposes by the Borough.
The Fire Administrator, when so ordered by the Director of Fire, shall
engage in drills in the operation of the fire equipment, and attend fire
schools and courses of study in Fire Department procedure. The Fire
Administrator shall supervise, document, implement and enforce any
required federal, state, county and local training, record keeping or other
§ 31-12 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33-3
1:142
programs now required or any which may be required for the employees of
the Merchantville Fire Department and volunteers acting is such capacity.
The Fire Administrator shall issue semi-annual reports to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Merchantville which shall include reports on
program efficiency and compliance with federal, state, county and local
rules and regulations, as well as recommendations for improvements in
the operation of the Merchantville Fire Department in conjunction with the
volunteer company and companies serving the Borough.
§ 33-4. Appointments to Fire Department.
All applicants or appointees for or to positions in the Fire Department shall
qualify, hold and occupy said appointment and receive such compensation
for their services as directed by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall in
any way interfere or change the organization of the volunteer fire
companies in the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 33-5. Composition of paid Fire Department.
The paid Fire Department may consist of such a number of firefighters as
the Director of Fire shall designate.
Chapter 33A
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 33A-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact and statement of
purpose.
A. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of
Merchantville of Camden County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
B. Findings of Fact:
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Merchantville are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes
damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed,
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-1
1:143
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
C. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
D. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel flood waters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and,
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 33A-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-2
1:144
§ 33A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Borough Clerk's interpretation of
any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
(2)
§ 33A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-2
1:145
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 33A-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-2
1:146
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
§ 33A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-2
1:147
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 33A-3. General provisions.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
(2)
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Merchantville, Camden County, New
Jersey.
B. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Merchantville,
Community ID # 340569, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Camden County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated (August 17,
2016).
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Camden County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels: (34007C0029F &
34007C0033E) whose effective date is (August 17, 2016).
(3) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory
documents are on file at 1 West Maple Avenue, Merchantville, New
Jersey.
C. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, re-located to,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall be liable for a fine not
exceeding $2,000.00, or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
§ 33A-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-3
1:148
§ 33A-4. Administration.
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination of the penalties so listed, in the discretion
of the Judge of the Municipal Court before whom such violation is
heard and conviction made. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Borough of Merchantville, from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
E. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
F. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
G. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Merchantville, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder
A. A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes,
within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 33A-3B.
Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Borough Clerk and may include, but not be limited to; plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
§ 33A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-4
1:149
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been flood proofed.
(3) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. The Borough Clerk is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties of the Borough Clerk shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit Review.
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal,
State or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(2) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with Section 33A-3B, the Borough
Clerk shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data available from a Federal, State or other source, in
order to administer Section 33A-4A and Section 33A-4B.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained.
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(b) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourse.
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control
Section and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Substantial damage review.
(a) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the
damage to structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
§ 33A-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-4
1:150
(b) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of
substantial damage structures and provide a letter of
Substantial Damage Determination to the owner and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety
and Flood Control Section.
(6) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Section 33A-4D.
D. Variance procedure.
(1) Appeal board.
(a) The Joint Land Use Board as established by Borough Council
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Joint Land Use Board shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Borough Clerk in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Joint Land Use Board,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior
Court of New Jersey, as provided by statute.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Joint Land Use Board,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
[1] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;
[2] The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
[3] The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
[4] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
[5] The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
[6] The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 33A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-4
1:151
[7] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
[8] The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
[9] The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
[10] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
[11] The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of Section 33A-4D(1)(d) and
the purposes of this chapter, the Joint Land Use Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(f) The Borough Clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing Section 33A-4D(1)(d) has been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 33A-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-4
1:152
§ 33A-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as
identified Section 33A-4D(1)(d), or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built
with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
A. In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the system;
§ 33A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33A-5
1:153
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood
waters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and,
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain
at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two
(2) openings in at least two (2) exterior walls of each enclosed area,
having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(6) Manufactured homes.
§ 33A-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 33A-5
1:154
Chapter 34
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
§ 34-1. Borough to collect properly placed matter.
The Borough of Merchantville, by its designated contractors or by its
employees, will collect and remove, on specified dates, only the matter
described hereinafter when such matter is placed in proper receptacles or
bundles and placed for collection in the manner prescribed.
§ 34-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE — Kitchen waste, food waste, including
condemned food, animal or vegetable matter, offal, decaying and
decomposing matter, ashes, tin cans, rags, leaves, grass, yard cuttings,
branches, Christmas trees (as is), old household items, refuse and junk
(such as beds, springs, chairs, mattresses, items of furniture, stoves,
refrigerators and other customary household waste), provided that this
term shall not include construction building materials or waste or debris
of contractors, except for small quantities for minor repairs of homes that
would otherwise be acceptable.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known as
"glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass and glass commonly known
as "window glass."
METAL AND ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — All metallic containers,
including but not limited to metal and aluminum soft drink containers,
coffee and/or beverage containers and any other metal container commonly
used for packaging of food and beverage material which are commonly
known as "cans."[Added 12-8-1986]
USED NEWSPAPERS — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to
as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Section 33A-5A(1).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
[1] Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
[2] Be constructed to minimize flood damage,
[3] Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
§ 33A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-2
1:155
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
§ 34-3. Containers.
§ 34-4. Recycling; preparation of garbage and trash for collection.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
garbage, trash and refuse from used newspapers and glass within the
Borough of Merchantville. The occupant or owner of any building within
the Borough of Merchantville shall separate all garbage, trash and refuse
from all used newspapers and glass and shall place the items for disposal,
removal and collection in accordance with the regulations listed below and
any other regulations listed by the Director of Public Works of the Borough
of Merchantville:
A. Except as set forth in § 34-4, all garbage, trash, refuse, glass, metal
containers and newspapers shall be placed in metal or other permanent
receptacles having a maximum capacity of 32 gallons, four cubic feet
capacity or a gross weight of 50 pounds, whichever is greater in each
instance. Said receptacle shall be fitted with properly fitting covers and
have handles securely fastened to the sides. Receptacles for garden
refuse may be wooden baskets and need not have covers. [Amended
12-8-1986]
B. In addition to the above described containers or receptacles, the
Director of Public Works may issue regulations authorizing other
specific types of receptacles for the disposal of garbage, trash, refuse,
glass and used newspapers. In exercising the discretion granted
hereunder, the Director of Public Works shall consider such factors as
cost, convenience and any other factor relevant to the public health and
welfare.
A. Used newspapers. Used newspapers shall be bundled separately and
secured in bundles not to exceed 50 pounds and shall not be contained
in plastic bags. All cardboard containers shall be flattened in bundles
and shall not exceed 50 pounds.
B. Glass and metal containers shall be contained in reusable metal or
plastic containers supplied by the occupant, owner or borough.
[Amended 12-8-1986]
C. All other garbage, trash and refuse shall be prepared for collection as
follows:
(1) Ashes shall be cold and free from any hot coals to prevent the
possibility of fire.
(2) Hedge trimmings and light brush clippings shall be securely tied in
bundles not to exceed four feet in length and 24 inches in diameter
and shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight.
§ 34-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 34-4
1:156
§ 34-5. Placement for collection.
§ 34-6. Collection by unauthorized persons.
Except for borough employees or agents in the discharge of their duties
under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons,
association or corporation to collect, pick in, rake up or in any other way
disturb the ashes, rubbish, used newspapers, glass or other refuse material
whatsoever deposited in any container or bundle laid or placed on any curb,
street or public place.
§ 34-7. Exceptions.
Neither the Borough of Merchantville nor its agents shall be responsible for
the collection or removal of the following materials:
(3) Receptacles shall not be filled higher than three inches from the
top. Covers shall be placed on receptacles to prevent any rubbish
or garbage being scattered about by wind or other elements.
Damaged or leaky receptacles shall be replaced at the expense of
the owners.
A. Each and every owner, tenant, housekeeper or other person or persons
occupying any dwelling or structure or portion thereof in the Borough
of Merchantville shall be required to:
(1) Procure proper receptacles as hereinbefore described for the
storage of all garbage, trash, refuse, used newspapers, glass and
metal containers. [Amended 12-8-1986]
(2) Collect, store and place all accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse,
used newspapers, glass and metal containers into proper
receptacles or bundles. The receptacles or bundles shall be stored
so as not to be visible from any point along the front line of the
property. [Amended 12-8-1986]
(3) Place all receptacles or bundles at the curb at the front of the lot of
the building or dwelling house where the same shall be accessible
for collection by 7:00 a.m. of the date specified. The receptacles or
bundles shall not be so placed at the curb prior to 3:00 p.m. of the
date preceding the scheduled collection.
B. All receptacles shall be removed from the curb within 24 hours after
said receptacles have been emptied.
C. It shall be unlawful to place and store any garbage, trash, refuse, used
newspapers and glass in any manner not authorized under the
provisions of this chapter, and any receptacle or container not
complying shall be classified as refuse and carted away.
A. Waste or debris arising from construction or demolition work except in
small quantities arising from minor repairs to homes.
§ 34-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-7
1:157
§ 34-8. (Reserved)17
§ 34-9. Severability.
Every section of this chapter and every subsection or separate part thereof
shall be considered as a separate regulation to the extent that if any section,
subsection or separate part thereof shall be declared ineffective, invalid or
unconstitutional, it shall not affect the remaining parts of this chapter.
§ 34-10. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed as to any such inconsistency only.
§ 34-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its passage and upon
publication according to law.
Chapter 37
GEMS, PRECIOUS METALS, GOLD AND JEWELRY
§ 37-1. Definitions.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys and sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals, gems or jewelry,
and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
Borough of Merchantville or at varying locations.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PERMANENT-BASED BUSINESS — Any business conducted on a year
round basis and housed in a single structure, such as a store or residence.
§ 37-2. Issuance of license.
B. Garbage, trash, refuse, used newspapers and glass from industrial
facilities, commercial facilities and apartments having four or more
living units except where such establishments utilize not more than 12
containers as more specifically described in § 34-3.
A. Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Borough
of Merchantville shall first register with the Chief of the Merchantville
Police Department, or the officer so designated by the Chief of Police,
who shall fingerprint the applicant and institute such an investigation of
17.Editor's Note: Former § 34-8, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 34-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 37-2
1:158
§ 37-3. License fees; nontransferability.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be two hundred dollars
($200.), per calendar year. A license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall not be transferable and shall terminate on December 31st of
the year in which said license is issued.
§ 37-4. Records to be maintained.
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale,
including the amount paid, description of the item and any identifying
numbers or engravings. The dealer shall also obtain the name, address,
and date of birth, driver's license number and state of issuance for the
person from whom the items were purchased, received or sold. The name
of the clerk making the transaction shall be "legibly set forth." The dealer
shall issue to the seller and keep for his own records, for not less than
five (5) years, the weights of the precious metals purchase and the fineness
of the precious metal. The records required to be maintained shall be
kept confidential by the dealer and shall be released only to appropriate
law enforcement personnel. This information is to be documented on the
"Secondhand Jewelry Transaction Receipt" form to be supplied to the
Merchantville Borough Police Department within forty-eight (48) hours of
the transaction. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any law
enforcement officer requesting same in the normal course of his duties. The
records required to be maintained shall be kept confidential by the dealer
the applicant's moral character and business responsibility, as he
deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. In the event
that the dealer is a business entity other than a sole proprietorship,
the officers in a corporation or the partners in a partnership (or limited
partnership) shall be deemed to be the applicant(s) who shall be
fingerprinted and investigated in accordance with this section. Upon
completion of the investigation, Chief of the Merchantville Police
Department, or the officer so designated by the Chief of Police, shall
either issue or deny the license based upon the results of his
investigation. Upon the issuance of the license, the applicant shall be
given a copy of this chapter.
B. Any applicant denied a license under this section by Chief of the
Merchantville Police Department, or the officer so designated by the
Chief of Police, based upon the results of an investigation, may appeal
such denial to the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the denial. This appeal shall be
perfected by service of a Notice of Appeal on the Borough Clerk of the
Borough of Merchantville either personally or by certified mail.
C. The Borough Council shall conduct a hearing on this appeal within
thirty (30) days of its receipt of the appeal, and shall render a decision,
in writing, on the appeal within twenty (20) days of the close of the
hearing.
§ 37-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-4
1:159
and shall be released only to appropriate law enforcement personnel. The
precious metal shall be retained in the form in which they were purchased
for a period of ten (10) business days.
Editor's Note: Statutory requirements, see N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 and N.J.S.A.
51:6A-1 et seq.
§ 37-5. Description of items to be delivered to the Chief of Police or
his designee.
Each dealer doing business in the Borough of Merchantville shall deliver
to the Chief of the Merchantville Police Department, or the officer so
designated by the Chief of Police, the description of all items purchased,
received or sold including a photographed recording of the item(s) being
purchased by the dealer within forty-eight (48) hours of the completion
of the transaction of the "Secondhand Jewelry Transaction Receipt" forms
prescribed by the Public Safety Director, or officer in charge. The
photograph shall be of digital form and quality with the ability to be
electronically transferred to a computer.
§ 37-6. Disposal within ten (10) days of purchase prohibited.
No dealer shall sell, melt or change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within ten (10) days of the date of said purchase, and
all such items shall be made available for at least ten (10) business days to
any authorized police officer requesting such items.
§ 37-7. Restrictions on transactions.
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom he is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
herein defined, nor with any individual who is in an intoxicated state and/or
is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or hallucinogenic or
habit-producing drugs.
§ 37-8. Surety bond.
Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Borough Clerk executed by the
applicant as principal with a surety company authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond, to be
approved by the Borough Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of $10,000.00,
conditioned for the due and proper observance of and compliance with
the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of the borough in force
or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and
conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any
person or persons who shall have received judgment against the licensee
licensed under this chapter by reason of any damage sustained by any such
person as a result of the operations of the licensee under this chapter, which
damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction.
Said bond shall contain the following language: The obligation of this bond
shall, in addition to the Borough of Merchantville, be and remain for the
§ 37-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 37-8
1:160
benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against obligor, as a
result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license granted
under Chapter 37 of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville. Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license. As per State Law
every itinerant business must also show proof of bond, issued license in
jurisdiction of origin and weights and measures inspection.
§ 37-9. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
Chief of the Merchantville Police Department, or the officer so designated
by the Chief of Police, after a hearing, upon notice to the applicant for any
of the following causes:
§ 37-10. Violations, penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.); and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days; and/or a period of community service not exceeding ninety
(90) days. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 38
HAWKING AND PEDDLING
§ 38-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals,
gems and jewelry.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude.
E. Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
A. Deterring the use of soliciting, canvassing and peddling to gain access
to homes for criminal purposes.
§ 37-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1
1:161
§ 38-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASS — The act of going from door to door or house to house for the
purpose of seeking orders, pledges or information.
PEDDLE — The act of going from door to door or house to house for the
purpose of selling or attempting to sell goods or wares.
SOLICIT — The act of going from door to door or house to house for the
purpose of attempting to persuade residents, householders or their agents
or servants to buy, to sell, to agree to buy or sell, to contract for goods
or services, to donate money or property or to solicit participation in any
group or organization. In addition, the term "solicit" shall also be deemed to
include the act of making surveys for research purposes, analysis, opinion
polls, rating data and any such similar work which, by its nature, involves a
door-to-door or place-to-place activity.
§ 38-3. Restrictions. [Amended 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
Canvassing, soliciting and peddling in the Borough of Merchantville, in the
County of Camden, are prohibited:
§ 38-3.1. Establishment, display and distribution of "Do Not Knock
Registry." [Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
B. Maintaining quiet and privacy for the residents of the Borough of
Merchantville.
C. Discouraging unethical and dishonest business practices within the
Borough of Merchantville.
A. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
B. At any other time or place unless each such canvasser, solicitor or
peddler shall have first registered under the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Police Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Police Clerk that
peddling, soliciting, canvassing, hawking and door-to-door sales
enterprising as set forth in this chapter are not permitted on the
premises (hereinafter referred to as the "Do Not Knock Registry").
Notification shall be by completion of a form available at the Police
Department office during normal business hours.
B. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the "Do
Not Knock Registry," pursuant to this chapter herein, shall be able to
obtain from the Police Department office a sticker for display at his/her/
its premises indicating enlistment on the "Do Not Knock Registry."
§ 38-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 38-3.1
1:162
§ 38-4. Registration.
Every person who shall desire to canvass, solicit or peddle must first
register with the Merchantville Police Department on a form to be furnished
by the Merchantville Police Department. Each such person shall, in writing
and on said form, supply the following information:
§ 38-5. False answers.
No person seeking to register under the terms of this chapter shall give any
false answer to any question required to be answered by this chapter as
part of the registration application.
§ 38-6. Persons ineligible for registration.
No registration shall be accepted under the authority of this chapter from
any person who shall have been convicted of a crime or from any person
under the age of 18 years.
C. Owners and/or occupants who are placed on the "Do Not Knock
Registry" at their request shall remain on the "Do Not Knock Registry"
until such time as they advise the Police Clerk in writing that they wish
to be removed from the list.
D. The Police Clerk shall distribute the current "Do Not Knock Registry" to
a licensee under this chapter at the time of issuance of a license to
peddle, solicit, canvas, hawk or otherwise door-to-door sell pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. The "Do Not Knock Registry" provided to
licensees shall only include the physical address of the enlisted
premises. The licensee shall not peddle, solicit, canvas, hawk or
conduct door-to-door sales at any premises identified on the thencurrent
"Do Not Knock Registry."
A. His name, age and the address of his residence.
B. The name, business address and telephone number of his employer or
organization which he represents.
C. The name, business address and telephone number of the person, firm
or corporation for whom or in whose behalf he desires to solicit
pledges, gifts or donations or for whose benefit he seeks information.
D. The nature of the activity in which he proposes to engage.
E. The route, date and approximate hours of his itinerary in the Borough of
Merchantville.
F. Whether or not he has ever been convicted of a crime.
G. Identification acceptable to the Borough of Merchantville Police
Department.
§ 38-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:163
§ 38-7. Identification.
Each registrant shall carry on his or her person identification at all times
when canvassing, soliciting or peddling, as defined in this chapter, and
present same upon request to any person or official requesting same.
§ 38-8. Term of registration.
Each registration filed pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be valid
for the 90 calendar days next succeeding the date of its issue.
§ 38-9. Revocation of privilege.
The Merchantville Police Department shall revoke the privilege to solicit
upon discovery of any material misrepresentation made by the registrant in
his registration application or for any violation by said registrant of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 38-10. Prohibitions.
No person shall canvass, solicit or peddle within the Borough of
Merchantville, in the County of Camden, without first filing an application
acceptable under this chapter or at a time when or at a place where
canvassing, soliciting or peddling are prohibited by this chapter.
§ 38-11. Exceptions; special permit.
A. This section shall not be construed to include the sale and delivery of
milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or such other necessary and perishable
articles of food or merchandise of a type commonly delivered on a
house-to-house basis at intervals of one week or less nor the selling of
products actually grown by the seller or sale by any real estate agent,
insurance agent or other professional possessing a valid license issued
by the State of New Jersey.
B. Any veteran or exempt fireman who holds a special license under the
laws of the State of New Jersey shall be exempt from the fee provisions
of this section but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
provisions hereof.
C. Special permits.
(1) Any nonprofit, religious, charitable, recreational, civic or veteran's
organization, service club, volunteer fire or first-aid company
desiring to solicit or canvass, or have solicited or canvassed in its
name, money, donations or financial assistance of any kind or
desiring to sell or distribute any items of literature for which a fee
is charged shall be exempt from the registration of § 38-4, provided
that there is filed a sworn application, in writing, with the Chief of
Police for a special permit. Said application shall contain the
following information:
§ 38-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 38-11
1:164
§ 38-12. (Reserved)18
§ 38-13. Fees. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
A fee as stated in Chapter 25, Fees, shall be paid by each applicant for the
issuance of a license for canvassing, peddling or soliciting, except that no
fee shall be required for a special permit as provided for in § 38-11 of this
chapter.
§ 38-14. Solicitation on roadways prohibited; charitable
organizations excepted. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
Except for charitable organizations duly permitted in accordance with this
chapter and other applicable law, no person shall stand in or beside any
public road or right-of-way to stop, impede, hinder or delay the progress
of a vehicle, or to otherwise interact with the occupants of any vehicle on
any public road or right-of-way, for the purpose of soliciting the purchase of
goods, merchandise or tickets, or for the purpose of soliciting contributions
for any cause, and the only question of law and fact in determining guilt
under this section shall be whether goods, merchandise or tickets were
tendered or offered for sale, or whether a contribution was solicited.
§ 38-15. Application for permit. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13]
All charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 who desire to
solicit contributions in roadways situate in the Borough of Merchantville
(a) The name and address of the organization.
(b) The purpose for which the special permit is requested.
(c) The name and address of the officers, directors or trustees of
the organization.
(d) The period during which canvassing or soliciting is being
carried on.
(e) The names and addresses of all canvassers or solicitors
engaged by the applicant.
(2) Upon being satisfied that the organization or association is bona
fide and as represented in its application, the Chief of Police shall
issue a special permit without charge for the period of time during
which canvassing or soliciting is requested within seven days after
receipt of a properly completed application.
D. Any person canvassing or soliciting for a political candidate or program
shall be exempt from this section.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 38-12, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 38-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-15
1:165
shall file an application for a permit with the Borough Clerk on a form
supplied by said Clerk specifying the following information:
§ 38-16. Council approval. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
§ 38-17. General conditions. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
All approved charitable solicitations shall be conducted in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-60 and the regulations promulgated thereunder (presently
codified at N.J.A.C. 16:401.1 et seq.) and including the following:
A. Name and tax identification number of the applicant organization.
B. Address of the applicant organization.
C. Telephone number of the applicant organization.
D. Contact person for the applicant organization, including name, address
and day and evening phone number.
E. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
F. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
G. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any county highway
or intersection of a county highway, said application shall include a
copy of an authorization from the Camden County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to permit said charitable solicitation.
H. Identify the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be conducted
and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the members of
the public who will be traveling the roadways situate in the Borough of
Merchantville.
I. Such other information as may be required or is otherwise deemed
necessary by the Borough Clerk in order to process the application.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall forward a copy of the
application to the Chief of Police and to the Superintendent of the
Public Works Department. The Chief of Police and Superintendent of
the Public Works Department shall review the application and shall
provide the Borough Clerk with any recommendations regarding the
same.
B. Upon review and approval by Borough Council, the Borough Clerk shall
issue a permit to allow the event including as a condition of the permit
any recommendations made by the Chief of Police, Superintendent of
the Public Works Department and/or the Borough Council. The permit
shall also be subject to any conditions imposed by law. In cases where
the event requires county or state approval, the permit issued
hereunder shall be conditional, subject to approval by the county and/or
state.
§ 38-15 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 38-17
1:166
A. Solicitation shall be subject to the specific terms and conditions of each
permit granted. Such permit shall be in possession of the solicitor
during all times of solicitation and shall be available for inspection by
the Police Department and/or other officials upon request.
B. No person shall solicit charitable contributions on a State highway or
intersection thereof without approval from the New Jersey Department
of Transportation (NJDOT), via the issuance of a charitable solicitation
permit. Such permit shall be in the possession of the solicitor during all
times of solicitation and be available for inspection by local, county and
State police enforcement personnel.
C. Solicitation shall not stop traffic or impede the flow of traffic. Traffic
shall already be stopped before solicitation may occur and shall cease
while traffic is moving. Use of flagmen shall be prohibited.
D. The solicitor shall not install any traffic control devices.
E. Parking of vehicles shall comply with applicable traffic regulations.
F. Signage shall be in accordance with NJDOT regulations (presently
codified at N.J.A.C. 16:406.1).
G. All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with NJDOT
standards.
H. Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours.
I. Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of the
charitable organization shall be at least 18 years old.
J. Solicitors shall not drink alcohol beverages, use drugs or be under the
influence of drugs or alcohol when soliciting. Solicitors shall not harass
the public.
K. Solicitation shall be permitted in the right-of-way, but is encouraged to
be off the traveled way.
L. The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any
debris resulting from the solicitation activity, including trash or debris
in the right-of-way.
M. The Police Department shall be responsible for supervising solicitation
activity and enforcing the terms of the solicitation permits (both local
and the NJDOT permit if applicable). The Police Department may
suspend solicitation operations at any time if the permit is violated or, if
in the police officer's sole discretion, traffic is being impeded or delayed
or the public safety is at risk.
N. The Borough shall not be liable in any civil action for damages for
property damage or personal injury resulting form any accident arising
out of or in the course of solicitations.
§ 38-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-17
1:167
§ 38-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13; amended 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
Chapter 38A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 38B
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 38B-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge
within the boundaries of the Borough of Merchantville, which shall include
labor and material for the removal of hazardous substances or taking of
reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damages to the public health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough of Merchantville, including
the lands, private and public, therein.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the release, spill, leak, emission, dump or disposal of hazardous
substances into the waters or lands within the Borough of Merchantville or
outside the Borough when damage may result to the waters or lands inside
the Borough.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — All elements and compounds, including
petroleum products as set forth within N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b, as amended,
O. No more than one (1) permit per calendar year shall be issued to a
charitable organization for solicitation under this Article.
P. No more than one (1) permit per calendar month shall be issued to any
charitable organization for solicitation under this Article within any
calendar year.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the fines and/
or penalties as are set forth in the § 1-9 of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation, subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter.
B. To the extent the conduct prohibited under this chapter also violates
other provisions of the Borough Code, those violations constitute
separate offenses subject to additional fines and penalties as
prescribed.
§ 38-17 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 38B-1
1:168
except that sewage and sewage sludge shall be considered hazardous
substances for the purpose of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
association, societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 38B-2. Liability for costs.
Any person who shall discharge hazardous substances within the Borough
of Merchantville shall be strictly liable for all cleanup and removal costs
incurred by the Borough of Merchantville or agencies and employees
thereon.
§ 38B-3. Hearing on assessment.
Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within 10 days of receipt of such assessment, make a written request for a
hearing before Borough Council exclusively upon the reasonableness of the
amount assessed.
§ 38B-4. Attorneys' fees; collection costs.
The person responsible for the discharge shall be liable for all reasonable
attorneys' fees and costs incurred in the collection of cleanup and removal
costs.
Chapter 39
HEALTH NUISANCE CODE
§ 39-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.19 A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 39-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1963)."
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 38B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-3
1:169
§ 39-3. Copies filed for examination.
Three (3) copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 39-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than two dollars
($2.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation.
§ 39-5. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 39-6. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 39-7. When effective.
This chapter and the code herein established shall take effect immediately
after final passage and publication as provided by law.
Chapter 39A
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 39A, Historic Preservation Commission, adopted
1-26-98 and amended 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 01-09; 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-03; 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 02-16 and 3-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-01, was amended in its entirety and relocated to Chapter 94,
Article VIIIB 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19.]
Chapter 40
LAUNDERETTES
§ 40-1. Definitions.
A. The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
§ 39-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 40-1
1:170
§ 40-2. License required; application and fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any launderette in the borough
without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such license
shall be filed with the Borough Clerk. Said application shall state the
name and address of the person who will operate the launderette, the
exact location of the premises and the size thereof, where said launderette
will be operated and the maximum daily amount of water which will be
used in connection therewith. A separate application and license shall be
required for each establishment. Each license shall expire on the 31st day
of December following the date of issuance. No license shall be issued
unless the premises in which the launderette is to be operated complies in
all respects with the requirements, regulations and provisions of the Fire
Department, Board of Health, Building Code and Zoning Ordinances of the
borough.20 The annual license fee for the full year or any portion thereof
shall be at the rate of $5.00 for each washing machine installed; provided,
however, that the minimum fee shall be $25.00.
§ 40-3. Condition of premises.
The entire premises devoted to the operation of the launderette and all
machines used in connection therewith shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. The floor shall be kept clean and dry. The premises shall be
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of
Merchantville.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Merchantville.
BOROUGH CLERK — The Clerk of the Borough of Merchantville.
LAUNDERETTE — Establishment or place of business conducted for
the purpose of washing, cleaning, drying and laundering clothes or
other washable materials or cleaning and dyeing any such materials
that may be brought to said establishment or place of business, and
wherein the work is done in machines, coin-operated or otherwise,
located on the premises by the customers themselves, or by or under
the supervision of the owners or operators of said establishment or
place of business for said customers, and shall include a "Laundromat,"
"wash-o-mat" and similar names and types under which laundering of
the self-service type is carried on.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, association, organization, firm and
partnership as well as an individual.
B. Whenever in this chapter any word importing the singular number or
masculine gender is used in describing or referring to any person,
party, matter or thing, the same shall include and apply to several
persons or parties as well as to one person or party, to females as well
as males and to several matters or things as well as one matter or thing.
20.Editor's Note: For Building Code, see Ch. 15; Zoning, Ch. 94.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:171
adequately ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial light.
The walls of said premises shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint,
cement or other impervious material. All plumbing work shall at all times
be kept in good condition and state of repair. Said launderette shall be
operated in such manner as always to comply in all respects with the
requirements, regulations and provisions of the Fire Department, Board of
Health, Building Code and Zoning Ordinance of the borough and all the laws
of the State of New Jersey.21
§ 40-4. Machines as nuisances.
No machinery used in the operation of a launderette shall be operated
in such manner as to cause unnecessary or unreasonable vibration to the
annoyance of residents in the surrounding neighborhood or to the detriment
of the well-being of the neighborhood or the premises in the neighborhood.
§ 40-5. Hours of operation.
No launderette shall begin operations before 7:00 a.m. or to continue after
11:00 p.m., except that machines which have been started before 11:00
p.m. need not be stopped until the operation has been completed, but no
machine shall be started for use at or after 11:00 p.m.
§ 40-6. Specially designated machines.
No diapers or other articles containing bodily excrement or discharges
shall be permitted to remain around the premises but shall as speedily
as possible be placed in washing machines especially designated for such
purpose, and all such machines so designated shall be appropriately and
conspicuously marked and shall not be used for any other purpose.
§ 40-7. Attendant required.
No launderette shall be permitted to operate unless an attendant shall be
on the premises at all times during the hours of operation as enumerated in
§ 40-5.
§ 40-8. Notice of violation; procedures.
A. Where the Board of Health finds that a laundry or launderette is being
operated or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or
any other ordinance of the borough so as to constitute a nuisance, the
Board of Health shall notify the owner of the premises or the operator
of the launderette, or both, to abate the nuisance at the expense of such
owner or operator. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify a
time within which such nuisance shall be abated. If such owner or
operator shall not comply with such notice within the time so specified,
the said Board may proceed to abate the nuisance at the expense of
such owner or operator, or both, as provided by law.
21.Editor's Note: For Building Code, see Ch. 15; Zoning, Ch. 94.
§ 40-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 40-8
1:172
§ 40-9. (Reserved)22
§ 40-10. Severability.
If any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter shall be found
to be unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining sections, clauses, sentences
and provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby but shall be and remain
in full force and effect.
§ 40-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 42
LITTERING
§ 42-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of
Merchantville Anti-Litter Ordinance."
§ 42-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage or collection
receptacle or system as required and authorized in Chapter 34 of the Code
of the Borough of Merchantville, entitled "Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse."
BOROUGH — The Borough of Merchantville, County of Camden, State of
New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
B. Where the Board of Health finds that the continued operation of the
launderette while a violation exists constitutes a distinct and immediate
hazard to public health, the Board is hereby authorized to prohibit the
owner of the premises or the operator of the launderette, or both, from
operating or permitting the operation of said launderette until such
time as the violation is corrected and the nuisance abated.
22.Editor's Note: Former § 40-9, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 40-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:173
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. The word
"handbill" as utilized throughout this chapter shall be deemed to include
any commercial handbill.
LITTER — Garbage, trash and refuse as defined in Chapter 34 of the Code
of the Borough of Merchantville and including, in addition, building and
construction debris and any other matter or material which, if thrown or
deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department
of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officers provided by
general law.
PARK — Any park, playground, recreation center or any other public place
in the borough owned or used by the borough and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, public utility or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PRIVATE STRUCTURE — Any privately owned or occupied lands or
premises, including property owned or occupied by any public utility.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways
and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or service;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms of this subsection
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incidental to any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind.
C.
§ 42-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 42-3
1:174
§ 42-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall leave, throw, store or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the borough except in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 42-4. Litter on private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the
borough, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 42-5. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 42-6. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the borough, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 42-7. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent
scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon any private property.
§ 42-8. Location of required litter receptacles.
A. Litter receptacles are required at the following public places existing
within the municipality:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there should be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Drive-in restaurants.
(4) All street vendor locations.
(5) Self-service refreshment areas.
(6) Construction sites.
§ 42-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-8
1:175
§ 42-9. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit into any gutter, street or other public place within the borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 42-10. Prohibition on the dumping of waste.
No person shall throw, deposit, discard or dump any household or
commercial solid waste in any place not specifically designated for the
purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 42-11. Truckloads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the borough
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within
the borough the wheels or tires of which carry onto or which deposit in
any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 42-12. Storage of tires.
No person shall store tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure.
(7) Gasoline service station islands.
(8) Shopping centers.
(9) Parking lots.
(10) Camp grounds and trailer parks.
(11) Boat moorage and fueling stations, marinas and boat launching
areas.
(12) Public and private piers operated for public use.
(13) Beaches and bathing areas.
(14) Special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
§ 42-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 42-13
1:176
§ 42-13. Parking and keeping of vehicles.
No person shall park any type of vehicle on residential lawns. No person
shall keep inoperable unregistered vehicles on streets, vacant lots and
residential lawns.
§ 42-14. Accumulation of debris near construction sites.
The operator of a construction site is prohibited from accumulating debris
on or around the construction site or storing it in such a manner that it is
likely to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent property.
§ 42-15. Overflowing waste bins.
The borough prohibits overflowing or open commercial, industrial or
residential waste disposal bins.
§ 42-16. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all sorts of litter shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere,
as provided herein.
§ 42-17. Owner and occupant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant and person in charge of any building
or structure must keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting
said building or structure free from obstruction and nuisances of every kind
and must keep said sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free
from litter and other offensive materials.
§ 42-18. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or
other public place any accumulation from any public or private sidewalk
or driveway, except the occupant may rake fallen leaves into the gutter
for purposes of collection. Every person who owns or occupies property
must keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. And all
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 42-19. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk,
street or other public place within the borough. This provision shall not be
construed as prohibiting the distribution of handbills to persons willing to
accept them.
§ 42-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-20
1:177
§ 42-20. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 42-21. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly
posted. [Amended 5-27-1997]
§ 42-22. Distribution of handbills at inhabited private premises.
[Amended 5-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-08]
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any
private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there
is placed on said premises pursuant to this chapter a sign bearing the
words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement"
or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of
said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy
disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon the premises.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, a sign shall be no greater than the
dimensions of one foot wide by one foot high, and there must only be
one sign per each 100 feet of frontage.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private grounds, except on the porch or steps of
the private or commercial premises. Any commercial or noncommercial
handbill not thrown or deposited on the porch or steps of the private or
commercial premises shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. No person shall throw or deposit more than one commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private grounds, except on the
porch or steps of the private or commercial premises, within a twentyfour-
hour period. Each commercial or noncommercial handbill thrown
or deposited in or upon any private grounds, except on the porch or
steps of the private or commercial premises, in excess of one handbill
within a twenty-four-hour period, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, with each commercial or noncommercial handbill thrown or
deposited in excess of one handbill within a twenty-four-hour period
constituting a separate and distinct offense.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall
be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk,
or other public place or upon private property. In addition, persons,
firms and corporations engaged in the distribution of commercial
handbills shall obtain a license as hereinafter provided and make all
distributions between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time.
§ 42-20 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 42-23
1:178
§ 42-23. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
borough any litter, handbill or other object.
§ 42-24. Posting notices prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole, shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 42-25. Commercial handbill distribution licenses; application; fee.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage, as principal, in the
distribution of commercial handbills at inhabited private premises shall
make application to and receive from the Borough Clerk a commercial
handbill distribution license. Such applicant shall make written
application to the Borough Clerk upon a form or forms provided for
such purpose by the Borough Clerk. Such form shall contain, among
other things that may be required, the name, business address and a
brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the
applicant and the total number of agents and employees to be so
engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which
the applicant seeks to engage in such business. If the applicant is a
corporation, the application shall include the name and home address
of any shareholder owning more than 25% of the issued shares of such
corporation.
B. Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the Borough
Council may revoke any license obtained under an application
containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the
applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent
representations, or for violation of this chapter on repeated occasions,
or any other grounds specified by law. Such application shall be
accompanied by a fee hereinafter provided for in this chapter. No
license issued under this chapter shall be transferable; and, if any
license shall be surrendered by the licensee therein named or shall be
revoked for cause, neither the licensee named in such license nor any
other person shall be entitled to any refund of any part of such fee.
C. Fees: term. License fees under the terms of this chapter shall be as
follows:
(1) For a period of one year, the sum of $25.
(2) For a period of three months, the sum of $10.
(3) For a period of one week, the sum of $5.
(4) For a period of one day, the sum of $3.
§ 42-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-26
1:179
§ 42-26. (Reserved)23
§ 42-27. Severability; repealer.
§ 42-28. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 43
LOITERING
§ 43-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Loitering
Ordinance of the Borough of Merchantville."
§ 43-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in any place, public or
private, at any time in such manner as to:
A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holdings shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portion hereof.
B. Chapter 37 of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville, entitled
"Handbills and Posters" is hereby expressly repealed, and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of the breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created a disturbance or annoyance to the safety
of any person.
C. Warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
D. Obstruct the free passage of persons or vehicles.
E. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
23.Editor's Note: Former § 42-26, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 42-26 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 43-3
1:180
§ 43-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING and/or PROWLING — Includes the following activities:
lingering, remaining idle in essentially one location, spending time idly,
delaying, sauntering and moving slowly about, or doing any of the foregoing
acts in concert with others in a public place.
PRIVATE PLACE — Includes all places not commonly known as public.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes but is not limited to all places commonly known
as being public, such as public streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and
buildings. The term shall also include areas adjacent to private business
establishments as well as parking lots or other vacant private property not
under the control of the person charged with violating this chapter.
§ 43-4. Guidelines for enforcement.
§ 43-5. (Reserved)24
§ 43-6. Severability; repealer.
A. Without limitation, the following activities and circumstances may be
considered in determining whether this chapter has been violated:
(1) The flight of a person upon the appearance of a law enforcement
officer.
(2) Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a law
enforcement officer.
(3) The systematic checking of the means of access to a private or
public building at a time or in a place which would indicate an
unlawful entry was about to be attempted.
B. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable,
a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this chapter, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted by requesting that he identify himself
and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted
hereunder unless the law enforcement officer shall have complied with
the preceding sentence.
A. If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed stricken and shall not affect the validity of the
remainder hereof.
24.Editor's Note: Former § 43-5, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 43-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-6
1:181
§ 43-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon due passage and publication according
to law.
Chapter 46
NOISES
§ 46-1. Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or received within the limits of the Borough of Merchantville any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the limits of the borough.
§ 46-2. Acts constituting noise.
B. Section 54-4 of Chapter 54 of the Merchantville Code is repealed as of
the effective date of this chapter.
A. The following acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this chapter:
(1) Radios; televisions; phonographs. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving
set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants of which or with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this chapter. [Amended 8-11-03 by Ord. No. 03-10]
(2) Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals; birds. The keeping of any animals or birds which, by
causing frequent or long continued noise, disturbs the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
§ 43-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 46-2
1:182
(4) Horns. The sounding of any horn or warning device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except where
required by law or when necessary to give timely warning of the
approach of the vehicle or as a warning of impending danger to
persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street. No
person shall sound any horn or warning device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud
or harsh sound or for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of
time.
(5) PA systems; exterior telephone bells. The use of public address
systems, outside alarms and telephones on businesses which emit
noise into residential areas from a commercial district.
(6) Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(7) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(8) Construction or repair. The carrying on of an excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration work other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; the carrying on of
construction, repair or alteration work by a homeowner on his own
dwelling or property, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public
health or safety, the Director of Public Works may grant a permit
for excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work
for a period not to exceed three days, by the terms of which permit
such work may be carried on, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(9) Schools: courts: churches: hospitals. The creation of excessive
noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning,
church or court while in use or adjacent to a hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
that conspicuous signs are placed in such a street indicating that it
is a school, hospital or court street.
(10) Violations of N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1 et seq. To cause, suffer, allow or
permit sound from any industrial, commercial, public service or
community service facility, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1, that,
when measured at a residential property line, is in excess of the
standards as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.2 et seq., or that, when
measured at the property line of any other commercial facility, is in
excess of the standards as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3 et seq.
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:183
§ 46-3. Noises to attract public attention.
Chapter 48
NUMBERING OF PROPERTY
§ 48-1. Numbering required; means of numbering.
All dwelling houses or other buildings fronting on any of the streets,
avenues or highways within the limits of the Borough of Merchantville
shall be numbered at the expense of the owners thereof in the manner as
hereinafter described:
A. No person shall use any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device, or create any noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise.
B. No hawker, peddler or vendor shall shout or cry out upon any street or
public place between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
A. House and building numbers shall be:
(1) In Arabic numerals on the house and building.
(2) A minimum height of three (3) inches.
(3) At least thirty (30) inches above ground level and so placed that
trees, shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of
the numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
B. Chestnut Avenue shall be the line of beginning for the numbering of all
streets, avenues or highways crossing or entering into the same, the
numbers extending north and south therefrom, the odd numbers to be
on the east side of said streets, avenues and highways and the even
numbers to be on the west side of the same; and Centre Street shall be
the line of beginning for the numbering of all streets, avenues or
highways crossing or entering into the same, said numbers extending
east and west therefrom, the odd numbers to be on the north side of
said streets, avenues or highways and the even numbers to be on the
south side of same.
C. All dwelling houses or other buildings fronting on the north side of Park
Avenue between its intersection with the west line of Centre Street and
the north line of Maple Avenue shall be numbered by odd numbers
commencing at No. 1 at the intersection of Centre Street and extending
consecutively to the north line of Maple Avenue.
D. Such numbering shall be on the basis of one (1) number being allowed
to each eighteen (18) feet of frontage in the business zone of said
borough and each fifty (50) feet of frontage in the residential zones.
§ 46-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 48-2
1:184
§ 48-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon due passage and publication according
to law.
Chapter 50
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-2
1:185

ARTICLE I
Corporation Counsel and Borough Engineer
[Adopted 2-14-1977 as Ord. No. 518]
§ 50-1. Offices created.
There is hereby created the offices of Corporation Counsel and Borough
Engineer of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-2. Terms.
The Corporation Counsel and Borough Engineer shall serve at the pleasure
of the Borough Council but, unless sooner removed, shall serve for terms
of one (1) year and until their successors shall have been appointed and
qualified.
§ 50-3. Appointment.
The Corporation Counsel and Borough Engineer shall be appointed at the
annual organization meeting by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Borough Council.
§ 50-4. Compensation.
The Borough Engineer shall be compensated for his services at an hourly
rate and based upon actual time and expenses. The hourly rate shall be fixed
annually by the Borough Council and incorporated in a written contract for
the performance of the services rendered by the Borough Engineer.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:187

ARTICLE II
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 1-23-1989]
§ 50-5. Office created.
It is hereby created in the Borough of Merchantville the position of Chief
Financial Officer.
§ 50-6. Term and appointment.
The term and appointment of the Chief Financial Officer shall be made
by the governing body in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 50-7. Compensation.
The annual compensation for the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough
of Merchantville shall be fixed by the governing body in accordance with
Chapter 67, Salaries and Compensation, of the Merchantville Borough
Code.
§ 50-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-7
1:189

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)25
[Adopted 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02; repealed 9-8-2008 by Ord. No.
08-07]
§ 50-8. through § 50-12. (Reserved)
25.Editor's Note: Former Article III contained the Borough Administrator.
§ 50-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-8
1:191

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 50-13. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Municipal Prosecutor for the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 50-14. Compensation.
The salary of the Municipal Prosecutor of the Borough of Merchantville
shall be set forth in the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-15. Term of Office.
The term of office of the Municipal Prosecutor of the Borough of
Merchantville is one year, commencing January 1 and concluding on
December 31 of that year.
§ 50-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-15
1:193

ARTICLE V
Municipal Public Defender
[Adopted 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 50-16. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Municipal Public Defender for the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 50-17. Compensation.
The salary of the Municipal Public Defender of the Borough of Merchantville
shall be set forth in the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-18. Term of Office.
The term of office of the Municipal Public Defender of the Borough of
Merchantville is one year, commencing January 1 and concluding on
December 31 of that year.
§ 50-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-18
1:195

ARTICLE VI
Planning Board Solicitor
[Adopted 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 50-19. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Planning Board Solicitor for the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 50-20. Compensation.
The compensation of the Planning Board Solicitor of the Borough of
Merchantville shall be fixed by the agreement entered into between the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville and the Planning Board
Solicitor pursuant to the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
and/or the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-21. Term of Office.
The term of office of the Planning Board Solicitor of the Borough of
Merchantville is one year, commencing January 1 and concluding on
December 31 of that year.
§ 50-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-21
1:197

ARTICLE VII
Historic Preservation Commission Solicitor
[Adopted 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 50-22. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Historic Preservation Commission Solicitor for the
Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-23. Compensation.
The compensation of the Historic Preservation Commission Solicitor of the
Borough of Merchantville shall be fixed by the agreement entered into
between the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville and the
Planning Board Solicitor pursuant to the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq. and/or the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-24. Term of Office.
The term of office of the Historic Preservation Commission Solicitor of
the Borough of Merchantville is one year, commencing January 1 and
concluding on December 31 of that year.
§ 50-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-24
1:199

ARTICLE VIII
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 1-22-2007 by Ordinance No. 07-02]
§ 50-25. Purpose.
There is a need for an employee in the Borough of Merchantville to
administer and coordinate the activities and functions of the various
employees and departments in the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-26. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Deputy Borough Clerk for the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 50-27. Compensation.
The salary for the position of Deputy Borough Clerk shall be set forth in
the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-28. Term of office.
The term of office of the Deputy Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Merchantville is one year, commencing January 1 and concluding on
December 31 of that year. The Deputy Borough Clerk may also be removed
from office at any time pursuant to the terms of N.J.S.A. 40A:1-1 et seq.
§ 50-29. Residency.
The person appointed to the office of Deputy Borough Clerk need not be a
resident of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-29
1:201

ARTICLE IX
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
§ 50-30. Position created.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville do hereby
create the position of Purchasing Agent for the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-31. Compensation.
The salary of the Purchasing Agent of the Borough of Merchantville shall
be set forth in the appropriate Salary Ordinance adopted by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 50-32. Term of office.
The term of office of the Purchasing Agent of the Borough of Merchantville
is one year, commencing January 1 and concluding on December 31 of that
year.
§ 50-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-32
1:203

ARTICLE X
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 11-3-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
§ 50-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of Borough of Merchantville's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 50-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for Borough of Merchantville to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
Governing Body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of
the affordable housing program for Borough of Merchantville
§ 50-35. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for Borough of
Merchantville.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Governing
Body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Borough of
Merchantville, including the following responsibilities which may not
be contracted out:
(1) Serving as Borough of Merchantville's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Borough of
Merchantville's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 50-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-35
1:205
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the Administrative Agent for some or all of
the restricted units in Borough of Merchantville as described in
Subsection F. below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, Borough of Merchantville may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the Governing Body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of
Borough of Merchantville. If the Borough of Merchantville contracts
with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and Affirmative
Marketing Plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the
contracting Administrative Agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Governing Body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of Borough of Merchantville and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low and moderate income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
§ 50-35 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 50-35
1:206
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of Borough of Merchantville when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
Administrative Agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
§ 50-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-35
1:207
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the Administrative
Agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 50-35 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 50-35
1:208
Chapter 51
OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT
§ 51-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter install and operate
equipment for the burning of fuel oil or the storage of oil in connection
therewith in any building in the Borough of Merchantville without first
obtaining a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 51-2. Requirements for permit.
No such permit shall be issued except for the use of oil-burning equipment
tested and listed by the Underwriters' Laboratories and installed in
accordance with the regulations for the installation of oil-burning
equipment and for the storage and use of fuel oils in connection therewith,
as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and approved
by the Middle Department Rating Association.
§ 51-3. Application for permit. [Amended 12-13-1937]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring such permit shall make application
therefor, in writing, to the Borough Fire Marshal at the Fire House, stating
the make of such equipment, by whom manufactured, the location in the
borough where it is proposed to be installed and the method of the proposed
installation, which application shall be accompanied by a fee of $2.00.
Immediately after the installation of such equipment, it shall be inspected
by the Borough Fire Marshal, and, if found to comply with the provisions of
§ 51-2 hereof, he shall endorse his approval on said application and deliver
the same to the Building Inspector of the borough, who shall issue such
permit and mail or deliver the same to the owner of the building where the
equipment is installed. No such equipment so installed as aforesaid shall be
placed in operation, except to test the same, until such permit shall have
been obtained.
§ 51-4. Revocation of permit.
The Borough Fire Marshal may, at any time, reinspect equipment installed
under the provisions of this chapter and shall revoke the permit where
dangerous conditions are found. He may also at any time inspect oil-burning
equipment installed prior to the enactment of this chapter and if, in his
judgment, any of such equipment is of such character or so installed as to
create a fire menace, he may prohibit its operation until such condition is
remedied, in which case they shall not be operated thereafter until a permit
is secured as provided herein.
§ 51-5. (Reserved)26
26.Editor's Note: Former § 51-5, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 50-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-6
1:209
§ 51-6. Repealer; when effective.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed as to such inconsistency only, and this chapter shall take effect
upon due passage and publication according to law.
Chapter 53
PARKS
§ 51-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 51-6
1:210
ARTICLE I
Wellwood Park
[Adopted 1-28-1968]
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANTVILLE COMMUNITY CENTER — Includes the land and
premises belonging to the Borough of Merchantville located at the southerly
end of Greenleigh Court and generally circumscribed by Somerset Avenue,
Prospect Street, the northerly boundaries of the Merchantville Country
Club and, on the easterly side, the rear property lines of the properties
facing on Westminster Avenue, but shall not include the sidewalk between
the westerly boundary of the aforesaid premises and Prospect Street.
WELLWOOD PARK — The public park circumscribed by Maple Avenue,
Irvin Avenue, Myrtle Avenue and Hamilton Avenue but shall not include the
public sidewalks adjoining the foregoing streets.
§ 53-2. Night use of park and community center restricted.
[Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 556; 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-04]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon the grounds
of Wellwood Park or the Merchantville Community Center for any purpose
between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during the time period in which Eastern
Standard Time (EST) is being utilized, and between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. during the time period in which Eastern Daylight Time (EDT) is being
utilized, except during the time such person is attending or participating in
an event, program or other activity for which permission has been obtained
from the appropriate authority.
§ 53-2.1. Domestic animals prohibited. [Added 11-19-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-19]
No domestic animal shall be permitted upon the grounds of Wellwood Park
and/or the Merchantville Community Center.
§ 53-2.2. (Reserved) [Deleted 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-02]
§ 53-2.3. (Reserved) [Deleted 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-02]
§ 53-3. (Reserved)27
27.Editor's Note: Former § 53-3, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:211
§ 53-4. Posting notice of restrictions on premises.
Notice of the prohibitions established by this article shall be posted, as may
be determined by the Chief of Police of the Borough of Merchantville, on or
about the premises regulated thereby.
§ 53-5. Severability.
If any section or portion of any section of this article should be determined
to be invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of
the remaining sections or portions of this article.
§ 53-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately after adoption and publication
according to law.
§ 53-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 53-6
1:212
Chapter 54
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 54-1. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 4-8-1996]
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Merchantville:
§ 54-2. Use of premises for gambling.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to set up, keep or maintain or
permit to be set up, kept or maintained in any house or other building or
premises owned, leased or occupied by him or her any faro table, roulette
wheel or other device or game of chance whereby gambling may be done for
money or other valuable thing or to permit or allow any person to operate or
engage in any game of chance for the purpose of gambling, either as banker,
player, dealer or otherwise.
A. Enter any building or any public or private lands and break, injure or
deface such building or any part thereof or the fences, outhouses or
other property belonging to or connected with such building or lands.
B. Create or cause any disturbance at any building, public or private, or
molest or give annoyance to any persons attending, residing or who are
lawfully there within.
C. Loiter in or upon any public property or private property not his or not
lawfully in his possession and then and there to pry into the privacy or
security of the person lawfully in possession or occupation thereof.
D. Use loud, offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting
language or conduct himself or behave in any offensive, disorderly,
threatening, abusive or insulting manner or shout or make any noise, at
any place, during nighttime, to the annoyance or disturbance of any
person.
E. Congregate with others on a street and refuse to move on when ordered
by the police, or unlawfully, by his actions, cause a crowd to collect.
F. Engage in any illegal occupation or activity.
G. Cause any damage or otherwise break, deface or otherwise injure the
private property of another or public property.
H. Secrete any goods, chattels or valuable papers of another.
I. Make or aid, countenance or assist or maintain premises in which any
of the activities delineated in Subsections A through H above take
place.
§ 53-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:213
§ 54-3. Fighting contests.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to hold or permit or allow to be
held in any building or premises owned, leased or occupied by him or her
any dogfight, cockfight or prizefight or any sparring contest for a purse or
other money prize, or to maintain or permit or allow to be maintained on
any such premises any boxing ring, cockpit or any other place designed for
men or animals to fight.
§ 54-4. Firearms and explosives.28 [Added 4-8-1996]
No person shall set off or discharge any revolver, pistol, gun, cannon
or firearm of any description: provided, however, that nothing contained
herein shall be construed to extend to any military maneuvers, to any target
practice or to the explosion of dynamite or similar material used for blasting
purposes under proper supervision or to any police officer in the line of duty.
§ 54-5. Begging alms.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from door to door to beg
or solicit alms or to place himself or herself on the street for that purpose.
§ 54-6. Indecent exposure.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to appear on any street or
in any public place in a state of nudity or in an indecent or lewd dress
or garment or in a dress or garment not belonging to his or her sex, or
to make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or be guilty of any
lewd or indecent behavior, or to exhibit or sell or offer to sell any obscene
or indecent book, picture or thing, or to exhibit or perform any indecent,
immoral or lewd play or other representation.
§ 54-7. Activities frightening to animals and people.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to engage in any practice, sport
or exercise having a tendency to frighten horses or animals or to annoy or
frighten persons or pedestrians on the streets of the borough.
§ 54-8. Hawking.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to ring any bell or bells or blow
any horn or make any public outcry at or for any public sale, auction or
venue or in order to attract any attention to or gain passengers for any cab,
hack, omnibus or taxicab in or upon any street or highway.
§ 54-9. Establishment and maintenance of "Special Assistance
Registry." [Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1329]
28.Editor's Note: Former § 54-4, Loitering prohibited, was repealed 3-26-1973 by Ord. No.
476. See Ch. 43, Loitering.
29.Prior § 54-9 was repealed by Ord. No. 5-27-1997
§ 54-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 54-9
1:214
§ 54-10. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 128 of the borough entitled "An Ordinance for Suppressing
Vice and Immorality, etc.," approved November 13 1923, be and the same is
hereby repealed.
§ 54-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon due passage and publication according
to law.
§ 54-12. (Reserved)30
Chapter 55
PERMIT PARKING
A. The Borough Clerk shall prepare and maintain a "Special Assistance
Registry," which shall consist of the names and addresses of those
residents identifying themselves as in need of special assistance in the
event of an emergency. This registry shall be cross-indexed by the name
and address of each resident that opts onto the registry, identifying the
special circumstances for each, and is to be used solely for public safety
purposes.
B. The Borough Clerk shall provide the registry, which must be updated at
least monthly, to the Chief of the Merchantville Police Department, the
Chief of the Merchantville Fire Department, the Captain of the
Pennsauken First Aid Squad, and to any emergency services agency
that may be called to serve the residents of the Borough.
C. Any Borough resident who has requested enlistment on the "Special
Assistance Registry," pursuant to this chapter, shall be able to obtain
from the Borough Clerk's office a sticker for display at his or her
premises, indicating enlistment on the "Special Assistance Registry."
D. Any Borough resident who has requested placement on the "Special
Assistance Registry" shall remain on the "Special Assistance Registry"
until such time as he or she advises the Borough Clerk, in writing, that
they wish to be removed from the registry.
E. Any information contained in the "Special Assistance Registry" is
exempt from disclosure under the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: Sex offender residency prohibition; 2,500 feet, which was previously
codified herein has been preempted by Megan's Law, N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq.
§ 54-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:215
§ 55-1. Designation of area.
The portion of Block 29, Lot 1, on the Official Tax Map of the Borough of
Merchantville, described in a certain deed dated January 11, 1978, between
Robert W. Blanchett et al. and the Borough of Merchantville recorded in
Book 3543 at Page 438 in the book of deeds in the office of the Camden
County Registrar of Deeds is hereby set aside and designated for permit
parking as herein provided.
§ 55-2. Qualification for permit.
In order to qualify for the issuance of a permit, an applicant shall be either
the owner of any business or commercial enterprise located within the
territorial limits of the Borough of Merchantville or any person regularly
employed by such a business or commercial enterprise upon the premises.
§ 55-3. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be on a form supplied by the Borough Clerk
which shall attest that the applicant is the owner of a business or
commercial enterprise conducted within the territorial limits of the Borough
of Merchantville. In the event that the applicant is an employee of such
an enterprise, the Borough Clerk may require reasonable proof of such
employment.
§ 55-4. Issuance of permit.
The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Merchantville is hereby authorized to
issue to qualified persons applying and paying the requisite fee a parking
permit which will entitle the holder thereof to park a designated passenger
motor vehicle (not including a bus) in any available parking space within
the permitted parking area between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday, during the entire period for which the permit is issued.
§ 55-5. Issuance not to constitute guaranty.
The issuance of a parking permit shall not constitute a guaranty to the
person to whom issued that a space will be available for parking of the
designated motor vehicle.
§ 55-6. Period of issuance.
Permits may be issued for a period of one year commencing on the first
day of January and terminating on the last day of December, or permits
may be issued quarterly for the three-month period commencing January 1,
April 1, July 1 or October 1 of each year and terminating the last day of the
third succeeding month. Permits shall be issued to any person who pays the
designated fee therefor, except that the total number of permits in effect at
any given period of time shall not exceed 30.
§ 55-7. Fees; transferal; replacement.
§ 55-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 55-7
1:216
§ 55-8. Form and placement of sticker.
All permits shall be in the form of a decalcomania which shall be affixed to
the motor vehicle for which issued upon the left rear side window, in such a
manner and position as to be clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle.
Affixing such stickers by use of adhesive tape or any similar tape or device
is prohibited.
§ 55-9. Parking without permit prohibited.
During the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day except
Sundays, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle, registered in the name of or operated by such person,
to be parked in the permitted parking area as designated herein without an
appropriate permit therefor properly affixed to said motor vehicle.
§ 55-10. Parking within spaces.
Every motor vehicle parked in any parking space in the permitted parking
area shall be parked within the space marked upon the pavement for the
parking of a single motor vehicle.
§ 55-11. Removal and impoundment; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-27-1997]
In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed under § 1-9 of this
Code, any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
may be removed by any person so authorized by the Police Chief of the
Borough of Merchantville to a public garage or other place designated by
said Police Chief for the storing of said vehicle, and said vehicle may be
impounded and held until the owner thereof shall pay to the Borough Clerk
the costs of the removal of said vehicle from the parking lot, plus any
A. The fees for the issuance of the aforesaid parking permits shall be as
follows:
(1) Annual fee: $120.
(2) Quarterly fee: $30.
B. If any annual permit is issued after February 1, the annual fee shall be
prorated at the rate of $10 for each entire and partial month remaining
in the calendar year. The permit fee for quarterly permits shall not be
prorated.
C. Upon written application therefor and upon the payment of a fee of $2
to the Borough Clerk, any permit may be transferred from one vehicle
to another vehicle owned by the same person, at any time during the
period for which the permit is issued, for the balance of the permit
period remaining unexpired, or a replacement sticker may be issued to
any person upon proof that the original sticker was destroyed.
§ 55-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-11
1:217
reasonable storage charges for each and every day or part thereof that said
vehicle is impounded.
§ 55-12. Repealer; when effective.
Chapter 56
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 56, Planning Board, adopted 1-27-1964,
was superseded 1-10-1977 by Ord. No. 516. See Ch. 94, Zoning,
Article XII, Planning Board, and Article XIV, Provisions Applicable to
Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.]
Chapter 56A
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 56A, Plumbing Code, adopted 9-14-1967
by the Board of Health, was repealed 2-24-1997.]
Chapter 57
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 57, Poles and wires, adopted 7-6-1915,
was repealed 5-27-1997.]
Chapter 59
POLICE DEPARTMENT
A. All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
B. This chapter shall take effect upon publication according to law.
§ 55-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 55-12
1:218
ARTICLE I
Police Department Established
§ 59-1. Police Department established.
There is hereby established and organized in and for the Borough of
Merchantville a Police Department, which shall consist of a Chief of Police
and such members and officers as shall be deemed necessary by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville, which shall, from time
to time, determine the number of persons, including temporary officers and
members in an emergency, to be appointed to these positions, their terms of
office, the fixing of their compensation and the prescription of their powers,
functions and duties.
§ 59-2. Office of Chief of Police.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Merchantville the office
of Chief of Police.
B. Said Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville.
C. Said Chief of Police and all policemen of the Borough of Merchantville
shall be under the direction and control of the Director of Public Safety.
D. Said Chief of Police shall be paid a salary as set forth in the annual
Salary Ordinance.31
E. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the Borough Council for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the Borough
Council, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any social emergency directive for the disposition
and discipline of the Department and its members and officers.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control.
(5) Report at least monthly to the Borough Council in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department
during the preceding month and make such other reports as may
be requested by the Borough Council.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:219
§ 59-3. Duties of officers.
All the officers of the Police Department shall perform all the duties
provided by law and such other and further duties as may be established
by the Director of Public Safety, including but not limited to preserving
the public peace; protecting life and property; detecting, arresting and
prosecuting offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances of
the Borough of Merchantville; directing and controlling traffic; providing
attendance and protection during emergencies; providing appearances in
court; cooperating with all other law enforcement agencies; and providing
training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 59-4. Administration.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville shall be designated
as the appropriate authority as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The
appropriate authority shall be responsible for the overall performance of the
Police Department. The appropriate authority shall adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and for
the discipline of its members.
§ 59-5. Uniform police force members.
A. The Police Department shall consist of the following uniform police
force members in the identified line of authority:
(1) Chief of Police. The police force shall consist of one Chief of Police
whose duties, responsibilities, and authority are defined in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118. The Chief of Police shall be head of the police force
and shall be directly responsible to the member of Borough Council
designated as the Director of Public Safety.
(2) Captains. The police force shall consist of one or more Captains to
be determined by the governing body. The governing body, in its
discretion, may, upon vacancy, determine to appoint no Captains.
The Captain or Captains so appointed shall be next in the line of
authority subordinate only to the Chief of Police.
(3) Lieutenants. The police force shall consist of one or more
Lieutenants to be determined by the governing body. The
governing body, in its discretion, may, upon vacancy, determine to
appoint no Lieutenants. The Lieutenant or Lieutenants so
appointed shall be next in the line of authority to the Chief of Police
and Captains so appointed.
(4) Sergeants. The police force shall consist of one or more Sergeants
to be determined by the governing body. The governing body, in its
discretion, may, upon vacancy, determine to appoint no Sergeants.
The Sergeant or Sergeants so appointed shall be next in the line of
authority and subordinate to the Chief of Police, Captains and
Lieutenants so appointed.
§ 59-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 59-5
1:220
(5) Corporals. The police force shall consist of one or more corporals to
be determined by the governing body. The governing body, in its
discretion, may, upon vacancy, determine to appoint no corporals.
The corporal or corporals so appointed shall be next in the line of
authority following the Sergeants and subordinate to the Chief of
Police, Captains, Lieutenants and Sergeants so appointed.
(6) Patrolmen. The police force shall consist of one or more patrolmen
to be determined by the governing body. The patrolman or
patrolmen so appointed shall be next in the line of authority
following the Sergeants and subordinate to the Chief of Police,
Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants and corporals so appointed.
(7) Special officers — Class One. The Borough Council may appoint,
from time to time, special law enforcement officers known as
"special officers — Class One" in accordance with New Jersey
statutes for terms not exceeding one year. Such special officers —
Class One shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties
provided by said statutes during their term in office but shall not be
continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall
not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize the
aforementioned special law enforcement officers known as "special
officers — Class One" when on duty to exercise the powers and
authority as provided in state statutes. The special officers — Class
One are subordinate to the Chief of Police, Captains, Lieutenants,
Sergeants, corporals and patrolmen so appointed.
(8) Special officers — Class Two. The Borough Council may appoint,
from time to time, special law enforcement officers known as
"special officers — Class Two" in accordance with New Jersey
statutes for terms not exceeding one year. Such special officers —
Class Two shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties
provided by said statutes during their term in office but shall not be
continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall
not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize the
aforementioned special law enforcement officers known as "special
officers — Class Two" when on duty to exercise the powers and
authority as provided in state statutes. The Special Officers — Class
Two are subordinate to the Chief of Police, Captains, Lieutenants,
Sergeants, corporals, patrolmen and special officers — Class One
so appointed.
B. The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville may employ such
other nonuniform staff such as clerks, secretaries, dispatchers and the
like, as it deems necessary for the operation of the Police Department.
The duties, responsibilities, superiors and other employment-related
matters of such nonuniform employees shall be identified in such
employees' title job descriptions which may be included within the
Police Department's Rules and Regulations.
§ 59-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-5
1:221

ARTICLE II
Police Services
§ 59-6. Fees and charges for police services.
All fees and charges established for copies of photographs, reports and
other documents to be furnished by the Police Department of the Borough
of Merchantville are as set forth in Chapter 25, Fees for Public Documents.
§ 59-7. Collection of fees; receipts.
All fees and charges established by § 59-6 shall be collected by the Police
Department which shall issue consecutively numbered receipts therefor in
triplicate. The original receipt shall be delivered to the applicant, one copy
shall be retained by the Chief of Police or some responsible police officer
designated by him, and the third copy shall be delivered to the Borough
Treasurer at least once each month accompanied by the fees or charges so
received.
§ 59-8. Disposition of receipts.
The copies of the receipts issued hereunder shall be retained by the
Treasurer and the Chief of Police until such time as they shall be ordered to
be destroyed by the governing body or by the Borough Auditor.
§ 59-9. Nonapplicability of fees.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from examining and
making copies of any public record, not otherwise restricted, without
charge.
§ 59-10. Restricted or confidential information.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to anyone the right
to obtain copies of photographs, information, statements or reports when,
in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the same should be restricted and
held as confidential in the interest of justice. In any such case where a
restriction is imposed by the Chief of Police, said restriction may be lifted
by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction or by the written order of
the Attorney General, the County or Municipal Prosecutor or the Director of
Public Safety.
§ 59-11. Issuance of information without charge.
No charge shall be made for copies of photographs, reports, statements or
other documents which the Police Department shall be required to give or
to make to any public officer or law enforcement authority or which may be
given to aid public officer or law enforcement authority in the enforcement
of the law.
§ 59-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-11.1
1:223
§ 59-11.1. Extra duty assignments—application procedure. [Added
2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 02-05; amended 8-12-2002 by Ord. No.
02-09]
The local school board, any private entity or individual may hire police
officers for extra duty assignments. Applications describing the specific
nature of the services being requested shall be submitted to the Chief
of Police who shall determine the propriety of such request. Extra duty
assignments that are approved shall be made available to members of the
Police Department who may wish to engage in such activities.
§ 59-11.2. Responsibility for compensation. [Added 2-25-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-05; amended 8-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-09]
§ 59-11.3. Extra duty assignment services—rates and charges.
[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 02-05; amended 8-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-09]
A. The local school board, any private entity or individual requesting
police officers for extra duty assignments pursuant to this article shall
be responsible for the cost of such services as set forth in this section.
B. The person or entity requesting police officers for extra duty
assignments shall make application to the Chief of Police stating,
among other things, the anticipated time in which such extra duty
assignment services will be required. The Chief of Police will thereafter
inform the requesting party as to the appropriate amount to be placed
in a special escrow account. The person or entity requesting such
services, within three (3) days of the proposed commencement of such
services, shall tender this escrow amount to the Chief of Police, who will
remit same to the Chief Financial Officer for deposit into the special
escrow account.
C. No extra duty assignment services shall commence without the posting
of the escrow as herein required, nor shall extra duty assignment
services continue if the funds escrowed are insufficient to cover the
costs of the continuation of such services. The escrow balance shall at
all times be sufficient to pay for extra duty assignments before said
services are rendered and no services shall be rendered unless prepaid.
D. The Chief of Police is responsible for all contacts with the party
requesting extra duty assignment services and for the status of escrow
balances. The recipient of services will receive a statement of charges
within ten (10) days of the cessation of such services.
A. Hourly rates for extra duty assignments shall be established annually
by Resolution of the Borough Council. The rate charged shall include,
but not be limited to, the hourly rate to be received by police personnel
performing such services, and any such sum as may be required by the
Borough to cover the administrative cost of providing such services.
§ 59-11.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 59-11.3
1:224
§ 59-11.4. Extra duty assignment services—disbursement. [Added
2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 02-05; amended 8-12-2002 by Ord. No.
02-09]
The Chief Financial Officer shall pay police personnel performing extra
duty assignments at the established hourly rate for extra duty assignments,
less regular payroll deductions. Payment to police personnel shall be made
during the next regular pay period following the performance of any extra
duty assignment.
§ 59-11.5. Limitation of liability. [Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No.
02-05; amended 8-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-09]
The performance of any extra duty assignment is contingent upon the
Borough's ability to provide the necessary manpower through the
employment of off-duty police personnel. In the event that the Police
Department fails to perform or complete any extra duty assignment, the
Borough's liability shall be limited to refunding any fee or portion thereof
received as payment for such services.
B. The minimum charge for any extra duty assignment service shall be two
(2) hours.
§ 59-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-11.5
1:225

ARTICLE III
Discipline and Hearings
§ 59-12. Suspension and removal.
Disciplinary actions brought against any uniform officer of the police force
shall be conducted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 et seq., which
provides that no officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fired or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey statutes and the
Police Department's Rules and Regulations.
§ 59-13. Hearings.
§ 59-14. Review of disciplinary conviction.
The final decision of the Committee for Public Safety may be reviewed in
the Superior Court in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-150.
A. The Mayor, the Director of Public Safety and one other member of
Borough Council appointed by the Mayor shall constitute the
Committee for Public Safety, which is empowered to hear and decide
the charges made against uniform officers of the police force.
B. The Committee for Public Safety shall prepare a report containing
findings of fact, conclusions and a final disposition of the charges. Such
decision by the Committee for Public Safety shall be the final decision of
the Borough of Merchantville.
C. The Committee for Public Safety, in its discretion, may select a hearing
officer to serve in place of the Committee for Public Safety. Such
hearing officer shall conduct a hearing, then submit a report to the
Committee for Public Safety containing findings of fact, conclusions and
a recommended disposition of the charges to be acted upon by the
Committee for Public Safety and the final decision of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 59-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-14
1:227

ARTICLE IV
Rules and Regulations
§ 59-15. Adoption and promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville, who is the
appropriate authority as referred to in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, shall adopt and
promulgate Rules and Regulations for the police force consistent with this
chapter, state law and federal law.
§ 59-16. Purpose of Rules and Regulations.
The Rules and Regulations of the police force to be adopted and
promulgated shall provide for the government of the police force and shall
further provide for the discipline of the police force members.
§ 59-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-16
1:229
Chapter 60
POOLROOMS
§ 60-1. Hours of operation.
No pool or billiard room within the limits of the Borough of Merchantville
shall be permitted or allowed to remain open for the playing of pool,
billiards or any other games of any character between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
§ 60-2. Minimum age of patrons.
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed or permitted
to be or remain in and about any pool or billiard room as aforesaid or to
frequent the same or loiter therein.
§ 60-3. License required.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to have for public
use any public pool, billiard or combination table in the Borough of
Merchantville without first having obtained a license therefor from the
Borough Council.
§ 60-4. Expiration date and fee of license.
Such license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which
the same is granted, and the fee for such license shall be the sum of ten
dollars ($10.), to be paid to the Borough Clerk upon the granting of such
license by Council as aforesaid; provided, however, that the fee for licenses
granted after the first day of July in each year shall be the sum of five dollars
($5.) to be paid as aforesaid.
§ 60-5. Revocation of license.
Said license may be revoked by Borough Council at any time upon proof of
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance
of the borough or of any state law; provided, however, that the holder of
such license shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon.
§ 60-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the passage and publication according
to law.
Chapter 60A
PUBLIC DEFENDER SERVICES
§ 59-16 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60A-1
1:230
§ 60A-1. Application; fee; inability to pay.
In order to obtain the services of the Municipal Public Defender or a courtapproved
counsel, an application must be filed with the Municipal Court on
a form provided by the borough. The application form shall be consistent
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-1 et seq.
§ 60A-2. Use of fees.
All moneys collected for the use of this application fee shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the
Municipal Public Defender or court-approved counsel, including, when
required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
Chapter 60B
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
A. The Municipal Court Judge shall make the decision as to which
defendants are indigent after reviewing the defendant's application.
This determination shall be based upon whether the applicant fits
within the definition of "indigent defendant" found within N.J.S.A.
2A:158A-2.
B. The Municipal Court Administrator shall assess a nonwaiveable
application fee of $200.00 upon each person from whom an application
for services under this chapter is made. This fee shall be chargeable
regardless of whether the applicant is found to require the services of
the Municipal Public Defender or court-approved counsel. The
Municipal Court Judge may waive any application fee, in whole or in
part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee represents
an unreasonable burden upon the applicant.
C. The defendant's inability to pay the application fee shall in no way affect
or reduce the rendering of services under this chapter. In the case of a
defendant who is unable or unwilling to pay the application fee, the fee
shall become a lien and the borough may collect the fee consistent with
N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1 and N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-19.
D. In all cases where it appears that the defendant has, or reasonably
expects to have, means to meet some part, though not all, of the cost of
the services rendered to him, he shall be required to reimburse the
borough, either by single payment or in installments, in such amounts
as the applicant can reasonably be expected to pay over a time period
not to exceed four months. No default or failure in the making of such
payment shall affect or reduce the rendering of services under this
chapter.
§ 60A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60A-2
1:231

ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance
§ 60B-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 9-24-2007
by Ord. 07-16; 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-13]
The International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2006 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Merchantville, in
the State of New Jersey, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said IPMC are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 60B-4 of this
chapter, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Borough
Clerk of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 60B-2. Administration.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Merchantville shall be
charged with the responsibility to administer the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Merchantville and accomplish all activities
necessary to enforce this chapter.
§ 60B-3. Repealer.
Chapter 15 of the Borough Code of the Borough of Merchantville entitled
"Building Code" and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed solely as to the section or sections that
conflict or are inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 60B-4. Amendments to standards. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-13]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, is hereby
amended and revised in the following respects:
A. Section PM-101.1, Title, shall now read as follows:
PM-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Merchantville, hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
B. Section PM-103.1, General, shall be amended to read as follows:
PM-103.1 General: There is hereby created in the Borough of
Merchantville the position of Property Maintenance Code Official
(hereinafter, "Code Officer") who shall be appointed annually by the
Mayor of the Borough of Merchantville. The code official shall enforce
all provisions of this code.
C. Section PM-106.4, Penalties, shall read as follows:
§ 60B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-4
1:233
§ 60B-5. Unlawful acts. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10;
amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator and/or occupier of property
situate in the Borough of Merchantville to fail to comply with the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 60B-6. Notice; personal service. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-10; amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Merchantville, or his
designee, shall serve written notice upon any such person described in
Section 60B-5, describing the condition of the premises and demanding that
the condition be abated within five (5) days of receipt of said notice, or an
appropriate complaint shall be filed in violation of this article.
§ 60B-7. Alternate service of notice. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-10; amended 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
In the event that personal service cannot be made, or in the event that
service by certified mail is not accepted, service shall be accomplished by
posting said notice in a conspicuous place on the premises, or by electronic
mail to an e-mail address provided by the property owner, operator or
occupant, with a "Read Receipt Request" provided.
PM-106.4 Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Merchantville, or such other court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine
not exceeding $2,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or community service for a term not exceeding 90 days, or all of
the above. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation, subject to the penalty provisions of this article.
D. Section PM 111.0, MEANS OF APPEAL, shall be deleted in its entirety.
E. Section PM-304 shall be included in its entirety. [Added 6-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-04]
F. Section PM-602.3, Heat supply, shall be amended as follows:
PM-602.3 Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling units, rooming units,
dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either express or implied, to furnish
heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the
period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain the room temperatures
specified in Section PM-602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and
10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than sixty degrees (60° F.) [sixteen
degrees Celsius (16° C.)] during other hours.
§ 60B-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-8
1:234
§ 60B-8. Corrective measures. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-10; amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
Where the owner, operator and/or occupier shall refuse and/or neglect to
correct the violation(s) within five (5) days after the date of the notice as
referenced in Section 60B-6 of this chapter, or upon the expiration of five
(5) days following posting of notice as provided in Section 60B-7 of this
chapter, or, in the case of a second or subsequent violation within one year
from the date of the last notice, three (3) days after the date of the notice as
referenced in Section 60B-6 of this chapter, or upon the expiration of three
(3) days following posting of notice as provided in Section 60B-7 of this
chapter, the borough may correct or cause the violation(s) to be corrected,
at the expense of the owner, operator and/or occupier of the property.
§ 60B-8.1. Subsequent remedial action; continuing notice. [Added
6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
Where the owner, operator and/or occupier refuses and/or neglects to
correct the violation(s) within five (5) days after receipt of notice as
referenced in Section 60B-6 of this chapter, or upon the expiration of five
(5) days following posting of notice as provided in Section 60B-7 of this
chapter, or, in the case of a second or subsequent violation within one year
from the date of the last notice, three (3) days after the date of the notice
as referenced in Section 60B-6 of this chapter, or upon the expiration of
three (3) days following posting of notice as provided in Section 60B-7 of
this chapter, and the Borough is required to take corrective measures as
referenced in Section 60B-8 of this chapter, the notices given to the owner,
operator and/or occupier of any such land shall be valid for subsequent
remedial action to the property a period of one hundred twenty (120) days
from the expiration of five (5) days following posting of notice as provided
in Section 60B-7 of this chapter.
§ 60B-9. Lien by Borough. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10]
In all cases where such conditions are abated by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Merchantville pursuant to Section 60B-6, the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall certify the cost thereof
to the Council of the Borough of Merchantville, which shall examine the
certificate, and if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against said land. The amount so charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such land and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the Borough
of Merchantville Tax Collector.
§ 60B-10. Cumulative penalties. [Added 10-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-10]
The imposition and collection of a fine imposed hereunder, shall not bar the
right of the Borough of Merchantville to collect any costs in the manner as
§ 60B-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-10
1:235
permitted herein, or by summary action, in a court of law, and the remedy
herein provided shall be cumulative.
§ 60B-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-10
1:236
ARTICLE II
Usage of Storage Containers, Trash Dumpsters and Roll-Off
Containers
[Adopted 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
§ 60B-11. Bulk storage containers — public property.
No bulk storage container, storage container, storage device, "pod", or
similar container shall be placed or maintained by any private party in or on
any Borough property, street or right of way.
§ 60B-12. Bulk storage containers — private property.
No bulk storage container, storage container, storage device, "pod", or
similar container shall be placed or maintained on any private property
unless it complies with one or more of the following provisions:
§ 60B-13. Trash dumpsters and roll-off containers.
No trash dumpster, roll-off container, or similar container for trash or
debris of any type may be placed or maintained by any private party in
or on any Borough property, street, or right of way except in compliance
with the provisions of this article. Furthermore, no trash dumpster, rolloff
container, or similar container for trash or debris of any type may be
placed or maintained on any private property within the Borough except in
compliance with the provisions of this article in a manner and location as
set forth on a duly approved site plan.
§ 60B-14. Permits required.
Prior to the placement of any dumpster, roll-off container, or similar
container in or on any Borough property, street, or right of way, or on any
private property (not covered by a duly approved site plan) the owner or
user of such container shall apply for and receive a permit from the Borough
pursuant to the provisions and standards set forth herein.
A. Such containers may be placed or maintained on a driveway or other
suitably paved area for purposes of packing or unpacking goods and
materials of the owner or occupant of the property in preparation for or
subsequent to moving into or out of the property for a period of not
more than twenty-one (21) consecutive days.
B. Such containers may be placed or maintained on a driveway or other
suitably paved area for purposes of storing the goods and materials of
the owner or occupant of the property when necessary during
renovation or rehabilitation of the structure located on the premises in
which the goods or materials would otherwise be located during the
period of renovation or rehabilitation and up to ten (10) days prior to
commencement and ten (10) subsequent to completion of the work but
in no event more than a total of four (4) months.
§ 60B-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-14
1:237
§ 60B-15. Responsibility.
The owner of the container and the owner of the property associated with
its use shall be jointly responsible for compliance with the provisions of this
article. Copies of the penalty provisions of this article shall be appended to
the permit and shall be mailed with a copy of the permit to the owner of the
container, the property owner, and any other interested party.
§ 60B-16. Violations; penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Merchantville, or such other
A. Application for the permit shall be made to the office of the Borough
Clerk or such other office as the Borough Council may from time to time
designate on a form provided by the Borough. The application shall
require, among other things, the full name, address, and other contact
information for both the owner of the container and the owner of the
property with which the use of the container is associated. The
application shall be accomplished by a permit fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00).
B. Any container to be placed on a street or right of way shall be placed on
the street in a legal parking space as approved or designed by the
Borough and shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors or other
safety markings so that the container will not constitute a hazard to
traffic. The specific number, location, and nature of the markings shall
be determined by the Borough Police in the exercise of their discretion
and shall be noted on the permit as a condition of its issuance.
C. Any permit issued for placement of a container on a street, right of way
or other public property shall be valid for a period of five (5) days and
sticker or notice shall be prominently displayed on the street side of the
container indicating the commencement and expiration date of the
permit.
D. Any container placed on private property shall be placed on a suitable
base to assure stability. If in the opinion of the Borough Police, the
location is sufficiently near to a public vehicular or pedestrian path, the
permit may require suitable safety markings as set forth in subsection
B, above.
E. Any permit issued for placement of a container on private property shall
be valid for a period of ten (10) days and sticker or notice shall be
prominently displayed on the street side of the container indicating the
commencement and expiration date of the permit.
F. Upon a showing of continued need for the container (such as during the
course of major construction projects), permits may be renewed up to
three (3) times for periods of up to five (5) days upon application for
renewal and payment of an additional fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee.
§ 60B-14 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-16
1:238
court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,250.00, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or community service for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or all of the above. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation, subject to the
penalty provisions of this article.
§ 60B-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-16
1:239

ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Vacant Properties
[Adopted 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-13]
§ 60B-17. Definitions.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity who is not the owner, who has
charge, care and control of a premises or part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner. Operator shall also include a
creditor, as defined in P.L. 2014, c. 5, that has served a notice of intention to
foreclose on a mortgage on a residential property pursuant to P.L. 1960B, c.
244, and that property has become vacant after the filing of this intention
to foreclose.[Added 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder
having authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing
entity subject to the provisions of C. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec.
17 as amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by
the Borough of Merchantville to have authority to act with respect to the
property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided, however,
that any property where all building systems are in working order, where
the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in habitable condition, and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this Article.
§ 60B-18. Registration requirements. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-05]
Effective September 1, 2013, the owner and/or operator of any vacant
property, as defined herein, shall, within 30 calendar days after the building
becomes vacant property or within 30 calendar days after assuming
ownership of the vacant property, whichever is later, or within 10 calendar
days of receipt of notice by the municipality, file a registration statement
for such vacant property with the Property Maintenance Inspector on forms
provided by the Borough of Merchantville for such purposes. Failure to
receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute grounds for failure to
register the property.
A. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
§ 60B-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-18
1:241
§ 60B-19. Access to vacant properties. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-05]
The owner and/or operator of any vacant property registered under this
article shall provide access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior
inspections of the building to determine compliance with municipal codes,
upon reasonable notice to the property owner and/or operator or the
designated agent. Such inspections shall be carried out on weekdays during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., or such other time as may be mutually
agreed upon between the owner and/or operator and the Borough.
§ 60B-20. Responsible owner or agent.
years or older, designated by the owner and/or operator or owner and/
or operators as the authorized agent for receiving notices of Property
Maintenance Code violations and for receiving process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such
owners and/or operators in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code, and the name, street address, telephone number and
e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the
firm's individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property.
The individual or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining
the property shall be available by telephone or in person on a twentyfour-
hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be
the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement
must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the
State of New Jersey.
C. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration, except for the initial registration time, which shall be
prorated through December 31. The owner and/or operator shall be
required to renew the registration annually as long as the building
remains a vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in Section 60B-21 of this article, for each vacant
property registered.
D. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
E. The owner and/or operator shall notify the Borough Clerk within 30
calendar days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Borough
Clerk for such purpose.
F. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
owners and/or operators of the building.
§ 60B-18 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-20
1:242
§ 60B-21. Fee schedule.
§ 60B-22. Requirements of owners and/or operators of vacant
properties. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
The owner and/or operator of any building that has become vacant property,
and any person maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such
building that has become vacant, shall, within 30 days thereof:
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this Article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of Property
Maintenance Code violations concerning the registered vacant
property and all process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding brought to enforce Property Maintenance
Code provisions concerning the registered building by service of the
notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
borough in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner
files a new annual registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register vacant property under the provisions of
this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive by posting on
the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known
address of the owner of the property on record within the Borough of
Merchantville by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the building.
A. The initial registration fee for each building shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.).
B. The fee for the first renewal is one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.).
C. The fee for a second renewal is three thousand dollars ($3,000.).
D. The fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is five
thousand dollars ($5,000.).
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Borough Code or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and/or operator, the owner and/or
§ 60B-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-22
1:243
§ 60B-23. Violations; penalties. [Amended 8-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-05]
operator's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process (if
designated pursuant to § 60B-20 of this article), and the person
responsible for the day-to-day supervision and management of the
building, if such person is different from the owner and/or operator
holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed
in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 8 inches by
10 inches; and
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete;
D. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are well
maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter and grass and weed
growth; and
E. Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition,
keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure
that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
is demolished or until repaid and/or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
F. If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated, or if a residential
property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the operator's
filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the
operator or any other third party, and the property is found to be a
nuisance and/or in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the operator, which shall have the
responsibility to abate the nuisance and/or correct the violation in the
same manner and to the same extent as the title owner of the property,
to such standard or specification as may be required by State law or this
article. The Borough shall include a description of the conditions that
gave rise to the violation with the notice of violation, and shall provide a
period of not less than 30 days from the operator's receipt of the notice
for the operator to remedy the violation. If the operator fails to remedy
the violation within that time period, the Borough may impose penalties
allowed for such violations pursuant to Section 60B-23 of this article.
A. Any owner, operator or occupant who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for
penalties or any combination thereof as set forth in Chapter 1-9 of the
Code of the Borough of Merchantville, in the discretion of the Judge of
the Municipal Court before whom such violation is heard and conviction
§ 60B-22 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-23
1:244
made, but in no event shall the fine be less than $250.00. Each day that
a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation,
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
B. For purposes of this article, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions of such
provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this
article.
§ 60B-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-23
1:245

ARTICLE IV
Registration of Defaulted Mortgage Property.
[Added 12-12-16 by Ord. No. 2016-17]
§ 60B-24. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Borough Council to establish a process to
address the deterioration, crime and decline in value of the neighborhoods
of the Borough of Merchantville caused by property with defaulted
mortgages located within the Borough, and to identify, regulate, limit and
reduce the number of these properties located within the Borough. It is
the Borough Council's further intent to establish a registration requirement
as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from the negative impact and
conditions that occur as a result of vacancy, absentee ownership, lack
of adequate maintenance and security and will provide a method to
expeditiously identify multiple parties and their contact person(s) for each
property responsible for this protection.
§ 60B-25. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY — Any real property located in the Borough,
whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the Mortgagee or Trustee,
is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien
sale, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was
transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure
and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The
designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain
in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide
purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been
dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — Any property that is accessible
through a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is
unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION — Shall mean 6 months from the date of
the first action that required registration, as determined by the Borough,
or its designee, and every subsequent 6 months. The date of the initial
registration may be different than the date of the first action that required
registration.
APPLICABLE CODES — Shall include, but not be limited to, the Borough's
Zoning Code, the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, Trash Ordinance,
Residential and Commercial Recycling Ordinance, and the State Building,
Construction and Fire Codes.
§ 60B-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-25
1:247
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — Shall be defined as follows:
DEFAULT — That the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any Law Enforcement Officer, Building
Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector of
Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Borough to enforce
the applicable code(s).
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/
or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned
vehicles auto parts or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal
items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an
unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail, or statements by neighbors, passers-by,
delivery agents or government agents; or the presence of boards or other
coverings over doors, windows or other openings in violation of applicable
code.
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien
holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to
obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a
debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but
is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale
to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes,
activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described
process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other
means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
(1)
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
(2)
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Borough Codes;
or
(3)
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lacks maintenance
as required by the applicable codes.
(4)
§ 60B-25 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-25
1:248
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — a property manager,
property management company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of registrable real property within 20 driving
miles of the Borough limits. Upon review of credentials the Borough, or its
designee, may allow a non-local property manager to be listed.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees;
mortgage service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who,
individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or beneficial
title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of registrable real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land,
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the Borough limits. Developed lots are considered improved land.
RENTAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains a single-family rental
dwelling unit or multi-family rental dwelling units for use by residential
tenants, including but not limited to, the following: mobile homes, mobile
home spaces, town homes and condominium unit(s). A rental dwelling unit
includes property that is provided to an individual or entity for residential
purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in lieu of rent,
regardless of relationship between lessor and lessee.
VACANT — Any parcel of land in the Borough that contains any building
or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings
as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "Evidence
of Vacancy" above which is without lawful tenant, or lawful occupant or
without a certificate of occupancy.
§ 60B-26. Applicability.
The sections of this Article IV shall be considered cumulative and not
superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be
an additional remedy available to the Borough above and beyond any other
State, County, or Borough provisions for same.
§ 60B-27. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 60B-28 of this article, the Borough, or
its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each Registrable Property
within the Borough, containing the information required by this article.
§ 60B-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-28
1:249
§ 60B-28. Registration of defaulted mortgage real property.
A. Any Mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Borough shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The Mortgagee
shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with
the Code Enforcement Officer, or its designee, on forms or other
manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or
occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether
it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the Mortgagee/Trustee, and the Servicer, and the name and
twenty-four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property who has the authority to make decisions concerning the
abatement of nuisance conditions at the property, as well as any
expenditure in connection therewith.
C. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this Ordinance No. 2016-17 have 30 calendar days from the
effective date to register the property with the Code Enforcement
Officer, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and
indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is vacant or
occupied.
D. If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new
Mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this article and, within 5 days of
the transfer, must register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid semi-annual
registration fees are the responsibility of the new Mortgagee or Trustee
and are due and payable with their initial registration.
E. If the Mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers
the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the
transferee is subject to all the terms of this article and within 5 days of
the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid semi-annual
registration fees are the responsibility of the new Registrable property
owner and are due and payable with their initial registration.
F. As long as the property is Registrable it shall be inspected by the
Mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in
the property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten (10)
days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property
registration.
G. A non-refundable semi-annual registration fee established by ordinance
by the Borough Council, shall accompany each registration pursuant to
this section. (See Chapter 25, Fees, Section 25-16)
§ 60B-28 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-28
1:250
§ 60B-29. Maintenance requirements.
H. All registration fees must be paid directly from the Mortgagee, Trustee,
Servicer, or Owner. Third Party Registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the Borough and/or its authorized designee.
I. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the semi-annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they are registrable.
J. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or
legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing
of a dismissal of Lis Pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/or
certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any
Mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements
of this article as long as the borrower is in default.
K. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten (10) days of the change.
L. Failure of the Mortgagee to properly register or to modify the
registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances
as required by this article is a violation of the article and shall be
subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary penalties.
M. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this article, the Borough may take the
necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown
brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those
required by Federal, State or local law, discarded personal items
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration was
required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
§ 60B-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-29
1:251
§ 60B-30. Security requirements.
§ 60B-31. Public nuisance.
All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 60B-32. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may
apply to the property.
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal
of all trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance
of a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with the applicable
code of the Borough. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the
Borough's Code Enforcement Borough Council, Special Magistrate or
Hearing Officer, or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Borough may
take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Borough.
A. Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure manner
so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
C. If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a local property manager shall be designated by the
Mortgagee or Owner to perform the work necessary to bring the
property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property
manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with
the requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws.
§ 60B-29 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-33
1:252
§ 60B-33. Additional authority.
§ 60B-34. Immunity of Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer or any person authorized by the Borough to
enforce the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or
criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed by this article.
§ 60B-35. Enforcement; penalties.
A. If the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the Mortgagee or
Owner, and may bring the violations before the applicable hearing
officer as soon as possible to address the conditions of the property.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require the
Mortgagee or Owner affected by this article, to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to,
securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of
an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably
required to help prevent further decline of the property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Borough, in its
discretion, may abate the violations and charge the Mortgagee or
Owner with the cost of the abatement.
D. If the Mortgagee or Owner does not reimburse the Borough for the cost
of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by
the Code Enforcement Officer or Court, within thirty (30) days of the
Borough sending the Mortgagee or Owner the invoice then the Borough
may lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative fee
as determined in the Borough's fee ordinance to recover the
administrative personnel services. In addition to filing a lien the
Borough can pursue financial penalties against the Mortgagee or
Owner.
A. Enforcement: the requirements of this article may be enforced as
follows:
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding two thousand ($2,000.) dollars; and/or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding ninety (90) days; and/or a period of
community service not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(2) By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a
court of competent jurisdiction;
§ 60B-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60B-35
1:253
(3) By condemnation and demolition pursuant to Title 20 of the New
Jersey Statutes, or by the nuisance abatement process;
(4) By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or
certificates or occupancy;
(5) By any other process permitted at law or equity; and
(6) Use of any one of the enforcement process or theory does not
preclude the Borough from seeking the same, different, or
additional relief through other enforcement methods.
B. Separate offenses. A violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense for each day it shall continue or recur. Each condition which
exists in violation of this article is a separate violation.
(1) Each day a property remains unregistered when required to be
registered by this ordinance is a separate offense for each day it
shall continue or recur.
(2) Each day a property is not inspected as required by this article is a
separate offense.
(3) Each day a property is not secured as required by this article is a
separate offense.
(4) Each day a condition violating the Borough's minimum housing
codes or property maintenance codes exists on a property subject
to registration under this article is a separate offense.
C. Persons responsible for violations. The Owner, Mortgagee, Trustee or
Servicer as those terms are defined in this article, and their duly
authorized officers, employees or agents employed in connection
therewith who has assisted in the commission of the violation or failed
to perform as required by the article shall be guilty of the violation.
§ 60B-35 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 60B-35
1:254
Chapter 61
PUBLIC GARAGES
§ 61-1. Operation and maintenance; definitions.
A. No person shall construct, operate or maintain a public garage or
public motor vehicle storage building in the Borough of Merchantville
or alter or change any other building for such purposes, except subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person desiring to construct or operate any such public garage or
building or to alter or change any other than an existing building into a
public garage shall first make application, in writing, to the Building
Inspector for a permit for such operation or construction specifying the
floor space to be therein devoted to or used for the purpose of motor
vehicle storage.
C. No such public garage or building shall hereafter be constructed,
maintained or operated, or any other building altered or changed for
such purposes, with any entrance thereto on any street in any purely
residential district, square or section of said borough; provided,
however, that the Building Inspector, on the approval of the Borough
Council, may issue such permit in any such district, square or section
where the majority of the owners, measured according to the linear feet
of the property fronting on both sides of any such district, square or
section, shall petition in writing for the issuance of any such permit, or
any such garage already licensed may be permitted to have such
entrance in addition to its then-existing entrance by special permit from
said Council.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain such a public
garage or building in the Borough of Merchantville without first
obtaining a license for that purpose as hereinafter mentioned.
E. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC GARAGE or PUBLIC VEHICLE STORAGE BUILDINGS — Any
garage, place or building in which any automobile or other motor
vehicle is stored for hire or reward and which is held out to the public
and operated as a public garage, or which garage, place or building
or any part of the land connected therewith is let, rented or leased
in whole or in part for such storage for hire; or any garage, place or
building used as an automobile repair shop, or in, on or about which
automobiles or motor vehicles are stored, put or placed for the purpose
of repairing, altering or changing the same for hire or reward.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, SQUARE OR SECTION — Any street between
the two nearest intersecting cross streets where the majority of realestate
improvements, measured according to linear feet frontage on
either side thereof, shall consist of buildings used as residences.
§ 60B-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-2
1:255
§ 61-2. Inspection prior to issuance of license.
No license for the purpose mentioned in the preceding section shall be
issued until the Borough Council, upon the report of the Building Inspector,
shall be satisfied by a due and proper proof that the building in which it
is proposed to conduct the said public garage or the business of storing or
repairing motor vehicles has been properly constructed and safeguarded
against fire and other dangerous elements.
§ 61-3. Requirements for construction.
§ 61-4. Issuance of license.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant for the operation of any such public
garage has complied with all the provisions of this chapter and is otherwise
entitled to a license hereunder, the Clerk, upon the order of the Borough
Council and upon the payment of the required license fees, is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue the license to any corporation, firm or
person applying therefor. The annual fees to be paid for such license shall
be according to the capacity of said public garage or building, as follows:
at the rate of $1.00 for each car stored or capable of being stored in any
such buildings up to the limit of five machines, the floor space capacity
hereunder to be computed at the rate of 200 square feet for each car,
provided that the minimum license hereunder for any public garage shall
be $1.00 per year. Any public garage having more than 1,000 square feet
of floor space intended to be devoted to the purpose of such public garage
shall pay an additional license fee at the rate of $0.50 for every additional
200 square feet therein used or intended to be used as a public garage
or for motor vehicle storage purposes, provided that the maximum license
fee hereunder for any public garage shall be $15.00 per year and provided
also that where a number of individual public garages are constructed in
separate stalls or sections under one roof or adjoining each other for the
A. Hereafter no building shall be constructed to be used for the storage of
automobiles as a public garage, as herein defined, unless the floor,
walls and roof framing thereof shall be constructed of fireproof
material.
B. The use or maintenance of any open lights or fires within any such
public garage shall be prohibited.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in any such public garage, and signs to that
effect shall be prominently displayed.
D. At least one approved two-and-one-half-gallon chemical extinguisher
shall be provided for each 2,500 square feet of floor space.
E. No gasoline shall be kept, used or stored in any such public garage,
except that contained in automobile reservoirs. Gasoline supply shall be
contained in a tank buried below the level of the lowest floor with
approved pump discharging to the outside of the building.
§ 61-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 61-4
1:256
storage in each stall or section thereof of one car or motor vehicle, the
annual license fee to be paid hereunder for each stall or section shall be the
sum of $1.00.
§ 61-5. Location of gasoline pumps and appurtenances; license
required.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain on any of the public streets or
sidewalks in the Borough of Merchantville any gasoline storage tank, pump,
pipes or other appliances for the sale of gasoline without first obtaining
a license therefor as herein provided. Such license shall be issued by the
Clerk when directed by the Borough Council when in the judgment of the
Council the issuance thereof is for the public good. The license fee therefor
shall be $2.00 per annum.
§ 61-6. License expiration date.
Every license issued hereunder shall expire on the 31st day of December
next after the same shall be issued and shall be renewed annually, and for
any license taken out between the first day of January in one year and the
first day of January in the next year, the applicant shall only be required to
pay for the proportional part of the year for which it is issued; provided,
however, that the minimum license fee hereunder shall be $1.00 for any one
year or part of any one year for each public garage or each gasoline selling
station, as aforesaid.
§ 61-7. Encompassing factor.
The keeping open of such garage for business or the advertising of such
garage whether by printed advertisement, public signs or otherwise shall
be deemed to be the operation and maintenance of a public garage within
the meaning of this chapter.
§ 61-8. (Reserved)32
§ 61-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, to the extent of
such inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.
§ 61-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 63
PURCHASING
32.Editor's Note: Former § 61-8, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 61-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-1
1:257
§ 63-1. Adoption of state bidding and quotation threshold amounts.
Current state bidding and quotation threshold amounts shall be followed by
the Borough of Merchantville Purchasing Office.
The amounts so referenced in Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq. shall be amended pursuant to any amendment of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq., which would increase or decrease the bid threshold and/or the quote
threshold.
Chapter 65
RAFFLES AND BINGO LICENSING
§ 65-1. Eligible organizations.
A code authorizing licensing of bona fide organizations or associations
of veterans of any war in which the United States has been engaged,
churches or religious congregations and religious organizations, charitable
educational and fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, senior
citizen associations and clubs, officially recognized volunteer fire companies
and officially recognized volunteer first-aid or rescue squads is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 to 5:8-49.
§ 65-2. Issuing authority.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Bingo Licensing Law of New Jersey (1954)."
Three (3) copies of the said Bingo Licensing Law of New Jersey have been
placed on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk of this Borough upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain there until final action is taken
on this chapter for the use of and examination by the public.
The Borough of Merchantville does hereby delegate the Municipal Clerk of
the Borough of Merchantville to be the issuing authority for the purpose of
approving and granting bingo and raffle licenses.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or
conducting any games of chance authorized under any license issued under
this chapter, except as an active member of an organization, association,
church, congregation, society, club, fire company, first-aid or rescue squad
or senior citizen association or club to which the license is issued or a
member of an organization or association which is an auxiliary to the
licensee.
§ 65-3. Application. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Clerk of the municipality
a written application therefor in the form prescribed in N.J.S.A. 5:8-26.
§ 63-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 65-3
1:258
Municipal Clerk shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each
applicant with due expedition after the filing of the application, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-27.
There shall be a payment of a license fee or fees as set forth in Ch. 25,
Fees for each occasion upon which any game or games of chance are to be
conducted under such license, in addition to the fee to be collected by the
municipality and remitted to the State for each such game of chance. The
ten-dollar fee to the municipality shall be waived for any bona fide nonprofit
organization such as a charitable, religious or service organization as
recognized by U.S.C.A. § 501(c) or (d) or § 401(a).
Note: For current fees, see Chapter 25, Fees.
No license for the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games
of chance should be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for a
period of more than one year.
No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
Municipal Clerk until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant,
at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications
of the applicant and the merits of the application.
Each license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game
or games are conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
§ 65-4. Age requirement.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to
participate in any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted
pursuant to any license issued under this chapter.
§ 65-5. Location.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter oftener than six (6) days in any
calendar month or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 65-6. Special license.
There shall be a special license issued to any senior citizen association or
club which operates and conducts games of chance solely for the purpose
of amusement and recreation of its members. All applicants for such license
must comply with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 5:8-25.1.
§ 65-7. Advertisement.
No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be
or has been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded by means
of newspaper, radio, television or sound truck or by means of billboards,
§ 65-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:259
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public,
except that one sign not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in area may be
displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be played, and
an additional similar sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises
where the games of chance may be conducted under any license issued
under this chapter on any day of the week, including Sunday.
§ 65-8. Violations.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof, unless the amount of such rental is stated in a
statement annexed to the application for the license as provided in N.J.S.A.
5:8-26, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess of the sum
stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such a statement, executed
by him or her or on its behalf, or shall fail to keep such books and records
as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding,
operating or conducting of games of chance under any such license or shall
falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate
to any transaction connected with the holding, operating and conducting
of any game of chance under any such license or shall violate any of the
provisions of this Article or of any term of such license shall be a disorderly
person and, if convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering any other
penalties which may be imposed, forfeit any license issued to it under this
Article and shall be ineligible to apply for a license under this Article for one
(1) year thereafter.
§ 65-9. Sunday permission.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, the holder of any license issued
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., known as the "Bingo
Licensing Law," and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-58, the holder
of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.,
known as the "Raffles Licensing Law," shall be permitted to conduct games
on the first day of the week commonly known and designated as Sunday,
provided that the initial application for any such license shall specify that
Sunday permission is requested.
Chapter 66
RENTAL PROPERTIES
§ 65-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 65-9
1:260
ARTICLE I
Inspections; Property and Inspection Standards; Rental Certificate
of Inspection
[Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
§ 66-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner of this chapter. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow or other
dwelling unit, consisting of one or more rooms occupying all or part of a
floor or floors in a building, whether designed with or without housekeeping
facilities for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment
be designed for residence, for office or the operation of any industry or
business or for any other type of independent use.
CERTIFICATE — The Rental Certificate of Inspection issued by the Borough
attesting that the rental unit has been properly inspected in accordance
with this chapter.
CERTIFICATE HOLDER — The person to whom the Certificate is issued
pursuant to this chapter. The term "Certificate Holder" includes within its
definition the term "agent," where applicable.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged or
designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more
persons, including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his
servants, agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvement connected
with use or Inspection thereof.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership association or trust who owns, operates, exercises
control over, or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
consisting of one (1) or more dwelling units, which is kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where living
accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay or
other consideration, to one or more individuals.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-1
1:261
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit, which is available for lease or rental
purposes. Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental facility
occupied by the owner.
§ 66-2. Inspection.
All rental units within a rental facility hereinabove defined shall be
inspected by the Borough of Merchantville for thirty-six (36) consecutive
months, or with each change in occupancy, whichever shall occur first.
§ 66-3. Application for inspection; contents.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, every owner shall apply to the Borough Clerk of the Borough
of Merchantville, or such other person as designated by the Mayor and
Borough Council, for an inspection of each rental unit contained within
a building or structure. The application for inspection shall include the
following information:
A. The name and domicile address of the record owner or owners of the
premises and the record owner or owners of the rental business, if not
the same persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and domicile
addresses of all general partners shall be provided, together with the
telephone numbers for each of such individuals, where such individual
may be reached both during the day and evening hours. The
designation of a "P.O. Box" or similar alternative address does not
satisfy the requirements of this section.
B. If the domicile address of any record owner is not located in
Merchantville or in Camden County the name and domicile address of a
person who resides in Camden County and who is authorized to accept
notices from a tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to accept
service of process on behalf of the record owner.
C. The name and domicile address of the agent of the premises, if any.
D. The name and domicile address, including the dwelling unit number of
the superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual, employed by
the owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.
E. The name, domicile address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in
Camden County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the
event of an emergency affecting the rental facility or any unit of
dwelling space therein, including such emergencies, as the future of
any essential service or system and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the rental facility and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.
F. The name of any pet residing in the rental unit, the breed of said pet,
and the license number assigned to this pet pursuant to its licensure by
the State of New Jersey and/or the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 66-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-3
1:262
§ 66-4. Application for inspection; indexing and filing; public
inspection; fee.
The Borough Clerk or designee shall index and file the application for
inspection. In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the
mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended and supplemented, so that
the filing of the application for inspection will simultaneously satisfy the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property
being inspected, and will also satisfy the inspection requirements of this
chapter. The owners shall post the Rental Certificate of Inspection issued by
the Borough in a conspicuous place within its property.
§ 66-5. Application for inspection; amendments; filing.
Every person required to file an application for inspection pursuant to this
chapter shall file an amended application for inspection within twenty (20)
days after any change in the information required to be included thereon.
No fee shall be required for the filing of an amendment, except where the
ownership of the premises is changed.
§ 66-6. Periodic inspections.
G. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
H. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
I. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement
of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan, which shall become
part of the application and which shall be attached to the application for
inspection when filed by the Borough Clerk or designee. This
information shall be made available to the emergency services
providers within the Borough of Merchantville.
J. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Borough of
Merchantville.
A. Each rental unit within the rental facility shall be inspected at least
once every thirty-six (36) month period.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of Merchantville, and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Borough of
Merchantville shall not be used as a valid substitute.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance and, to the extent applicable, to determine if the
property complies with the Property Maintenance Code, Uniform
§ 66-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-6
1:263
§ 66-7. Access for inspections; repairs.
§ 66-8. Prohibitions on inspection.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
inspection of any rental unit within the Borough of Merchantville, which has
not been issued a Rental Certificate of Inspection in accordance with this
chapter.
Construction Code, BOCA Maintenance Code, Housing Code and/or
Uniform Fire Safety Act.
D. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit within the rental facility are deemed unsatisfactory, a Rental
Certificate of Inspection shall not issue for such property, and the
owner of the property or his agent shall not lease or rent such property,
nor shall any tenant occupy the property, until the necessary
corrections have been made, so as to bring the property and rental unit
into compliance with the applicable code, and the property is thereafter
subsequently inspected and a Rental Certificate of Inspection is issued.
In the event that the property is occupied when such conditions are
discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30 days, and, if
not made within that time period, the owner shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter, and, every day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to the penalty
provisions of Sections 66-17 and 66-18 of this chapter. The owner,
however, shall be permitted to apply for an extension of time to make
repairs or corrections so as to comply with this chapter, for good cause
shown.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities and rental units, in order
that they may promote the purposes of this chapter to safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the occupants of rental facilities and rental
units and of the general public. For the purposes of making such
inspections, the inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey rental facilities and rental units at all reasonable
times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility and/or rental unit
shall give the inspecting officer free access to the rental facility and/or
rental unit at all reasonable times, to promote the purposes of this
chapter.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility or rental unit
access to any part of such rental facility or rental unit at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations, as are
necessary, to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this chapter, an inspecting officer shall conduct an
inspection as hereinbefore provided.
§ 66-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-9
1:264
§ 66-9. Rental Certificate of Inspection.
§ 66-10. (Reserved)
§ 66-11. Fees.33
At the time of the filing of the application for inspection, and, prior to the
issuance of a Rental Certificate of Inspection, the owner or agent of the
owner must pay a fee in accordance with the following:
A. Upon the filing of a completed application for inspection, payment of
the prescribed fee and a satisfactory inspection, the owner shall be
entitled to the issuance of a Rental Certificate of Inspection
commencing of the date of issuance, valid for a period of thirty-six (36)
consecutive months. As hereinbefore stated, should a change of
occupancy occur within the inspection period, the Rental Certificate of
Inspection shall be void and, upon the filing of a completed application
for inspection, payment of the prescribed fee and a satisfactory
inspection, the owner shall be entitled to the issuance of a new Rental
Certificate of Inspection commencing on the date of issuance, valid for
a period of thirty-six (36) consecutive months.
B. An application for inspection shall be required for each rental unit, and
Rental Certificate of Inspection shall be issued to the owner for each
rental unit, even if more than one rental unit is contained in the
property.
A. An application fee of $150.00 per rental unit in rental facilities per
inspection period pursuant to property inspections required under this
chapter.
B. Change of Occupancy. An application fee of $50.00 per rental unit in
rental facilities per inspection period pursuant to property inspections
required upon a change in occupancy. [Amended 11-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-15]
C. Reinspections. Fees for the reinspection of rental units shall be charged
pursuant to property inspections performed under this chapter as
follows:
(1) For the first reinspection, there shall be no fee.
(2) For the second reinspection, there shall be a fee of $20.00.
(3) For the third and each subsequent reinspection, there shall be a fee
of $30.00.
D. Late Fee. If any fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of its due date, a
late fee surcharge of $20.00 shall be assessed in addition to any fees
outstanding.
33.Editor's Note: Fees codified under this section may also be found in Chapter 25, Fees,
Section 25-15.
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-11
1:265
§ 66-12. Providing application for inspection to occupants and
tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the application for inspection required by this chapter. This
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guest house registered with
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act,
as per N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the application for inspection in a conspicuous place within the
rental unit(s).
§ 66-13. Maximum number of occupants; posting.
§ 66-14. Taxes and other municipal charges; payment precondition
for inspection and issuance of Rental Certificate of Inspection.
No Rental Certificate of Inspection shall issue for any property, containing
a rental unit, unless all municipal taxes, water and sewer charges and any
other municipal assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 66-15. Other rental unit standards.
All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code and the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code.
§ 66-16. Occupant(s) standards.
E. When owner is a senior citizen. If the owner of the property is a senior
citizen who resides in a unit of the rental facility and rents out the
remaining unit(s), and would otherwise qualify under the State of New
Jersey property tax deduction under N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be
no fee.
A. The maximum number of occupants, as determined by the Hotel and
Multiple Dwelling Inspection Code of the State of New Jersey, N.J.A.C.
5:13A-1 et seq., shall be posted in each rental unit. It shall be unlawful
for any person, including the owner, agent and/or tenant, to allow a
greater number of persons than the posted maximum number of
occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental unit for a period
exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this provision shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of Sections 66-17 and 66-18 of this chapter.
B. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Borough of
Merchantville, as required in this chapter, may reside in the subject
premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said
premises, and any owner, agent and/or tenant allowing any other party
to reside in said premises shall be in violation of this section and shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 66-17 and 66-18 of this
chapter.
§ 66-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-16
1:266
§ 66-17. Revocation of Rental Certificate of Inspection; procedure.
A. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the
Borough Clerk, as provided in this chapter, may reside in the premises
subject to the Rental Certificate of Inspection. It shall be unlawful for
any other person to reside in said premises, and this provision may be
enforced against the landlord, tenant or other person residing in said
premises.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner,
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owner or of the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinance of
the Borough of Merchantville.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Merchantville, and with
all applicable State and Federal laws.
D. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 66-18
of this chapter.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, a
Certificate Holder may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the
Rental Certificate of Inspection issued hereunder upon the happening
of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this chapter in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this chapter at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection B., herein.
(3) Continuously renting the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of the Noise Ordinance of the Borough.
(4) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this chapter.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to the person or property.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a Rental
Certificate of Inspection may be filed by any one or more of the
following: Director of the Office of Code Enforcement, Chief of
Police, Construction Code Official, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire
Inspector or any other persons or officers authorized to file such
§ 66-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-17
1:267
complaint. Such complaint shall be in writing and filed with the
Borough Clerk or designee. The complaint shall be specific and
shall be sufficient to apprise the Certificate Holder of the charges,
so as to permit the Certificate Holder to present a defense. The
individual(s) may file a complaint on the basis of information and
belief, and need not rely on personal information.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Mayor and Borough Council,
and a date for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be
sooner than 15 nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough
Clerk or designee shall forward a copy of the complaint and a
notice, as to the date of the hearing, to the Certificate Holder and/
or the agent, if any, at the address indicated on the application for
inspection. Service upon the agent shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the Mayor
and Borough Council, unless, in its discretion, the Mayor and
Borough Council determine that the matter should be heard by a
Hearing Officer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Borough
Council. If the matter is referred to a Hearing Officer, such officer
shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of law to the
Mayor and Borough Council within 30 days of the conclusion of the
hearing. The Mayor and Borough Council shall then review the
matter and may accept, reject or modify the recommendations of
the Hearing Officer based on the record before such hearing
officer. In the event that the matter is not referred to a Hearing
Officer and is heard by Mayor and Borough Council, then the
Mayor and Borough Council shall render a decision within 30 days
of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a decision
shall be rendered dismissing the complaint, revoking or suspending
the Rental Certificate of Inspection, or determining that the Rental
Certificate of Inspection shall not be renewed or reissued for one or
more subsequent years.
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Borough Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action brought pursuant to this chapter
by demonstrating that the Certificate Holder has taken appropriate
action and has made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or
circumstances giving rise to the revocation proceeding, including but
not limited to the institution of legal action against the tenant(s),
§ 66-17 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-17
1:268
§ 66-18. Violations; penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the fines and/or
penalties as are set forth in the chapter 1-9 of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation, subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
occupant(s) or guests for recovery of the premises, eviction of the
tenant(s) or otherwise.
§ 66-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-18
1:269

ARTICLE II
Vacancies
§ 66-19. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 66-20. Time limit for filling vacancies; exception.
A. The owners of any dwelling units or commercial units, other than those
exempted below, shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
B. The following are exempt from the provisions of Section 66-20A of this
Article:
(1) Units in owner-occupied buildings where there are four (4) units or
less and one (1) of these units is owner-occupied.
(2) Units in newly constructed buildings which are being rented for the
first time. After the first rental, such units will be subject to the
provisions of this Article.
(3) Units in a building whose owner has transmitted his first sixty-day
notice of his intentions to convert the building into a condominium
or cooperative and his full plan of conversion to the Borough Clerk
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.8.
C. The following are exempt from the provisions of Section 66-20B of this
Article:
(1) Any unoccupied property that is under agreement of sale. This
exemption shall be limited to the first three (3) months after a
property becomes unoccupied. Thereafter all provisions of this
Article are applicable, and all time requirements are considered to
be extended by said three-month period.
(2) Any unoccupied property that is listed for sale by a realtor or by the
owner. This exemption shall be limited to the first three (3) months
after a property becomes unoccupied. Thereafter all provisions of
this Article are applicable, and all time requirements are
considered to be extended by said three-month period.
A. All such units that have been rental units shall be rented and occupied
by a new tenant within two (2) months after the end of the preceding
tenancy, which shall be defined as the last day of residence by the
preceding tenant or tenants, except where this requirement has been
waived by the Planning Board under the provisions of Section 66-23
below, in which event the unit shall be rented and occupied within the
time period specified in the waiver.
B. All such units that have not been rented, but become vacant for any
reason, shall be occupied within two (2) months after the property
becomes vacant, except where this requirement has been waived by the
Planning Board under the provisions of Section 66-23 below, in which
§ 66-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-20
1:271
§ 66-21. Notification of vacancy.
event the unit shall be occupied within the time period specified in the
waiver.
A. The owner of any rental unit which is still vacant thirty (30) days after
the end of the preceding tenancy shall notify the Zoning Officer within
five (5) days, in writing, of said continuing vacancy.
(1) "Vacancy," as it applies to a dwelling unit, is defined as:
(a) Being unoccupied by any person or persons for more than
twenty (20) days out of a month; or
(b) Receiving no electricity, gas or fuel heat; or
(c) Appearing to manifest no evidence of occupancy by a person or
persons, such as by lack of furniture, lack of food or clothing,
lack of mail delivery or by being boarded up.
(2) "Vacancy," as it applies to a commercial unit, is defined as:
(a) Lacking a main entrance open to the general public for
business; or
(b) Being closed to the general public for business for more than
eighteen (18) out of twenty-four (24) hours per day for more
than three (3) out of seven (7) days per week for a period of
three (3) or more weeks.
B. Said notification shall include the following:
(1) The address of the unit and its location within the building;
(2) The rent charged the preceding tenant and rent to be charged the
proximate incoming tenant;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the owner;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the owner's agent
and/or resident manager, if any.
C. No notification shall be required with respect to any unit rented and
occupied within thirty (30) days or less from the end of the preceding
tenancy.
D. The owner or other representative of any unit that has not been
previously rented and which is vacant for more than thirty (30) days
shall notify the Zoning Officer within five (5) days, in writing, of such
vacancy. Such notification shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and any other relevant information,
such as identification of an attorney, estate or relatives with knowledge
of the status of ownership.
§ 66-20 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-22
1:272
§ 66-22. Notification of occupancy.
§ 66-23. Waivers of requirements.
A. Within thirty (30) days after submission of the report required under
Section 66-21 above, the landlord (in those cases involving rental units)
shall notify the Zoning Officer that the unit has been rented and
occupied, with the name or names of the new tenant or tenants and the
terms of the tenancy. Failure to have the unit rented and occupied
within sixty (60) days after the end of the preceding tenancy, except
where a waiver has been granted by the Planning Board, shall be
considered a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in Section 1-9 of the Code.
B. Within thirty (30) days after submission of the report required under
Section 66-21 above, the owner (in those cases involving rental units)
shall notify the Zoning Officer that the unit has been occupied, with the
name or names of the new occupant or occupants. Failure to have the
unit occupied within sixty (60) days from the time that the unit became
vacant, except where a waiver has been granted by the Planning Board,
shall be considered a violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Section 1-9 of the Code.
A. A landlord may seek a waiver of the requirement to rent the unit within
sixty (60) days of the end of the preceding tenancy where the condition
of the unit or other special circumstances make rental within such time
period impossible. In order to obtain a waiver, the landlord must submit
a request, in writing, to the Planning Board within thirty (30) days or
less from the end of the preceding tenancy, setting forth with
specificity:
(1) The reasons that the unit cannot be rented within such time period.
(2) The steps that the landlord shall take to remedy the conditions that
make it impossible to rent the unit.
(3) The date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied.
B. Full documentation, such as code violation reports, engineering or
inspection reports, etc., shall be provided by the landlord.
C. Any waiver granted by the Board under this section shall specify a date
by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. The Board may extend
that date, upon written request of the landlord, but may not provide
more than two (2) such extensions of not more than sixty (60) days
each.
D. In no circumstance shall any waiver, including extensions, exceed six
(6) months from the time of the granting of such waiver.
E. The following circumstances shall constitute grounds for the granting
of a waiver by the Planning Board:
§ 66-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-23
1:273
§ 66-24. Filing of complaints.
Any individual affected by the action or inaction of an owner of a dwelling
unit or commercial unit subject to the provisions of this article, and any civic
organization and any appropriate municipal agency, may file a complaint of
violation of this Article with the Merchantville Municipal Court.
§ 66-25. Vacancies upon effective date of regulations.
Any landlord of any unit which has been vacant thirty (30) days or more
from the end of the preceding tenancy, as of the effective date of this
Article (adopted November 5, 2013), shall be required to file the notification
required under Section 66-21 of this article within fifteen (15) days of the
effective date of this article.
(1) An owner wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to reserve said
unit for a family member. The owner shall provide in the waiver
request full documentation, such as the name of the future tenant
and the date of occupancy.
(2) An owner wishes to maintain a vacant unit in order to improve the
conditions of said unit. The owner shall provide full documentation
in the waiver request, such as up-to-date building and housing
inspection reports, improvement plans, all related permits and the
date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied.
(3) An owner maintains a vacant unit in order to correct code
violations in said unit. The owner shall provide in the waiver
request full documentation, such as code violation reports,
correction plans, permits and the date by which the unit shall be
rented and occupied.
F. In the case of properties that have not been previously rented, an owner
may seek a waiver of the requirement to have the unit occupied within
sixty (60) days from the time that it became vacant where the condition
of the unit or other special circumstances make occupancy within such
time period impossible. In order to obtain a waiver, the owner must
submit a request, in writing, to the Planning Board within thirty (30)
days or less from the time that the unit became vacant, setting forth
with specificity:
(1) The reasons that the unit cannot be occupied within such time
period.
(2) The steps that the owner shall take to remedy the conditions that
make it impossible to occupy the unit.
(3) The date by which the unit shall be occupied.
G. To the extent applicable, the provisions of Subsections B, C, D and E
above shall be applied to properties that have not been rented.
§ 66-23 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 66-25
1:274
Chapter 66A
RETURNED CHECKS
§ 66A-1. Service charge for insufficient funds.
The service charge for a check or other written instrument returned to
the Borough of Merchantville or any of its departments or agencies for
insufficient funds shall be the sum of $20.00.
§ 66A-2. Future payments.
Subsequent to the issuance of a check or other written instrument returned
for insufficient funds twice, the authorization is granted to the appropriate
municipal official to require future payments to be tendered in cash or by
certified or cashier's check during a two-year period from the date of last
return for insufficiency of funds.
§ 66A-3. Municipal lien.
The service charge for a check or other written instrument returned to
the Borough of Merchantville or any of its departments or agencies for
insufficient funds shall be added to the property tax lien, sewer utility lien
or any other charge assessed by the Borough of Merchantville or any of its
departments or agencies.
Chapter 67
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
The salaries and compensation of borough officers and employees is
set forth by ordinance of the Borough Council. A copy of the current
Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and
available for inspection during regular business hours.
Chapter 70
SEWERS
§ 70-1. Sewer utility established.
A sewer utility for the operation of the sewage collection system is hereby
established in and for the Borough of Merchantville, in the County of
Camden, which shall be under the control of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Merchantville. The name by which it shall be known shall be the
"Merchantville Sewer Utility."
§ 70-2. Future revenue and disbursements.
All future revenue and accounting therefor from said Sewer Utility shall
be on a dedicated utility basis in conformity with the New Jersey Statutes
§ 66-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:275
Annotated of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-33 et seq. All moneys
derived from the operation of said Sewer Utility and any other moneys
applicable to its support shall be segregated and kept in a separate fund
which shall be known as the "Sewer Utility Fund," and all disbursements
for the operation and maintenance of said Sewer Utility shall be taken from
said Sewer Utility Fund.
§ 70-3. Dedicated budget.
The dedicated budget of this Sewer Utility shall include appropriations
for operating expenses, capital improvements, debt service and for the
payment of all sanitary sewer bonds, principal and interest and all other
deferred charges and statutory expenses as may be required.
§ 70-4. Applicability of provisions.
Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations utilizing
the sewage collection system of the Merchantville Sewer Utility shall be
subject to the rules and regulations hereinafter adopted.
§ 70-5. Permit required for sewer connections; fee.
§ 70-6. Installations and inspection; costs.
A. Application for connection to the sewage collection system shall be
made, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the Sewer Utility and
signed by the owner of the property for which said connection is being
applied for or his authorized agent. A charge will be assessed for this
connection at the time the application is made, as per the rules and
regulations promulgated under § 70-12 of this chapter.
B. The Sewer Utility Collector shall report quarterly to the Borough
Council all sewer connections applied for and/or issued within said
quarter by type of unit, location, lot and block number and address.
C. The following rates are hereby established as of May 1, 2009 for sewer
service rates for other than residential dwellings:
Connection Permit Fee: $1,207.00 [Added 4-13-2009 by Ord. No.
09-06]
A. The applicant will be responsible for payment of the installation of the
lateral main from the sewer main to the premises. All sewer lines shall
be at least two (2) feet below surface or finished grade to ensure
against freezing. Said sewer lines shall be separated from the water
and other service pipes by at least two (2) feet.
B. Inspections must be scheduled through the office of the Borough Clerk
at least two (2) business days before any inspection is required and
shall state the exact time when the trench will be opened and ready for
inspection. In cases where a reinspection is required and, in
consequence, the Sewer Utility agent is required to make additional
§ 70-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 70-6
1:276
§ 70-7. Connection charges; invalidation of connection permit.
§ 70-8. Sewer service charges.
trips for the purpose of making the reinspection, the extra expense
caused by the additional trips shall be paid by the owner. These costs
shall be paid pursuant to § 70-8C of this chapter.
A. The schedule of connection charges shall be set forth as per the rules
and regulations promulgated under § 70-12 of this chapter.
(1) A connection charge shall be imposed for each sewer connection,
said connection fee to be determined per domestic consumer unit
or equivalent domestic consumer unit in accordance with the
following schedules, except where otherwise noted, appended
hereto as Schedule A.34
(2) In the event that a business or structure is not described in the
schedule, the Borough Council shall determine the minimum
equivalent domestic consumer units.
(3) Multiple use of an individual structure or group of structures shall
be classified by the Borough Council to include all uses.
(4) In the event that a business or structure is described in the
schedule by general classification, but the particular nature of said
business or structure would result in an inequitable connection
charge if the schedule were used, the borough, in its discretion,
may determine that a higher or lower connection charge, as the
case may be, shall be charged.
B. If, after one (1) year, the applicant/owner has not shown proof of
connection, the connection permit will be deemed invalid, and the fees
will be retained by the borough.
A. The sewer service charges in the Borough of Merchantville shall be as
follows: [Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 02-15; 11-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-16; 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11; 11-22-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-14; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-03; 11-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-16]
(1) For residential dwellings shall be two hundred fifty-six ($256.00)
dollars per living unit per year. In the calendar year 2017 and
thereafter, the sewer service shall be payable on April 1, 2017 in
the amount of one hundred twenty-eight ($128.00) dollars, and
October 1, 2017 in the amount of one hundred twenty-eight
($128.00) dollars.
34.Editor's Note: Schedule A is available for inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk
during regular business hours.
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8
1:277
§ 70-9. Installation of toilet and connection to system required.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure and the owner of
every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed or acquired,
which may be occupied or used by human beings, located on a street along
the line of a sanitary sewer now or hereafter constructed or acquired in
the Borough of Merchantville, where the property line of the lot contains
such house, building or structure within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said
sanitary sewer line, shall, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the
service of such sewer is made available to such house, building or structure,
install a toilet in such house, building or structure, unless a toilet is now
installed therein or shall have been installed therein prior to such date,
and connect said toilet and any other sewerage facilities emanating from
said house, building or structure to the sanitary sewer system under and
pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Borough Council
and filed in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 70-10. Disposal of commercial and industrial wastes. [Amended
3-25-1996]
(2) In the calendar year 2017 and thereafter, the sewer service for a
residential living unit which qualifies for a senior citizen tax
deduction shall be payable on April 1 and October 1 of the calendar
year in equal payments of sixty-five ($65.00) dollars.
(3) In the calendar year 2017 and thereafter, the sewer service fee per
commercial unit shall be payable in June and December of the
calendar year in equal payments of one hundred five ($105.00)
dollars, plus one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per 100 cubic feet of
water used.
B. Bills shall be payable on or before June 1 and December 1 as they are
rendered on a semiannual basis, in advance.
C. All charges for services not specifying a due date shall be due and
payable when presented.
D. A penalty of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month or fraction
thereof will be assessed to all bills for charges not paid within thirty
(30) days of the date on which said bill is due and payable. All bills shall
be payable to the Merchantville Sewer Utility at the offices of the
Merchantville Tax Collector.
E. Rates for uses other than residential uses shall be set by resolution of
the Mayor and Borough Council.
F. In special cases not contemplated in the schedule of rates or not clearly
defined therein, the Borough of Merchantville is hereby authorized to
establish, by resolution, special rates as the Mayor and Borough
Council may deem necessary to keep and maintain the Sewer Utility on
a self-liquidating basis.
§ 70-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 70-10
1:278
A. Connection required. If any such house, building or structure referred
to herein shall be used for industrial or commercial purposes, the
owner thereof shall, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the
services of said sewer are made available to said house or structure or
prior to occupancy or use of said house, building or structure,
whichever date shall be later, install such facilities as are necessary to
accept and dispose of industrial wastes emanating therefrom and
connect such facilities with said sanitary sewer system under and
pursuant to rules and regulations, which rules and regulations shall be
filed in the office of the Borough Clerk.
B. Grease traps required. All commercial and institutional establishments,
including but not strictly limited to all food preparation establishments,
shall install and maintain grease traps in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) All grease traps shall be installed in conformance with the most
current National Standard Plumbing Code, or successor code, as
may be applicable for such installations.
(2) The installation of all grease traps shall be subject to the inspection
and approval of the Plumbing Subcode Inspector.
(3) Each facility requiring a grease trap shall be inspected twice a year
or as may be deemed necessary by the Borough of Merchantville.
Such inspection shall be performed by the borough licensed
collection system operator, the Borough Plumbing Subcode
Inspector, the Camden County Health Inspector and/or the Camden
County Municipal Utility Authority Inspector.
(4) The purpose of the inspection(s) required by Subsection B(3) above
shall be to certify that the grease trap is being properly maintained
in one (1) of the following ways:
(a) By the submission of receipts from a registered hauler that the
grease trap has been acceptably cleaned on a monthly basis by
said hauler; in addition to this submission, the grease trap is
subject to unscheduled verification by Fathometer to
determine that the grease trap is not obstructed by over 20%
of volume being occupied by residues to assure its acceptable
operation;
(b) By the submission of monthly analysis report results from a
certified laboratory showing oil and grease testing of the
effluent discharge, which results shall meet acceptable limits
and testing of the grease content of the trap, which acceptable
limits must be that the volatile acid contents are below 25
milligrams per liter and are therefore not rancid; or
(c) By the appropriate recordkeeping certified by a responsible
executive of the facility indicating the self-cleaning of the solid
and floating residues from the grease trap on at least a monthly
§ 70-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-10
1:279
§ 70-11. Failure of owner to connect; assessment of costs incurred
by borough.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to herein shall fail
to make any installation or connection required by this chapter within the
time herein required, the borough may proceed to make such installation or
connection or cause the same to be made and assess the cost thereof as a
lien against such house, building or structure pursuant to and in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 through 40:63-64.35
§ 70-12. Rules and regulations; filing.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville may promulgate
by resolution rules and regulations for the efficient operation of the
Merchantville Sewer Utility, including but not limited to the assessment
of fees, penalties and charges. All rules and regulations so promulgated
shall control the operation of the Merchantville Sewer Utility. All rules and
basis. Such residues are to be shown as acceptable for
processing as a by-product-usable substance, able to be
incinerated in an acceptable, licensed burning facility or able
to be transported off site by a registered hauler.
(5) No grease or grease residue may be disposed of in trash
receptacles. All grease traps shall be cleaned at least every 30 days
and recycled by a registered hauler.
(6) All recycled grease shall be reported to the Borough Director of the
Sewer Utility on a quarterly basis, no later than April 15, July 15,
October 15 and January 15 for the preceding calendar quarter, on
forms to be provided by the Director of the Sewer Utility.
(7) The following records must be maintained on the premises, for
inspection as part of the inspections to be conducted as set forth in
Subsection B(3) above:
(a) The date or dates the grease trap is cleaned.
(b) The quantity and amount of grease removed from the trap.
(c) The name of the person, firm or entity cleaning the trap.
(d) The date and quantity of grease removed from the premises by
a registered hauler.
(e) The name, address, telephone number and registration
number of the registered hauler.
(f) The place (including address) of disposal of the grease utilized
by the registered hauler.
35.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 through 40:63-64 was repealed by L. 1991, c. 53, § 1,
effective January 1, 1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11 through 40A:26A-14.
§ 70-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 70-12
1:280
regulations so promulgated shall be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
and shall be effective upon publication.
§ 70-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-25-1996]
Chapter 71
SHOPLIFTING
§ 71-1. Prohibited acts.
Shoplifting shall consist of any one (1) or more of the following acts:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to any combination of the following:
(1) A fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
(2) A term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. In addition to or in lieu of the above fines and penalties, any person who
violates the provisions contained in § 70-10B above shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the mandatory fines established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy for
each instance of noncompliance, including the provision for escalation
of penalties for the occurrence of repeat violations within a period of
four months, all pursuant to the New Jersey Clean Water Enforcement
Act. Willful gross violations, including false certification, may be
prosecuted by the borough as perjury, including the cessation of the
commercial or institutional operation, with a fine of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and/or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days.
A. For any person purposely to take possession of, carry away, transfer or
cause to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale by any store or other retail mercantile
establishment with the intention of depriving the merchant of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise or converting the same
to the use of such person without paying to the merchant the full retail
value thereof.
B. For any person purposely to conceal upon his person or otherwise any
merchandise offered for sale by any store or other retail mercantile
establishment with the intention of depriving the merchant of the
processes, use or benefit of such merchandise or converting the same
to the use of such person without paying to the merchant the value
thereof.
C. For any person purposely to alter, transfer or remove any label, price
tag or marking indicia of value or any other markings which aid in
§ 70-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-1
1:281
§ 71-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
CONCEAL — To conceal merchandise so that, although there may be some
notice of its presence, it is not visible through ordinary observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE — The merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
MERCHANDISE — Any goods, chattels, foodstuffs or wares of any type and
description, regardless of the value thereof.
MERCHANT — Any owner or operator of any store or other retail
mercantile establishment, or any agent, servant, employee, lessee,
consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such
owner or proprietor.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, including an agent, servant or
employee of a merchant where the facts of the situation so require.
PREMISES OF A STORE OR RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT —
Includes but is not limited to the retail mercantile establishment, any
common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by
a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such mercantile establishment.
SHOPPING CART — A pushcart of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.
determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale by any store or other retail mercantile establishment
and to attempt to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort
with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of all or some part of the value thereof.
D. For any person purposely to transfer any merchandise displayed, held,
stored or offered for sale by any store or other retail merchandise
establishment from the container in or on which the same shall be
displayed to any other container with intent to deprive the merchant of
all or some part of the retail value thereof.
E. For any person purposely to under-ring with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value thereof.
F. For any person purposely to remove a shopping cart from the premises
of a store or other retail mercantile establishment without the consent
of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of
permanently depriving the merchant of the possession, use or benefit of
such cart.
§ 71-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71-2
1:282
STORE or OTHER RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — A place
where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or sold or offered to the public
for sale.
UNDER-RING — To cause the cash register or other sale recording device
to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
§ 71-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days
or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof, for each offense, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 71A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 71-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:283

ARTICLE I
Containerized Yard Waste
§ 71A-1. Purpose.
This article establishes requirements for the proper handling of yard waste
in the Borough of Merchantville so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 71A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Containerized means the placement of yard waste in
a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Yard waste means leaves and grass clippings.
§ 71A-3. Prohibited Conduct. [Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
18-06]
A. The owner or occupant of any property shall not sweep, rake, blow or
otherwise place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in
the street. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street,
the owner or occupant of any property must remove the yard waste
from the street where the violation occurred, or said person or persons
shall be deemed in violation of this article.
B. A contractor, and/or any employee of a contractor, and/or any person
acting on behalf of the owner or occupant of any property, who is
engaged by the owner or occupant of the property to provide lawn care
or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place
any yard waste in the street, regardless of whether the yard waste is
containerized or not. A contractor, and/or employee of a contractor,
and/or person acting on behalf of the owner or occupant of any property
§ 71A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-3
1:285
shall be responsible for the removal of any and all lawn waste. A
contractor, and/or any employee of a contractor, and/or any person
acting on behalf of the owner or occupant of any property, who is
engaged by the owner or occupant of the property to provide lawn
care or landscaping services, who places yard waste in the street shall
be deemed in violation of this article and shall be responsible for the
removal of the yard waste placed in the street where the violation
occurred.
§ 71A-3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-3
1:286
ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
§ 71A-4. Purpose.
This article prohibits illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Merchantville, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 71A-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater
from humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Illicit connection means any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Merchantville, unless that discharge is authorized under a
NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Industrial waste means non-domestic waste,
including, but not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section
307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b),
or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the Borough of Merchantville or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
Should there be any combined sewer systems within the Borough of
Merchantville, MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and
to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
§ 71A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-5
1:287
NJPDES PERMIT — NJPDES permit means a permit issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Non-contact cooling water means
water used to reduce temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters
do not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product
(other than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may
however contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment
such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Process wastewater means any water which,
during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or
results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate
product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. Process
wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other
than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Stormwater means water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to
the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 71A-6. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Merchantville any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 71A-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-6
1:288
ARTICLE III
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 71A-7. Purpose.
This article prohibits the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Borough of Merchantville, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 71A-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the Borough of Merchantville or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
Should there be any combined sewer systems within the Borough of
Merchantville, MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are
sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and
to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Stormwater means water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to
the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 71A-9. Prohibited Conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Merchantville is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 71A-10. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following constitute exceptions to the prohibitions as listed in Section
71A-9, above:
§ 71A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-10
1:289
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
B. Uncontaminated ground water, such as infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters;
C. Air conditioning condensate, excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water;
D. Irrigation water, including landscape and lawn watering runoff;
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows;
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges;
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water;
H. Flows from fire fighting activities;
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 71A-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-10
1:290
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
§ 71A-11. Purpose.
This article establishes requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough of Merchantville, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 71A-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Immediate shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at
once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Owner/keeper shall mean any person who shall
possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any
pet, whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
PET — Pet means a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Pet solid waste means waste matter expelled from the
bowels of the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Proper disposal means placement in a designated
waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other
refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic
sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
§ 71A-13. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 71A-14. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 71A-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-14
1:291

ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
§ 71A-15. Purpose.
This article prohibits the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or
on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of Merchantville,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 71A-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Feed means to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or
game.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Wildlife means all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 71A-17. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Borough of Merchantville, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (i.e., wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers). In addition to any
other penalties that may be imposed under this article, any person found
to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to cease the feeding
immediately.
§ 71A-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-17
1:293

ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection Program
§ 71A-18. Purpose.
This article establishes a yard waste collection and disposal program in the
Borough of Merchantville, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 71A-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Containerized means the placement of yard waste in
a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
PERSON — Person means any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject
to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Yard waste means leaves and grass clippings.
§ 71A-20. Yard waste collection, time of placement; placement near
storm drains restricted.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven (7) days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall
not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of
such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any
other manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this article.
§ 71A-20.1. Violations. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10]
It shall be a violation of this article to sweep, rake, blow, or otherwise place
yard waste that is not containerized at the curb or along the street except on
§ 71A-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-20.1
1:295
days designated by the Borough for scheduled yard waste vacuum pickup.
Materials may be placed between the curb and the sidewalk (commonly
referred to as the "grass strip") seven (7) days in advance of the posted
days for yard waste vacuum pickup. The Borough Department of Public
Works will post notification on each street ten (10) days in advance of the
posted yard waste pickup. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or
along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of
this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible
for placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street
within twenty-four (24) hours of formal notification or said party shall be
deemed in violation of this article.
§ 71A-20.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-20.1
1:296
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 71A-21. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Health Officer,
Code Enforcement Officer, and any and all other Municipal Officials deemed
appropriate by the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 71A-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-21
1:297

ARTICLE VIII
Violations
§ 71A-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
09-10; 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for
penalties or any combination thereof as set forth in § 1-9 of the Code of the
Borough of Merchantville, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court before whom such violation is heard and conviction made. Each day
that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation,
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 71A-23. through § 71A-26. (Reserved)
§ 71A-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-23
1:299

ARTICLE IX
Stormwater Management Requirements and Controls for Major
Development
[Adopted 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11]
§ 71A-27. Scope and purpose.
A. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through
nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be explored before relying
on structural Best Management Practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs
should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management
strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies
include both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls
that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based
upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for "major development," as
defined in Section 71A-28 of this article.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Merchantville.
D. Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
§ 71A-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-27
1:301
§ 71A-28. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores, and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES, OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design, and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 71A-27 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-28
1:302
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the state Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Is the process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land, or the addition of 0.25 or more
acres of impervious surface. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Merchantville or political subdivision of the
State of New Jersey, subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
§ 71A-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-28
1:303
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Is defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 71A-28 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-28
1:304
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Is defined as previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 71A-29. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Section 71A-30 of this article. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards, which provide at least as much protection
from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater
§ 71A-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-29
1:305
§ 71A-30. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
quantity, and water quality impacts of major development projects
as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5, are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or Water
Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Section 71A-36 of this article.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Sections 71A-30F and 71A-30G of this
article:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail, with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that
the access is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G of this section may be obtained for
the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G of this
section to the maximum extent practicable;
§ 71A-29 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-30
1:306
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G of this section, existing structures currently
in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned;
and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation, lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsections F and G of this section that were not
achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections
F. and G of this section shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at Subsection E.
herein into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph (2),
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. ("Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed);
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers, and pesticides;
§ 71A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-30
1:307
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection (3)., below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection (2)(i)[2], above,
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c), below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
§ 71A-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-30
1:308
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have
an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1), below, are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1)below; or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F. and
G. of this section shall be dedicated to a government agency,
subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the appropriate
County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent
restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
§ 71A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-30
1:309
address identified in Section 71A-33 of this article, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Section 71A-31, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100 percent of the average annual
pre-construction groundwater recharge volume for
the site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to [3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
§ 71A-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-30
1:310
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Section 71A-31 of this
article, complete one of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that, for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
§ 71A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-30
1:311
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10-, and 100
year storm events are 50, 75, and 80 percent, respectively,
of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that
is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas, if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with [1], [2], and [3] above shall
only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by (80%) percent of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is one and one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall in two (2)
hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may
take into account the implementation of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
§ 71A-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-30
1:312
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2, below,
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, and TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates listed for the BMPs in Table 2. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Section 71A-33 of
this article, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in Section 71A-33 of this article.
Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates
may be used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved alternative
rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided to
the Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80 percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
§ 71A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-30
1:313
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90%
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90%
Extended Detention Basin 40% - 60%
Infiltration Structure 80%
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 71A-32C.
Sand Filter 80%
Vegetative Filter Strip 60% - 80%
Wet Pond 50% - 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty percent
(80%) TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal, while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F. and G. of
this section.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 71A-33 of this
article.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
§ 71A-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-30
1:314
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph [1] above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area, or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as
measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the Category One waterway;
§ 71A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-30
1:315
§ 71A-31. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
discharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
Subsection G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow
the reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 71A-30 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-31
1:316
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a), above, and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b),
above. A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover
for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site,
if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has
existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five (5) years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover has existed on the site during the five (5) years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
(3) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods, may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation, as
defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account
the effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 71A-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-31
1:317
§ 71A-32. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, PO Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the
diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one (1) inch and a maximum
spacing between bars of six (6) inches. In addition, the design of
trash racks must comply with the requirements of Section 71A-36D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 71A-34 of this article.
§ 71A-31 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-32
1:318
§ 71A-33. Sources for Technical Guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge, and water quality design and performance standards
established by Section 71A-30 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 71A-30 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates
are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology
and certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 71A-33A(1) and (2), below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, PO Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, PO Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 71A-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-33
1:319
§ 71A-34. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, PO Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625 (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
However, the provisions of this section are not intended to preempt
more stringent municipal or county safety requirements for new or
existing stormwater management basins. Municipal and county
stormwater management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their
authority, require existing stormwater management basins to be
retrofitted to meet one or more of the safety standards in Subsections
B1, B2, and B3 below for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape
provisions at outlet structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
(6) inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
PSI.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two (2) inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
§ 71A-33 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-34
1:320
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
PSI.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph (3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Section 8C, below, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six (4-6) feet in width. One step shall be located
approximately two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the
permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located
one to one and one-half (1-1 1/2) feet above the permanent
water surface. See Subsection 8D, below, for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county, or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin:
§ 71A-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-34
1:321
§ 71A-35. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
Stormwater Plan at Section 71A-35C, below, as part of the
submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan
approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
(3) The applicant shall submit nine (9) copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Section 71A-35C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic Base Map - The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet
beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of 1=200
or greater, showing 2-foot contour intervals. The map, as
§ 71A-34 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-35
1:322
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, areas of potential soil
erosion, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains
(with their appropriate transition area buffers), marshlands,
pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures,
roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant
natural and man-made features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways, and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions should also
be provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 71A-29
through 71A-33 of this article are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality,
and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
§ 71A-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-35
1:323
§ 71A-36. Maintenance and repair.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 71A-30 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 71A-36 of this article.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Sections 71A-35C(1) through C(6) of this
article when it can be demonstrated that the information requested
is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in Section 71A-27C of this article shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 71A-36B and 71A-36C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
§ 71A-35 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-36
1:324
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
71A-36B(2), above, is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Section 71A-36B(7) below shall
be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which
the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
71A-36B(2), above, shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
71A-36B(2), above, shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
71A-36B(2), above, shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Sections 71A-36B(6) and 71A-36B(7),
above.
(9) The requirements of Sections 71A-36B(3) and 71A-36B(4) do not
apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to
and accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
§ 71A-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-36
1:325
§ 71A-37. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or sixty (60) days from the receipt of the ordinance by the
county review agency, if the county review agency should fail to act.
by the municipal engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance
and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses
to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county
may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to
the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 71A-36 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-37
1:326
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
[Adopted 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10 as Chapter 33A; amended
7-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18 and codified as Article X of Chapter
71A; repealed 9-12-16 by Ord. No. 16-08, see now Chapter 33A]
§ 71A-38. through § 71A-42. (Reserved)
§ 71A-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-38
1:327

ARTICLE XI
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10; amended 11-19-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-17; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-09]
§ 71A-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Merchantville so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 71A-44. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Merchantville or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 71A-45. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 71A-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-45
1:329
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and
floatable materials; or
Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section 71A-46 below prior
to the completion of the project.
§ 71A-46. Design Standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Section 71A-45 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb-opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb-opening
has two (2) or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than
seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across
the smallest dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 71A-45 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-46
1:330
§ 71A-47. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department; Public Works
Department, Construction and Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 71A-48. (Reserved)36
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8) inches long
and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
36.Editor's Note: Former § 71A-48. Penalties, was repealed 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06. For
penalties for this chapter, see now § 71A-22.
§ 71A-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-48
1:331

ARTICLE XII
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10; amended 11-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-17; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-10]
§ 71A-49. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Merchantville and/or the
waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 71A-50. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Merchantville or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the state of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 71A-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-51
1:333
§ 71A-51. Prohibited conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 71A-52. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 71A-53. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department; Public Works
Department and/or Code Enforcement of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 71A-54. (Reserved)37
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers)
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup)
37.Editor's Note: Former § 71A-54. Penalties, was repealed 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06. For
penalties for this chapter, see now § 71A-22.
§ 71A-51 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 71A-54
1:334
Chapter 73
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 71A-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71A-54
1:335

ARTICLE I
Curb, Sidewalk and Drive Apron Construction
§ 73-1. Notice to construct or maintain.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the abutting landowner to construct
and maintain the curbs, sidewalks and drive aprons fronting the property.
All owners and persons holding real estate in the Borough of Merchantville,
lying or fronting on any part of the streets of said borough shall, within
60 days after written notice being given by the Clerk of said Borough
of Merchantville, construct and maintain the sidewalks, curbs and drive
aprons along his or her property according to the grade established by said
borough. The Borough Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works shall
determine when the condition of any sidewalk, curb or drive apron becomes
unsafe or is in need of repair. The notice provided for by this section shall be
served upon all owners residing in the municipality personally or by leaving
the same at their usual place of residence with a member of the family
above the age of 14 years. In the case of infants and incompetents, such
notice shall be served upon their guardian; when any real estate is held in
trust, upon the trustee; when held by joint tenants, tenants in common or
by the entirety, upon any one such tenant. If the owner of any such real
estate is a nonresident of the municipality, the notice may be served upon
him personally, or upon his agent in charge of the property, or upon the
occupant or mailed to the nonresident owner at his last known post-office
address.
§ 73-2. Curb and drive apron specifications.
All public streets within the Borough of Merchantville shall be curbed
and drive aprons constructed and maintained under the direction and
supervision of the Borough Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works,
who shall inspect and approve the work in accordance with the following
specifications:
A. All curbing shall be concrete, six inches across the top, eight inches
across the bottom and cast in place to a depth of 18 inches using a mix
of one part cement, 1 3/4 parts sand and 3 1/2 parts stone, which shall
be poured in a monolithic mass and thoroughly rubbed down, and a
smooth, uniform surface is to be the result. Upon the removal of forms,
if there are any honeycombs or holes in the concrete surface, the
contractor shall remove the concrete from the site immediately and
shall not patch it by using any form of plaster-type material. Expansion
joints are to be of a character acceptable to the Borough Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works and must be placed at a maximum
interval of 20 feet.
B. When it is deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works, concrete curbs at highway
intersections shall be constructed as follows:
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:337
§ 73-3. Sidewalk specifications.
All sidewalks in the Borough of Merchantville shall be constructed under
the direction and supervision of the Borough Engineer or the
Superintendent of Public Works, who shall inspect and approve the work in
accordance with the following specifications:
§ 73-4. Shade tree removal.
In the event that any sidewalk, curb or drive apron construction or
maintenance will involve the removal of any tree or part thereof, including
roots, situate between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb, the owner
shall first secure written approval for said work from the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 73-5. Failure to comply.
In any case in which the owner or owners of the real estate affected fail
to perform the maintenance or make the improvements after service of the
written notice as set forth in § 73-1, the Borough Council may cause the
maintenance or improvements to be made and may award a contract or
contracts therefor.
(1) Eight inches across the top, 10 inches across the bottom and built
to a depth of 18 inches using the mix and method of construction
above specified. When an eight-inch curb is required at rounded
intersections, it must extend from the point of curve to the point of
tangency throughout the entire length of the curved intersection.
C. "Drive aprons" are defined as that portion of any driveway located
between the back edge of the sidewalk (far edge from the street) and
the back edge of the curb. These shall be constructed from concrete
only utilizing the same mix as specified for sidewalks in § 73-3A and
shall be poured to a uniform depth of six inches. A full depth curb shall
be built across drive openings, and no drive apron slab shall extend to
the gutter line.
D. A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Merchantville for curb openings. The application for such a permit shall
be accompanied by a sketch clearly setting forth the location and
nature of any such opening and shall be accompanied by a fee of $5.00.
A. All sidewalks, except as hereinafter provided, shall be constructed of
concrete to a width of four feet, or the prevailing width if wider, and a
depth of four inches using a mix consisting of one part cement, two
parts sand and four parts stone.
B. Brick or stone may be used for the construction of sidewalks but, if
used, must be laid on a four-inch concrete base, and a sample of the
brick or stone to be used must be submitted to the Borough Engineer
for approval prior to use.
§ 73-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73-6
1:338
§ 73-6. Cost of repair or improvement; report, notice.
Any officer of the Borough of Merchantville in charge of such maintenance
or improvements shall keep an accurate record of the entire cost thereof,
including but not limited to engineering fees, legal fees and administrative
costs, and shall assess such costs or the proportion thereof required to be
assessed under this chapter upon such properties in proportion to their
respective frontage thereon and file a report thereof under oath with the
Borough Clerk. The Borough Council shall examine such report and, if
properly made, confirm and file it with the Tax Assessor who shall record
such sidewalk assessments in the book in which other assessments of
the municipality are recorded. Before confirming the report, the Borough
Council shall give notice to the owners or owner named therein of the time
and places fixed for examination of the report. The notice shall be served
in the same manner as required for service of notices before consideration
by the Borough Council of assessments for benefit for real estate taxes, but
failure to give any such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
§ 73-7. Assessments to be a lien.
Such sidewalk assessment shall bear interest from the time of confirmation
at the maximum rate then permissible by law and with the same penalties
for nonpayment as assessments for local improvements in the municipality,
and from confirmation thereof shall be a first and paramount lien upon the
real estate assessed to the same extent and be collected and enforced in
the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The governing
body may provide for the payment and collection of such assessment in
installments in the same manner and at the same rate of interest as
assessments for local improvements are payable in installments in the
municipality. No such assessments shall be invalid by reason or error in the
statement or omission of the name of any owner or owners of real estate
assessed, or for any other informality, where such real estate has actually
been improved. In addition thereto, the borough may have an action to
recover the said amount against the owner of said lands in any court having
competent jurisdiction thereof; a certified copy of the aforesaid certificate
of assessment shall in such action be prima facie evidence of the existence
of a debt due from the said owner or owners to the borough.
§ 73-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-7
1:339

ARTICLE II
Snow Removal
§ 73-8. Responsibility of owner or occupant.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants of premises abutting or
bordering upon any of the streets, avenues or highways in the Borough of
Merchantville shall remove or cause to be removed all ice or snow from
the sidewalks of any such streets, avenues or highways within 10 hours of
daylight after the same shall have formed or ceased to fall thereon.
§ 73-9. (Reserved)38
§ 73-10. Removal by borough.
In the event the owner or owners, occupant or occupants shall fail to
remove the ice and snow as provided in § 73-8 and in lieu of the imposition
of a fine as provided in § 73-9, said snow or ice may be removed from
the sidewalks by the Highway Department of said borough or under its
direction, in which case the cost of such removal shall be certified to the
Borough Council and charged as a lien against the abutting property and
shall be added to and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such abutting property.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 73-9, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-10
1:341

ARTICLE III
Repeal and Effective Clauses
§ 73-11. Repealer.
Chapter 73, Article I, of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville as
adopted March 28, 1960, and thereafter amended is hereby repealed, but
such repeal shall not serve to affect any proceedings or assessments
pending or made thereunder. Chapter 73, Article II, adopted December
8, 1924; Article III, adopted December 26, 1922, as thereafter amended;
Article IV, as adopted September 2, 1913; and Article V, as adopted
September 16, 1913, and thereafter amended, are hereby repealed. All
other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
hereof be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistencies only.
§ 73-12. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon the passage and publication
according to law.
§ 73-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-12
1:343
Chapter 73A
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 73A-1. Short title and purpose.
§ 73A-2. Approval of subdivision plans required.
§ 73A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meaning as
indicated:
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street intended for vehicular use.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across a block.
EASEMENT — A right granted for the use of private land for certain public
or quasi-public purposes; also the land to which such a right pertains.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Merchantville
Subdivision Ordinance.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the Borough of Merchantville by
establishing regulations and procedures to insure its orderly growth
and development, to foster the conservation, protection and proper use
of its land and to secure adequate provision of space for circulation,
utilities and services.
A. Any owner of land within or partly within the Borough of Merchantville
shall, prior to subdividing or resubdividing such land, secure approval
of the same by the Merchantville Planning Board before the subdivision
may be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the County of Camden,
New Jersey. In certain cases involving use variances which are granted
in conjunction with the application for the subdivision, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have jurisdiction for subdivision review and
approval in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37a. All
references herein to the Planning Board shall apply to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment when it has jurisdiction to hear subdivision applications.
B. Approval of final plans by the Planning Board shall constitute an
acceptance of dedication of land for streets, parks and public purpose
or use. However, such acceptance shall not constitute an acceptance of
physical improvements on such land and shall not impose upon the
borough any obligation for maintenance of or jurisdiction over the
improvements until the improvements have been specifically accepted
by the borough according to law.
§ 73-12 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-3
1:344
PLANTING STRIP — The unpaved portion of a street right-of-way either
between the sidewalk pavement and the property line or between the curb
and the sidewalk pavement.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for use as street, alley, crosswalk or
common means of communication, travel or drainage.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this act, if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the
Planning Board to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but
not limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument: and the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer
to conform to the requirements of Chapter 94, Zoning, and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of
the Borough of Merchantville. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation of not more
than three lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development: any new street; or the extension of any off-tract improvement,
the cost of which is to prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:44D-42.
MISCELLANEOUS DEFINITIONS — Except as set forth above, all other
definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 through 40:55D-7 are incorporated
by reference into this chapter.
§ 73A-4. General procedure.
A. Applications. All applications for subdivision approval shall be required
to submit to the Zoning Official, at least 21 days prior to the regular
meeting of the Planning Board, a complete application and plat of
proposed subdivision for purposes of review classification into major or
minor subdivision. The Zoning Official shall notify the Chairman of the
Planning Board within five business days of the submittal of the
required materials and shall transmit them as directed.
B. Determination of completeness/classification. The Planning Board shall
take action on completeness of the application and plat classification
within 45 days after the submission of the application in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection A of this section. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a mutually agreed
upon extension thereof shall be deemed to be a determination that the
application is complete.
§ 73A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-4
1:345
C. General instructions to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
make its decisions on plats according to the purposes and provisions
stated in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and in
this chapter and according to the standards of design set forth in
§ 73A-7 of this chapter. The applicant may request that one or more of
the submission requirements be waived, in which event the agency or
its authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
Whenever review or approval of an application by the County Planning
Board is required, the Merchantville Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon with the required time
period.
D. Disclosure of owners of corporation or partnership. The provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq. shall be applied to subdivisions involving
six or more lots.
E. Appeals from decisions of the Planning Board. Appeals from decisions
of the Planning Board shall be made in accordance with the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
F. Fees. Fees are to be remitted at the time of submission of the
development application. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04;
4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(1) Application. The fees for the following application shall be as stated
in Chapter 25, Fees: (a) Application fee for a minor subdivision
review, (b) Application fee for a preliminary major subdivision
review, (c) Application fee for a final major subdivision review.
(2) Escrow. In addition to this application fee, an applicant for
subdivision is responsible for all escrow fees to cover the costs of
professional services, including but not limited to engineering,
legal and other expenses connected with the submitted materials.
For a minor subdivision, an escrow deposit fee plus a per lot fee
must accompany the application along with the application fee
when submitted to the Zoning Official. For a preliminary major
subdivision, an escrow fee plus a per lot fee will be required at the
time of the application. For a final major subdivision, an escrow fee
plus a per lot will be required at the time of final application. See
Chapter 25, Fees.
(3) Where a subdivision application also requires a variance or other
procedure covered under the provisions of Chapter 94, Zoning, the
application and escrow fees required under that chapter shall be
paid in addition to those under this section.
(4) Any additional required deposit must be received by the Borough
by the end of the business day prior to the applicable Planning
Board or Zoning Board meeting in order for the application to be
§ 73A-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-4
1:346
§ 73A-5. Minor subdivision.
heard. Sums not utilized in the review process shall be returned
to the applicant. Sums required for review that exceed the deposit
must be paid to the Borough before a construction permit will
be issued. If escrow amounts are determined to be insufficient,
additional escrow must be paid before any additional action can be
taken on the application.
G. Application forms. Suitable application forms, as referenced in Section
94-104B of this chapter, for the application for review of major and
minor subdivisions, shall be furnished by the Zoning Official.
H. Procedures. The Borough Planning Board shall adopt such
administrative procedures, not in conflict with this chapter, as may be
necessary to implement this chapter.
(1) Proof of payment of taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every application for subdivision
approval submitted to the Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown
that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any
approvals or other relief granted by either Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provisions for the payment
thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately
protected.
A. Applications for minor subdivisions will be submitted with a complete
application form and plat, meeting the following requirements:
(1) Original linen or Mylar tracing prepared by a licensed land
surveyor, and 16 paper copies of plat at a scale not less than one
inch equals 50 feet, showing the following:
(a) The boundary dimensions of the tract to be subdivided.
(b) The proposed lots to be created including dimensions.
(c) The location of existing buildings located on the tract and
within 100 feet of it, including the setbacks, in feet, from the
nearest lot lines.
(d) Existing streets within 200 feet of the tract.
(e) Name of the tract owner as well as names of adjoining property
owners as disclosed by the most recent borough tax records.
(f) Location, course and dimensions of servicing utilities,
including storm, sanitary, water, gas, electric and cable.
§ 73A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-5
1:347
(g) North arrow and graphic scale.
(h) Location map at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet.
(i) Block and lot numbers from tax map.
(2) The required fee.
B. Public notice. Public notice and public hearing shall not be required
unless the application also involves a variance, in which case the notice
and hearing requirements as set forth in Chapter 94, Zoning, would
apply.
C. Review and approval procedure. If it is determined by the Planning
Board that the application meets all of the zoning requirements and all
of the standards set forth in this chapter or if variances and/or waivers
are granted for specific requirements and/or standards, the Planning
Board shall grant approval of the plat, with any conditions determined
to be appropriate to the granting of such approval. Minor subdivision
approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute minor subdivision approval, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, as required
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and shall be so
accepted by the County Recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
D. Requirements for recording with Register of Deeds.
(1) Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
on which the resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless
within such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a
deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed by
the developer with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal
Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing the application
for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the Planning
Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Law
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that if the developer chooses
to file minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than
deed, such plat shall conform with the provisions of said law.
(2) The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period
for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection
D(1) above if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Planning Board that the developer was barred or prevented,
§ 73A-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-5
1:348
§ 73A-6. Major subdivision.
Where an application has been classified as a major subdivision, the
subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Official the following material for
review and approval of applicant's plat:
directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities, and that the developer applied promptly for
and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait
for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board.
The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
E. Effect of approval.
(1) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date on which the resolution was adopted, provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall be duly recorded as
provided herein.
(2) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of a minor
subdivision approval, or the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later.
A. Preliminary plats.
(1) Plat requirements. Original linen or Mylar tracing and 16 copies of
the subdivision plat in the form of a map or a series of maps drawn
to scale not smaller than 50 feet to the inch, and showing, in
addition to the requirements of the minor subdivision plat, the
following:
(a) The limits and dimensions of the tract to be subdivided and its
identifying numbers on the Borough Tax Map, showing also the
location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the nearby
properties and also the names and addresses of property
owners within 200 feet of the tract boundary.
§ 73A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-6
1:349
(b) Existing and proposed streets, including names and widths of
the right-of-way and cartway.
(c) The location and dimensions, where applicable, of existing
buildings, easements, rights-of-way, public lands, tree masses,
streams and other such features, and monuments.
(d) The location and dimensions of proposed easements, rights-ofway,
and lands reserved for public purposes.
(e) Existing topographic contours at not more than two-foot
intervals. The plat shall also show proposed final contours.
(f) The name of the subdivider and the name, seal and signature of
the licensed professional engineer or surveyor qualified to
practice in New Jersey who prepared the plot.
(g) A summary table of the number and type (i.e., single-family,
two-family, etc.) of structures and dwelling units proposed,
which shall be included on the plat.
(h) Proposed improvements, including streets, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks and stormwater management systems.
(i) A summary table showing conformity with zoning standards.
Each lot shall show minimum setback lines.
(2) Review procedure.
(a) The Zoning Official shall notify the Chairman of the Planning
Board within five business days of the submittal of applications
and shall transmit them as the Chairman may direct. At its next
regular meeting, as advised by the Zoning Official, the
Planning Board may docket the application for hearing.
(b) Following a determination of completeness of the application
and before public hearing thereon, the applicant shall cause
lawful notice and advertisement of the hearing to be made and
shall, at least 10 days before the hearing, file the plats and
pertinent papers and reports in the office of the Borough Clerk
for public inspection upon request. Publication and notice shall
be made pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. Proof
of notification and advertising shall be furnished to the
Planning Board at the time of the hearing. Before the hearing,
the Planning Board shall circulate copies of the plans among
the officials of the borough charged with enforcement of
building, zoning, engineering, sanitation, and other pertinent
regulations, including Police and Fire Departments.
(c) Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days
of the date of such submission or within such further time as
§ 73A-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-6
1:350
may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of
a complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
(d) After or at the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning
Board shall approve the plans, subject to the conditions
specified at the hearing, included but not limited to the
requirements of §§ 73A-4, 73A-7 and 73A-8 of this chapter, or
disapprove them. If the Planning Board requires any
substantial amendment to the layout of improvements
proposed by the developer that have been subject of a hearing,
an amended application shall be submitted and proceeded
upon, as in the case of the original application for
development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
subdivision complies with this chapter and the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., grant preliminary approval to the
subdivision. If the Board wishes to impose conditions not
specified at a previous public hearing, a new hearing shall be
held to discuss said conditions. The Planning Board's action
shall be noted or stamped on all copies of the subdivision plat,
together with a statement of any conditions or required
changes and modifications. Such statement of conditions shall
be deemed to be as much part of the plat as if they had been
originally submitted by the subdivider.
(e) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall, except as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49d, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date on which
the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
[1] That the general terms and conditions on which the
preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed,
including but not limited to use requirements; layout and
design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size;
yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the borough
from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
[2] That the applicant may submit for final approval on or
before the expiration date of preliminary approval the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary
subdivision plat.
[3] That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board
may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
§ 73A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-6
1:351
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed
a total extension of two years, provided that if the design
standards have been revised by the ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
[4] Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of
preliminary approval pursuant to Subsection A(2)(e)[3]
above and preliminary approval has expired before the
date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall
begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The
developer may apply for the extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the extension date.
[5] The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the Board but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply
for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of preliminary approval or the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever
occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from
granting an extension pursuant to Subsection A(2)(c)[3]
herein.
(f) After action by the Planning Board, the following distribution
of the subdivision plat copies and supporting materials shall be
made: one copy of each of the materials, including the
statement of conformity to other regulations, shall be retained
by the Planning Board; one copy of each of the remaining
materials shall be returned to the subdivider; and one copy of
these materials shall be transmitted to the Borough Council for
its information and also to serve as a basis upon which the
subdivider shall make necessary arrangements. One additional
copy of these materials is provided for work and miscellaneous
purposes.
B. Final plats.
(1) Plan requirements. The applicant shall submit final subdivision
plans and supporting materials to the Zoning Official with the
application for approval of the final plats. Final plats shall conform
in all important details with preliminary plats as approved by the
Planning Board and must be submitted within three years of the
§ 73A-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-6
1:352
date of approval of the preliminary plats, or such other period that
shall be extended by the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49. If
final approval is requested for a portion of an approved preliminary
subdivision plat, the applicant may proceed with the development
in stages, provided that adequate proofs are submitted to the
Planning Board that at each stage of development the project
can function effectively and conform to the requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 94, Zoning, if no further development takes
place. Where substantial changes have been made in the final plats
not conforming to the preliminary plats as approved, such revised
plats shall be treated as preliminary plats submitted for the first
time. Final plats shall be approved by the Borough Planning Board
and its engineers before the subdivider may record the plats in
the office of the County Clerk of Camden County. Any conditions
specified in the approval of preliminary plans shall be incorporated
into the final plans. The following materials shall be submitted by
the subdivider:
(a) Original linen or Mylar tracing, cloth duplicate, and 13 paper
prints of the subdivision plat in the form of a map or a series of
maps drawn to scale not smaller than 50 feet to the inch. Such
map or maps shall be made on permanent materials. One copy
shall be made on translucent tracing cloth with permanent
black ink and one copy shall be a cloth print duplicate thereof;
both of these copies shall be suitable for recordation according
to the provisions of the laws of the State of New Jersey. Of the
remaining copies, one shall be a cloth-print duplicate and 12
shall be black-and-white paper prints. The error of closure
shall not be more than one part in 5,000. The final subdivision
plats not for recordation shall show:
[1] The items required to be shown in preliminary subdivision
plats, as specified in § 73A-6A(1).
[2] Final topographic contours at not more than two-foot
intervals.
[3] The location of all proposed monuments and street signs.
(b) Two copies of utility map or maps showing tract boundaries,
existing and proposed streets, lot lines, sanitary and storm
water sewer facilities, water pipes, curbs, sidewalks, fire
hydrants and manholes.
(c) Two copies of profile and cross-section maps or diagrams of
streets showing proposed grades of curbs, sanitary and
stormwater sewers, water pipes and any other underground
utilities.
(d) One copy of any deed restrictions affecting the subdivision of
the property or a written statement by the subdivider that
there are no such restrictions.
§ 73A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-6
1:353
(e) One copy of a statement of the type or types of structures to be
erected, and a summary table of the number of structures and
dwelling units proposed.
(f) A certification by the Borough Engineer that any required
improvements which may have been installed before final plan
approval have been installed in accordance with borough
procedures, specifications and standards.
(g) Evidence that the subdivider has furnished to the borough:
[1] A written agreement, concerning improvements not yet
completed or not yet adequately installed in a form
provided by the borough, that the subdivider will lay out
and improve roads and streets and construct all of the
improvements, including necessary grading of the entire
street rights-of- way, paving, curbs, gutters and other
improvements, including sidewalks, sewers, street trees,
street name signs, monuments, crosswalks, fire hydrants
and all other related improvements and facilities which
may be required as a condition of the approval of the plan
by the Borough Planning Board, within the time or times
herein specified.
[2] A bond in such amount, under such conditions and form
and with surety as shall be approved by the governing
body to guarantee the performance of the subdivider's
undertaking in Subsection B(1)(g)[1] above, and secure
the completion of the improvements within the time
therein specified, and a written agreement that, upon
acceptance of any streets or improvements, whether
installed before or after final plan approval, the subdivider
shall provide a maintenance bond not exceeding 15% of
the full cost of all improvements under such conditions, in
form and with surety as shall be approved by the
governing body to guarantee the maintenance of the
streets and public improvements, including grading,
paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, street
signs, sewers and crosswalks, for a period of up to two
years from the date of acceptance of said improvements by
the borough. In lieu of a bond, the subdivider may deposit
cash or securities with the borough or with a bank or trust
company to guarantee performance of said contract and to
secure completion of the improvements under an escrow
agreement provided by the Borough Solicitor and the
governing body. The escrow agent for the deposits of such
cash or securities shall be designated by the governing
body.
§ 73A-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-6
1:354
[3] An agreement that the subdivider will install curbs and
underground facilities before paving streets and
constructing sidewalks.
[4] The developer shall reimburse the municipality for all
reasonable inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer
for the inspection of improvements required as part of the
subdivision approval; provided that the borough may
require of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the municipal
engineer for such inspection. For those developments for
which reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000.00 or
greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
four installments. The initial amount deposited by a
developer shall be 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees.
When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer shall
make additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. The Municipal Engineer shall not perform
any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those
inspections are not on deposit. In the event that final
approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall
be applied by stage or section.
(2) Review procedure.
(a) One copy of each subdivision plat and one copy of utility maps
and street profiles received by the Secretary of the Planning
Board shall be transmitted to the Borough Engineer for his
review and report to the Planning Board. Nine copies of the
subdivision plats and one copy of all supporting materials shall
be sent directly to the Planning Board for its review.
(b) The Borough Engineer shall, within two weeks, review plans
and transmit such plans with a report, in writing, to the
Planning Board.
(c) Approval by the Planning Board shall be noted or stamped on
all copies of the subdivision plat. If the Planning Board
disapproves the plat, the findings and reasons for such
disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the Planning
Board, and the applicant shall be given a copy.
(d) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a
§ 73A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-6
1:355
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of
the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required,
and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats. Whenever review or
approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required, the Merchantville Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon a timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
(e) Effect of final approval of a major subdivision.
[1] The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon
the developer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution
of final approval is adopted; provided that in the case of a
major subdivision, the rights conferred by this section
shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within
the time period provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54. If the
developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, and has duly recorded the plat as required in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the Planning Board may extend such
period of protection of extensions of one year, but not to
exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding other provisions
of this act, the granting of final approval terminates the
time period of preliminary approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 for the section granted final approval.
[2] Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection B(2)(e)[1] of this section
and final approval has expired before the date on which
the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what
would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer
may apply for the extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date.
[3] The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final
approval for a period determined by the Board, but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
§ 73A-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-6
1:356
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration
date of final approval, or the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An
extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsection B(2)(e)[1] of this section.
(f) Distribution of copies of the subdivision plat, as finally
approved, shall be as follows: one to the Planning Board, one to
the Borough Engineer, one to be retained by the Borough Clerk
for borough files, one to the Assessor, one to the Zoning Official
and one to the subdivider. One copy of all supporting materials
shall be retained in the borough files.
(g) The Borough Engineer shall not make his certification on the
final plats for filing at the County Clerk's office until the
Planning Board shall have granted approval.
(3) Requirements for recording with Register of Deeds.
(a) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from
the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the
plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the County
Recording Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause
shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period
not to extend 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
The Planning Board may extend the ninety-five-day or onehundred-
ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities, and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be
equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required
approvals, and determined by the Planning Board. The
developer may apply for an extension either before or after the
original expiration date.
(b) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County
Recording Officer until it has been approved by the Planning
Board as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the
Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Board or a
certificate has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47,
40:55D-50, 40:55D-56, 40:55D-61, 40:55D-67 or 40:55D-76.
The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. If the
County Recording Officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and
§ 73A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-6
1:357
§ 73A-7. Standards of design.
In passing on the adequacy of subdivision plans, the Planning Board shall
apply the standards contained in this section and the provisions of Chapter
94, Zoning. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for
preliminary or minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant
such exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval as set forth in this chapter, if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impractical
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question. Applications for subdivision approval shall conform
in all respects to appropriate provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38b(8) through
40:55D-38b(15).
upon request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged
from the official records.
(c) It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify
the Planning Board, in writing, within seven days of the filing
of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of
filing and official number.
A. General standards.
(1) Land. No land shall be subdivided for residential purposes unless
the subdivider shall have eliminated, or provided adequate
safeguards as determined by the Planning Board in conjunction
with professional assessments in his plans against such hazards of
the site as would imperil life, health or property by flood, fire and
disease.
(2) Development. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with
existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole
may develop harmoniously.
B. Block and lots.
(1) Grading. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage
and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools. The original
top soil shall be redistributed as cover and shall be stabilized by
suitable planting.
(2) Lot lines. Lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial
thereto wherever practical.
(3) House numbers. House numbers shall be assigned (to each lot) by
the Borough Clerk.
(4) Lot area. Minimum lot area and dimensions shall be governed by
Chapter 94, Zoning.
§ 73A-6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-7
1:358
(5) All lots shall have frontage on a street conforming with the design
standards contained herein, and improved in accordance with
borough specifications.
C. Streets and sidewalks.
(1) Integration. The proposed street pattern shall be integrated with
the borough plan of streets, and shall be related to topography so
as to produce usable lots and reasonable street grades.
(2) Design and purpose. Streets shall be designed according to their
function and laid out to preserve the integrity of their design.
Streets shall be classified as set forth in the Master Plan of the
borough.
(3) Widths. Minimum street right-of-way width is 50 feet, with a thirtytwo-
foot cartway.
(4) Continuations. New streets shall be laid out to continue existing
streets at no reduction in width, provided that such continuations
are both reasonable and practicable.
(5) Names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by the
same name. Names for new street shall not duplicate or closely
resemble names for existing streets within the borough and
adjoining municipalities.
(6) Adjacent access. Street layouts shall make reasonable provision for
access to adjacent underdeveloped areas, and the subdivider shall
improve these access streets to the limits of the subdivision. No
areas lacking access to a street shall be created.
(7) Half streets. Provision of half streets, except to complete existing
half streets, is prohibited.
(8) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited unless
constructed as culs-de-sac, not exceeding 500 feet in length, with a
turnaround having a minimum radius of 40 feet to property line and
a cartway radius of 35 feet.
(9) Clear sight distance. Clear sight distance along the center lines of
streets shall be maintained at not less than 300 feet.
(10) Grades. There shall be a minimum centerline grade of 0.33% and a
maximum centerline grade of 6% on all streets. Grades exceeding
these limits may be permitted on recommendation of the Borough
Engineer.
(11) Directional changes. Changes in street direction shall be made in
accordance with borough specifications.
(12) Vertical curves. Vertical curves are required for changes in grade.
The rate of change of grade on vertical curves shall be no more
§ 73A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-7
1:359
than 4% per 100 feet of road, provided that the clear sight distance
specified in these regulations is maintained at all points of the road.
(13) Surface drainage. The slope of the crown on streets shall be more
than 1/8 inch per foot and less than 1/2 inch per foot as directed by
the Borough Engineer.
(14) Drainage gutters shall be constructed for the full length of all
streets.
(15) Side slopes. Street cuts and fills shall be provided with side slopes
no steeper than one vertical to 1.5 horizontal. Where necessary,
such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grass or other
vegetation to prevent gullying or erosion.
(16) Sidewalks. Sidewalks are required for residential and commercial
areas. The location of sidewalks relative to planting strips shall be
at the discretion of the Planning Board.
(17) Shade trees. The subdivider shall plant suitable shade trees of a
type satisfactory to the Planning Board on the street line or in the
planting strip so as not to interfere with sidewalks or utilities and in
a manner to harmonize with neighboring street frontages.
(18) Material and construction standards. Materials and construction
standards for streets, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks, shall
conform to regulations and standards of the Borough Engineer, and
construction and installation of all facilities shall be subject to
inspection by appropriate borough officials.
(19) Street improvements. Provisions of storm sewerage inlets, catch
basins and manholes shall meet the requirements and the approval
of the Borough Engineer as regards both design and location.
(20) Intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to
the following standards:
(a) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point. Street
intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than 70° (measured at the center lines of
the streets) shall not be permitted.
(b) Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 3%,
and approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight
course within 100 feet of the intersection.
(c) Curb radii at intersections shall be according to the following
schedule of minimum lengths: 10 feet for local streets and
alleys; and 15 feet for streets which have a cartway width of
greater that 32 feet. Where streets of different categories
intersect, requirements for the wider street shall hold. The
street right-of-way line shall be parallel to the curbline. In
§ 73A-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 73A-7
1:360
§ 73A-8. Enforcement.
zones where buildings are permitted to abut the right-of-way
lines, a diagonal cutoff may be employed, provided that
sidewalk width and corner visibility are unimpaired.
(d) A clear sight triangle shall be provided, in which no permanent
structures shall be placed except for utility poles, light
standards, street signs and fire hydrants.
D. Utilities.
(1) Connection. All properties shall be connected to the municipal
sanitary sewer system and to the public water supply system.
(2) Installation. Installation of all sewer, water and other utilities shall
be in strict accordance with the engineering standards and
specifications of the Borough Engineer, or public utility concerned.
(3) Manholes. Manholes for sanitary sewers shall be no more than 300
feet apart on straight runs, and there shall be a manhole at every
point of substantial change in course or grade and at intersections
of sewer lines.
(4) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located so that the distance
from any building frontage to a fire hydrant is not more than 600
feet measured along the curb. The Planning Board, acting on the
advice of the Fire Department, may require closer spacing of
hydrants. In commercial and industrial areas, the Fire Department
shall prescribe the location of the hydrants.
(5) Easements. Easements shall be required to facilitate the
maintenance and repair of utility lines, whether pipe or wire.
General easements may be provided for overground facilities.
Underground facilities shall be suitably located within a public
right-of-way or in the center of an easement not less than 14 feet
wide. As far as it may be reasonable, utility lines shall coincide with
property lines.
E. Other public facilities.
(1) Land requirements. Areas set aside for recreational or school
purposes shall be reasonably compact parcels, placed to serve all
parts of the subdivision, accessible from a public street, and not
excessively irregular in terrain. Such areas shall have at least 100
feet of frontage on a public street.
(2) Landmarks. Wherever possible, subdividers shall preserve groves,
waterways, scenic points, historic spots and other community
assets, landmarks and trees more than six inches in diameter at the
base of the trunk.
§ 73A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73A-8
1:361
§ 73A-9. Severability.
The various parts of this chapter, including articles, sentences, clauses,
phrases and words, are severable; and if any part is properly found to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such a finding shall not effect the remaining
portions of this chapter.
Chapter 74
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 74, Surface Water Drainage, adopted
9-2-1913, was repealed 5-27-1997.]
Chapter 75
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 75-1. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined as follows:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water, tank or receptacle for
water, whether artificially or semi-artificially constructed or portable,
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms part of a subdivision for which
municipal approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be
subject to the penalties imposed under § 1-9 of this Code, and each lot
disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the borough may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief; and
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land, from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer,
his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made or
the purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
§ 73A-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 75-1
1:362
having a depth at any point greater than two feet and used or intended to
be used for swimming or bathing solely by the owner, his family or guests of
the household and constructed, installed, established or maintained outside
any building in or above the ground upon any premises as an accessory use
to the residence.[Amended 3-14-1966]
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — Any pool used and maintained by an
individual, firm, corporation, club or association of persons for use by the
public or club members and their invitees and guests.
WADING POOL — Any artificially constructed pool, not designed or used
for swimming, with a maximum depth of two feet, whether permanent or
portable, but shall not include a portable "wading pool" no part of which is
permanently installed, which has a capacity of less than 250 gallons and is
intended for use by children.[Amended 3-14-1966]
§ 75-2. Permit to construct pool required.
It shall be unlawful to construct or establish a private swimming pool,
wading pool or public swimming pool as herein defined without obtaining a
permit therefor in the manner hereinafter described.
§ 75-3. Application for permit.
Application for a permit for the construction of a swimming pool or wading
pool shall be made to the Building Inspector. Each application shall be
accompanied by duplicate sets of plans, specifications and plot plans of
the property. The location of the pool on the property shall be shown,
together with the location, height and type of fencing or walls and accessory
buildings. No permit shall be issued until the plans, specifications and plot
plan has been approved by the Building Inspector and approval has been
certified on said plans. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid for a swimming pool
permit, and a fee of $5.00 shall be paid for a wading pool permit.
§ 75-4. Permit to operate pool; inspection. [Amended 3-14-1966]
On or before June 1 of each year, the owner of each swimming pool or
wading pool shall obtain from the Borough Clerk a permit for the operation
of said pool for the current calendar year. Application for each permit must
be made in writing. Within 10 days after the receipt of such application,
an inspection of the pool shall be made by an authorized representative
of the Borough of Merchantville to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. When such inspection is completed and the pool approved,
said permit shall be issued. There shall be a fee of $5.00 for each annual
swimming pool or wading pool permit.
§ 75-5. Owner to maintain pool in sanitary condition.
Construction and design of such pools shall be such that same may be
maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The
owner of every such pool shall be responsible to maintain said pool in such
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-5
1:363
condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water from the pool
overflowing into adjacent public or private property. Sand or earth bottoms
shall be constructed, equipped and maintained in strict conformity with the
currently published provisions of the Swimming Pool Code issued by the
State Board of Health.
§ 75-6. Connection with potable water supply prohibited.
There shall be no connection between a potable public or private water
supply system and a pool at a point below the maximum flow line of the pool.
No pool water shall be discharged or siphoned into a potable water supply
system.
§ 75-7. Swimming pool drain.
Each swimming pool and wading pool as herein defined shall be provided
with one drain pipe which shall not be over two inches in diameter. Such
drain pipe shall provide drainage from such pool to the property of the
owner or to a storm sewer, stream or, where approved by Borough Council,
to the gutter at the curbline. No pool drain shall be connected to a sanitary
sewer without the written consent of the appropriate sewer authority.
§ 75-8. Pool location. [Amended 3-14-1966]
No private swimming pool or wading pool shall be erected, installed or
maintained nearer than 15 feet to any property line or structure nor nearer
to the street line on which said premises fronts than the main rear wall
of the dwelling erected thereon. No private swimming pool or wading pool
shall be constructed or installed on any lot unless on said lot shall be located
a residence building or unless said lot is part of a residence curtilage.
§ 75-9. Lighting and noise nuisances. [Amended 3-14-1966]
§ 75-10. Pool enclosure. [Amended 3-14-1966]
All permanent private swimming pools and wading pools shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall of the type and dimensions hereinafter
specified:
A. Lighting. No artificial lighting shall be installed, maintained or operated
in such a manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance to neighboring
property.
B. Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to
be made or continued at any such swimming pool any loud, unnecessary
or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
A. All portable private swimming pools and portable wading pools, unless
enclosed by a fence or wall of the type and dimensions hereinafter
specified, shall, when not in use or unattended, be either emptied or
§ 75-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 75-10
1:364
§ 75-11. Compliance required. [Amended 3-14-1966]
§ 75-12. (Reserved)39
§ 75-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall
be held for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 75-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law; provided, however, that § 75-10 shall not
become effective as to existing pools until six months thereafter.
Chapter 77
TAXATION
covered with a suitable, strong protective covering, securely fastened
or locked in place.
B. Whenever a fence or wall is required to be erected under this chapter, it
shall be not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height
and shall be constructed so as not to have openings, holes or gaps
larger than four inches in any dimension, except for doors or gates. If a
picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall
not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be
used as part of such enclosure. All gates used in conjunction with the
fence or wall shall meet the same specifications as the fence or wall
itself and shall be equipped with approved locking and latching devices
which shall be locked at all times when the pool is not in use.
A. The owner and operator of every swimming pool or wading pool
constructed in the Borough of Merchantville shall at all times comply
with the provisions of this chapter and with such requirements as may
be promulgated by the Board of Health of the Borough of Merchantville
and the State of New Jersey.
B. The owner or operator of any pool within the Borough of Merchantville
shall allow the Building Inspector, the Health Officer or other
authorized official access, at all reasonable times, to any private
swimming pool, wading pool or appurtenances thereto for the purpose
of inspecting to ascertain compliance with this chapter and all other
pertinent borough ordinances.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 75-12, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 75-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-14
1:365

ARTICLE I
Tax Abatement for Home Improvements
[Adopted 2-13-1978 by Ord. No. 530; amended in its entirety
12-23-1996]
§ 77-1. Procedures. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
The following procedures shall govern agreements for tax abatements and
exemptions entered into by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville and property owners and developers:
A. Application process.
(1) All improvements, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3n, shall be exempt
from local real property taxes if approved by the Tax Assessor as to
the completeness and then approved by Borough Council.
Application shall be upon the form approved by the Borough
Council and the Borough Tax Assessor.
(2) Applicants shall be encouraged to apply for tax exemption on
improvements prior to the commencement of construction of the
improvement, provided that the applicant must file a proper
application with the Tax Assessor within 30 days of the completion
of the improvement in order to be eligible for tax exemption
thereon.
(3) Every properly completed application for exemption on a singlefamily
residential property, having one or more improvements,
which is filed within 30 days of the completion of the improvement
shall be approved and allowed or disapproved by the Assessor
within 60 days of its filing.
B. Applications. Applications for tax abatement and/or exemption on
projects shall be provided to the Borough Council through the Borough
Assessor, setting forth:
(1) A general description of the project for which abatement is sought.
(2) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Borough Council to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project.
(4) A description of the number, classes and types of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
(5) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement and/or
exemption on the project and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if tax abatement is granted.
(6) Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-1
1:367
(7) A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project
site.
(b) The estimated tax payments that would be made annually by
the applicant on the project during the period of the
agreement.
(c) The estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement.
(8) If the project is a commercial or industrial building, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of
the project and a history and description of the user's business.
(9) If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number
and types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the
common elements or general common elements, and a statement of
the proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units
according to type and of any rental or resale restrictions to apply to
the dwelling units respecting low- or moderate-income housing.
(10) Such other pertinent information as the Borough Council may
require.
C. Exemptions and abatements on residential dwellings.
(1) Exemptions. With regard to the exemption from taxation of
improvements to dwellings, in determining the value of real
property, the Borough shall regard the first $25,000 in Assessor's
full and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily
and directly affected by the improvement in any dwelling more than
20 years old as not increasing the value of the property for a period
of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to
which the improvements are made is increased thereby. During the
exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the
improvements, unless an abatement is granted pursuant to
Subsection C(2) of this section, or there is damage to the dwelling
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
(2) Abatements for improvements. The Borough Council may abate
some portion of the assessed value of property receiving the
abatement as it existed immediately prior to the improvement. An
abatement for a dwelling may be granted with respect to that
property for a total of up to five years, but the annual amount of the
abatement granted to any single property shall not exceed 30% of
the annual amount of the abatement granted under this article. The
abatement period and the annual percentage of the abatement to
be granted shall be set forth in the specific ordinance, which may
§ 77-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 77-1
1:368
include a schedule providing for a different percentage of
abatement up to 30% for each year of the abatement period.
(3) Abatement for new construction and/or conversions. The Borough
Council may abate some portion of the assessed valuation of
construction of new dwellings or of conversions of other buildings
and structures, including unutilized public buildings, to dwelling
use, or both. In determining the value of real property, the
municipality shall regard a percentage, not to exceed 30% of the
Assessor's full and true value of the dwelling constructed, or
conversion alterations made, as not increasing the value of the
property for a total up to five years, notwithstanding that the value
of the property upon which the construction or conversion occurs is
increased thereby. The abatement period and the annual
percentage of the abatement to be granted shall be set forth in the
specific ordinance, which may include a schedule providing for a
different percentage of abatement, up to 30%, for each year of the
abatement period.
(4) Joint abatement and exemption. A project-specific ordinance
providing for exemption may also provide for the abatement of
some portion of the assessed value of property receiving the
abatement of 30% as it existed immediately prior to the
improvement or conversion alteration. The annual amount of the
abatement shall not exceed 30% of the total cost of the
improvement or conversion alteration, and the total amount of
abatement and exemption granted to any single property shall not
exceed the total cost of the improvement or conversion alteration.
The abatement period and the annual percentage of the abatement
to be granted shall be set forth in the specific ordinance, which may
include a schedule providing for a different percentage or
abatement, up to 30%, for each year of the abatement period.
D. Exemptions and abatements on commercial and industrial structures.
(1) With regard to the exemption from taxation of improvements to
commercial or industrial structures, in determining the value of
real property, the municipality shall regard up to the Assessor's full
and true value of the improvements as not increasing the value of
the property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the
value of the property to which the improvements are made is
increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on
the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to
the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
(2) With regard to exemptions and/or abatements for any
improvements other than single-family residential property, the
Borough shall authorize exemption for improvements on an
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-1
1:369
§ 77-2. Additional improvements, conversion and/or construction;
eligibility for exemption and abatement. [Amended 3-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-02]
An additional improvement, conversion or construction completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
article during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
in effect shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such a case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements pursuant to this article, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or construction
shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement,
conversion, alteration or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed valuation of the property from which any additional abatement is
to be subtracted.
§ 77-3. Long-term tax exemption. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Upon approval of a specific ordinance authorizing an agreement for tax
exemption for a particular project, the Borough Council shall enter into a
written agreement with the applicant for the exemption of full real property
taxes. The agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the Borough
of Merchantville, in lieu of full property tax payments, an amount annually
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.
§ 77-4. Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or
penalties are due. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, pursuant to this article with respect to any property for which property
taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for which penalties for
nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 77-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the use for which it was intended.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building used, to be used or held for
use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on the
same premises, together with the land upon which said building or buildings
are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof,
but shall not mean a building or part of a building defined as a "multiple
individual basis after review, evaluation and approval of each
application by the Borough Council.
§ 77-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 77-5
1:370
dwelling" pursuant to P.L. 1967, c. 76.40 A dwelling shall include, as they
are separately conveyed to individual owners, individual residences within
a cooperative, if purchased separately by occupants thereof, and individual
residences within a horizontal property regime or a condominium, but
shall not include general common elements or common elements of such
horizontal property regime or condominium as defined in N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et
seq. and N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq., or of a cooperative, if the residential units
are owned separately.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair of a dwelling which produces a physical change in the existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency and
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation
and which does not change its permitted use. In no case shall it include the
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim
was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during
the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application
pursuant to this article.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-5
1:371

ARTICLE II
Tax Abatement for Commercial and Industrial Structures
[Adopted 1-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
§ 77-6. Type of property eligible; duration of exemption.
For the purposes of taxation, an exemption may be granted to the Assessor's
full and true value of improvements to commercial and industrial
structures. The exemption shall be granted for a five (5) year period, and
shall not increase the value of the property by the value of the improvement,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvement
is made increases thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment
on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to the improvement, unless there is damage to the
structure through the action of elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 77-7. Method of determination of exemption.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville may enter into a
written agreement with an applicant for the exemption and abatement
of local property taxes as referenced in Section 77-6. The agreement
shall provide that the applicant shall pay the municipality, in lieu of full
property taxes, an amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due
according to the tax phase-in basis as authorized and defined by N.J.S.A.
40A:21-10(c)(3), in accord with the following schedule:
(1) In the first full year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes
otherwise due on the additional improvement, conversion or
construction;
(2) In the second tax year, an amount not less than twenty (20%)
percent of taxes otherwise due on the additional improvement,
conversion or construction;
(3) In the third tax year, an amount not less than forty (40%) percent of
taxes otherwise due on the additional improvement, conversion or
construction;
(4) In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than sixty (60%) percent
of taxes otherwise due on the additional improvement, conversion
or construction;
(5) In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than eighty (80%) percent
of taxes otherwise due on the additional improvement, conversion
or construction.
B. The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Merchantville, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-11, shall forward a copy of all tax agreements entered
into pursuant to this chapter to the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within
thirty (30) days of the date of its execution.
§ 77-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-7
1:373
§ 77-8. Application requirements for taxing district.
C. In the event that the property owner, subject to a tax agreement, ceases
to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to meet the conditions for
qualifying for the abatement, the local property taxes due for all the
prior years subject to the abatement, and for the current year, shall be
payable as if no exemption or abatement had been granted. The Tax
Collector of the Borough of Merchantville shall notify the property
owner, within fifteen (15) days of the date of disqualification, of the
amount of taxes due. In the event the subject property has been
transferred to a new owner, and it is determined that the new owner
will continue to use the property pursuant to the qualifying conditions,
no tax shall be due, the exemption and abatement shall continue, and
the agreement shall remain in effect.
A. Applicants for tax exemptions and abatements for new construction
and\or improvements to commercial and industrial structures shall
provide the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville with an
application setting forth the following information:
(1) A general description of the project for which the exemption or
abatement is sought;
(2) A legal description of the real estate necessary for the project;
(3) Plans, drawings and other documents, as they may be required by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville to
demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
(4) A description of the number, classes and types of employees to be
employed at the project site within two (2) years of the completion
of the project;
(5) A statement of the reasons for seeking the tax exemption and
abatement on the project, and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant, if the tax exemption and abatement is
granted;
(6) Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
(7) A statement showing:
(a) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project
site to the Borough of Merchantville;
(b) The estimated tax payments that would be made annually by
the applicant on the project to the Borough of Merchantville
during the period of the agreement;
(c) The estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project to the Borough of Merchantville
during the first full year following the termination of the
agreement.
§ 77-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 77-8
1:374
§ 77-9. Additional improvements.
Additional improvements, conversions or construction completed on a
property already granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to
this article during the period in which the previous exemption or abatement
is in effect shall qualify for an additional exemption or abatement. The
additional improvements, conversions or construction shall be considered
as separate for the purposes of calculating the exemption or abatement,
except that the assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or
construction shall be added to the assessed valuation, as it was prior to that
improvement, conversion or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed value of the property for which any additional abatement is to be
subtracted.
§ 77-10. Termination of agreement.
At the termination of an agreement for tax exemption or abatement
authorized pursuant to this article, the project shall be subject to all
applicable real estate taxes, as provided by state and local laws and
regulations, provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the
project or improvement, at the termination of an agreement authorized
pursuant to this chapter, from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits
of any tax preference as provided by law.
(8) A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
any proposed users of the project, and a history and description of
the proposed user's business; and
(9) Any such other pertinent information as may be required by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville, to be determined
on a case-by-case basis.
B. Every application submitted pursuant to this article shall be on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation, and shall be filed
with the Tax Assessor of the Borough of Merchantville, as a condition
for its approval, within thirty (30) days following the completion of the
improvement, conversion or construction.
C. No application may be made to the Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville for an exemption or abatement of local property taxes
pursuant to this article for any property for which property taxes are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of
taxes are due. As a condition to the granting of an exemption or
abatement, a property owner shall be required to waive the filing of any
tax appeal for the subject property for the life of the exemption\
abatement.
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-10
1:375

ARTICLE III
Special Assessment District
[Adopted 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07]
§ 77-11. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to:
§ 77-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq.
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or expansion of a building or structure,
any change in the use of a building or structure, or any land use change that
affects the Borough's need for public facilities.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE OF THE BENEFITS — That share, or portion,
of the value of the total public facilities and service which specially and
peculiarly benefits the property upon which it is imposed, and in no event
shall such share or portion be in excess of the benefits such property
receives by reason of such improvement.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Capital improvements for sidewalks, consistent with
the Merchantville Sidewalk Replacement Program, that have a life
expectancy of at least 20 or more years.
A. Authorize the Borough to finance public facilities through the levying
and collection of special assessments;
B. Provide a mechanism for the Borough to levy and collect special
assessments from property to recover the cost of providing public
facilities that peculiarly benefit the property upon which they are
imposed;
C. Define the procedural and substantive requirements for special
assessments and special assessment districts for capital costs and
service charges of public facilities covered in the plan element of the
Borough;
D. Shift the financing of public facilities from all taxpayers to those who
specifically benefit from such public facilities; and
E. Authorize the Borough to establish special assessment districts and
levy special assessments for the purpose of providing public facilities to
benefit property owners in such designated special assessment
districts.
§ 77-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-12
1:377
PUBLIC SERVICES — The performance by employees, consultants, or
agents of functions, operations, design, engineering, planning and
maintenance, and repair activities in order to provide public facilities.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT — A charge imposed upon property located within
a designated special assessment district by the Borough of Merchantville to
pay for public facilities and services which peculiarly and specially benefit
the property upon which they are imposed.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT — The district in which public facilities
and services are to be provided and in which special assessments and
charges may be levied and collected pursuant to this article to pay for those
public facilities and services.
§ 77-13. Authority.
Consistent with the provisions of this article, the Borough may adopt
provisions authorizing the government to establish, and subsequently
merge or abolish those created hereunder, special assessment districts
for any part or all of the area of such local government, within which
may be provided public facilities and services from funds derived from
service charges, special assessments, or other charges within such special
assessment district.
§ 77-14. Requirements for special assessment districts.
A special assessment district must meet the following requirements:
A. For the purpose of providing public facilities and services, and capital
improvements for sidewalks, consistent with the Merchantville
Sidewalk Replacement Program, within any special assessment district,
the Borough may levy and collect service charges, special assessments,
or other charges within such special assessment district, and borrow
and expend money, issue bonds, revenue certificates, and other
obligations of indebtedness, which powers shall be exercised in such
manner, and subject to such limitations, as may be provided by general
law, in furtherance of the provision of the public facilities and services
authorized by this article.
B. The provisions of this article shall not affect nor limit any other
provisions of law authorizing or providing for the furnishing of public
facilities and services or the raising of revenue for these purposes. The
Borough may use the provisions of this article instead of, or in
conjunction with, any other method of financing part or all of the cost of
providing the public facilities and services authorized under this article.
A. Public facilities and services for which special assessments are levied
and collected must peculiarly and specially benefit the property upon
which the special assessments are imposed, and capital improvements
for sidewalks, consistent with the Merchantville Sidewalk Replacement
Program.
§ 77-12 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 77-14
1:378
§ 77-15. Procedures for special assessment districts.
B. Special assessments levied and collected pursuant to a designated
special assessment district must not exceed a proportionate share of
the benefits received by the property upon which the special
assessments are imposed.
C. The proportionate share of the benefits received by the property upon
which a special assessment is imposed shall be calculated and
apportioned by using any equitable means of assessment and
apportionment which the Borough Council of a local government may
prescribe, including, but not limited to, square footage, front-footage,
increased value, number of dwelling units, distance from the public
facility, traffic generation or other impact generation factors, or any
combination thereof.
A. Initiation of proceeding. Proceedings for the establishment of a special
assessment district may be instituted by the Borough Council when a
written request is made, by the Mayor, describing the boundaries of the
territory which is proposed for inclusion in the special assessment
district and specifying that the special assessment district will provide
capital improvements for sidewalks, consistent with the Merchantville
Sidewalk Replacement Program.
B. Ordinance establishing special assessment district. Within 20 days after
the Mayor's written request for the institution of proceedings for the
establishment of a special assessment district is filed, the Borough
Council shall adopt an ordinance establishing a special assessment
district in the form hereinafter specified.
C. Contents of ordinance. Proceedings for the establishment of a special
assessment district shall be instituted by the adoption of an ordinance
establishing the special assessment district which shall:
(1) State that a special assessment district is established under the
terms of this article and describe the proposed boundaries for
inclusion in the special assessment district.
(2) State the name proposed for the special assessment district in
substantially the following form: "_____ Special Assessment
District."
(3) State that capital improvements for sidewalks, consistent with the
Merchantville Sidewalk Replacement Program, are proposed to be
provided within the special assessment district pursuant to this
article.
(4) State that, except to the extent that funds are otherwise available
and committed, a special assessment sufficient to pay for all such
public facilities and services will be annually levied and collected
within such special assessment district.
§ 77-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-15
1:379
§ 77-16. Collection of special assessments and service charges.
The special assessment may be collected in the same manner as ordinary
ad valorem property taxes are collected and may be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ad valorem property taxes, or another procedure may be
adopted if the Borough Council of the Borough prefers. The Tax Collector
or the appropriate Borough official responsible for collecting the special
assessments may deduct a service charge for the reasonable administrative
costs incurred in collecting the special assessment.
§ 77-17. Use of proceeds.
Any special assessments collected pursuant to this article may only be used,
in whole or in part, for public facilities and services authorized by this
article or for the payment of the principal and interest of bonds, revenue
certificates, and other obligations of indebtedness for such public facilities
and services.
§ 77-18. Issuance of bonds and indebtedness.
After the adoption of the ordinance establishing a special assessment
district, and approving the levying and collection of the special assessments
for public facilities and services as provided by this article, and as soon
as a contract for the public facilities and services has been finally let, the
Borough Council may, by resolution or ordinance, authorize the issuance
of bonds, revenue certificates, or other indebtedness in an amount not in
excess of the aggregate amount of the liens levied for such public facilities
and services. Any debt issued against the bond ordinance for the purpose
of financing the sidewalk program will be repaid, in full (principal and
interest), by the special assessment levies and no other general funds of the
Borough.
(5) The ordinance shall specify the rate, method and length of time for
the payment of the special assessment in sufficient detail to allow
each property owner participating in the program to estimate the
annual amount that he or she will have to pay.
D. Boundaries of district. In establishing the boundaries of a special
assessment district, the Borough Council may alter the exterior
boundaries of a special assessment district to include less territory than
that described in the Mayor's written request, and notice of the public
hearing, but it may not include any territory not described in the in the
Mayor's written request.
E. Types of public facilities and services provided. The type of public
facilities to be provided in a special assessment district shall be
specified in the ordinance to be limited to capital improvements for
sidewalks, consistent with the Merchantville Sidewalk Replacement
Program, to those property owners who choose to participate in the
program.
§ 77-15 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 77-19
1:380
§ 77-19. Priority of lien.
A special assessment shall be payable at the time and in the manner
indicated in the ordinance providing for the special assessment; shall
remain a lien, co-equal with the lien of all state, county, district, and
municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims until
paid; and shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed 18% per year. However,
the special assessments may be paid without interest at any time within 30
days after the public facility is completed and a resolution accepting the
same has been adopted by the Borough.
§ 77-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-19
1:381
Chapter 79
TAXICABS
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCAB or TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motor car used as a
public carrier for the transportation of persons for hire which is operated
over any of the streets of the borough not upon any established route or
routes and which accepts or discharges passengers to or from within or
without said borough.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association or
corporation, their lessees, trustees or receivers.
§ 79-2. License required.
No person shall hereafter operate any taxicab upon any street or highway
of the Borough of Merchantville unless said vehicle is licensed as herein
provided and all provisions of the state law relating to such vehicles and the
operation thereof have been fully complied with.
§ 79-3. Application for license; fee.
A. An application for such license shall be made to Borough Council and
shall set forth the following facts:
(1) The full name and address of the owner, lessee or bailee of the
vehicle to be licensed.
(2) The make and character of the same.
(3) The length of time it has been in use.
(4) The number of persons it is capable of carrying comfortably.
(5) The serial number and motor number of such vehicle and the place
where it may be inspected by the members of Borough Council or
their representative.
B. If the applicant is an individual, said application shall state whether or
not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime and, if so, of what
crime, the date and place of conviction and the punishment therefor. If
the applicant is a copartnership or a corporation, such application shall
set forth the names and addresses of the copartners of such
partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers and directors of
such corporation, and shall state whether any of such copartners,
officers and directors have ever been convicted of a crime and if so, of
what crime, the date and place of conviction and the punishment
therefor. Every such application shall be accompanied by a fee of
§ 77-19 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 79-3
1:382
§ 79-4. (Reserved)41
§ 79-5. Liability insurance required.
No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have
filed with the Borough Clerk, an insurance policy or certificate of a company
duly authorized to transact business in this state for not less than
$10,000.00 insuring against loss for bodily injuries or death suffered by
one person, and for not less than $50,000.00 for bodily injuries or death
suffered by two or more persons as the result of an accident occurring by
reason of the maintenance or operation of such taxicab, and for property
damage in the sum of not less than $5,000.00 for damage arising out of such
accident. Any license issued for such taxicab shall continue effective only so
long as such insurance shall remain in force to the full amounts aforesaid;
provided, however, that any applicant for a license for two or more taxicabs
may file with the Borough Clerk a bond or insurance policy for $50,000.00
in a company approved by Borough Council, covering all taxicabs operated
by said applicant, and shall be for the benefit of any person suffering
loss, damage or injury as aforesaid: provided further, however, that this
section shall not apply to any corporation which shall have obtained from
the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance an order exempting it from
providing such insurance and shall file a certified copy of such order with
the Borough Clerk.
§ 79-6. Power of attorney required.
No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have
delivered to the Borough Clerk a proper power of attorney, in addition to the
bond or insurance policy as provided in § 79-5 hereof, appointing such Clerk
the lawful attorney of such applicant for the purpose of acknowledging
service of process out of any court of competent jurisdiction, and the
operation of such taxicab shall be permitted only so long as such power of
attorney shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 79-7. Issuance of license.
If the application for a taxicab license be granted, the Borough Clerk shall
issue to the applicant a card stating the name and address of the licensee,
the number of the license, the make and character of the taxicab licensed
with the motor number and serial number thereof and the maximum
number of passengers to be carried therein at any one time. Said card shall
be prominently displayed in the interior of any taxicab so licensed (or, in the
$25.00 for a single taxicab and an additional fee of $5.00 for each
additional taxicab to be licensed up to three; beyond that number there
shall be a blanket fee of $50.00. Said license fees shall not be prorated,
nor shall any part thereof be refunded in case of the refusal of a license.
41.Editor's Note: Former § 79-4, Citizenship required for licensing, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-7
1:383
case of a fleet of cabs, in the principal garage of the owner), together with
a statement or schedule of changes for the use thereof.
§ 79-8. Oath.
Every application for a taxicab license shall be verified by the oath or
affirmation of the applicant or applicants, if an individual or a copartnership
and, if a corporation, by the oath or affirmation of an officer thereof.
§ 79-9. Number of licenses.
No more than four persons as herein defined shall be licensed to operate
taxicabs in the Borough of Merchantville in any one calendar year.
§ 79-10. Expiration of license.
Every license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire
at midnight on December 31 following its issuance, unless sooner
surrendered, suspended or revoked: provided, however, that if an
application for the renewal thereof be filed before said December 31, the
operation of said taxicab may be continued until the 15th of January
succeeding.
§ 79-11. Cab identification.
Every taxicab shall have painted on both sides of said vehicle the words
"Taxi" or "Cab" in letters at least three inches high or the name or trade
name of the operating owner with the words "Taxi," "Cab," or "Taxicab."
§ 79-12. Causes for revocation.
After due notice and hearing, Borough Council may revoke or suspend any
license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: if the
licensee has been convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction or
convicted of a violation of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey,
entitled "Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation"; if the licensee violates any
provision of this chapter; if said licensee has made false answers in his
or her application for a license or a renewal thereof; if said licensee has
failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe, proper and adequate taxi
service; or if said licensee has not fully complied with all the requirements
of this chapter with respect to such license. In addition to the reasons
stated above, a taxicab license may be revoked or suspended if the licensed
vehicle is dangerous to safety or health or if the required insurance is not
at all times maintained in force or if said licensed vehicle shall be used for
immoral or illegal purposes.
§ 79-13. (Reserved)42
42.Editor's Note: Former § 79-13, Violations and penalties, was repealed 5-27-1997.
§ 79-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 79-14
1:384
§ 79-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 79-15. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect December 31, 1945, after due passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 80, Theaters, adopted 12-4-1917, was
repealed 5-27-1997.]
Chapter 81
TELEVISION CABLE FRANCHISE
§ 81-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its non-exclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 81-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the federal and state definitions:
A. MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Merchantville, County of Camden,
State of New Jersey.
B. COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is known
as Comcast of Garden State, L.P.
C. ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et
seq.
§ 79-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-2
1:385
§ 81-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 81-4. Duration of franchise.
The non-exclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire fifteen
(15) years from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval
issued by the Board with a 10-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
In the event that the municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within ninety
(90) days of that notification.
§ 81-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality two percent (2%) of the gross revenues from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable
D. FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
E. BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
F. OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
G. BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the
FCC.
H. APPLICATION — The Company's Application for Renewal of Municipal
Consent.
I. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the
Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
§ 81-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 81-5
1:386
television reception service in the municipality or any higher amount
permitted by the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 81-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this Ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ 81-7. Extension of service.
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as
set forth in the Company's Application. Any extension of plant beyond the
Primary Service Area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension
Policy of thirty-five (35) homes per mile.
§ 81-8. Construction requirements.
§ 81-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipal Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
A. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-9
1:387
§ 81-10. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ 81-11. Local Office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 81-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.). Such
bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of
the Company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein.
§ 81-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ 81-14. Commitments by the Company.
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
C. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ 81-9 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 81-14
1:388
§ 81-15. Emergency uses.
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
A. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service on
one (1) outlet at no cost to each school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of active cable distribution
plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a
materials plus labor basis by the school requesting service. Monthly
service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
B. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service at
no cost on one (1) outlet to Borough Hall, each police, fire, emergency
management facility and public library in the municipality, and the
municipal senior center located at Somerset Avenue, provided the
facilities are located within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the Municipality.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
C. The Company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable and modem, to one (1) non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future school in the municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge provided
the facility is located within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of
active cable distribution plant. The Internet service shall be installed on
a personal computer that is accessible to the students and not for
administrative use only.
D. The Company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable and modem on one (1) non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge provided the
facility is located within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of active
cable distribution plant. The Internet shall be installed on a personal
computer that is accessible to library patrons and not for administrative
use only.
E. Within six (6) months of receipt of a Renewal Certificate of Approval,
the Company shall provide the borough with a one-time technology
grant in the amount of eleven thousand dollars ($11,000) for the
borough's cable and technology related needs.
§ 81-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-16
1:389
§ 81-16. Liability insurance.
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000.00 covering
liability for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability
arising out of its construction and operation of the cable television system,
and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of
$5,000,000.00.
§ 81-17. Incorporation of the Application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State or Federal
law.
§ 81-18. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 81-19. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ 81-20. Third party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ 81-21. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Chapter 83
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 81-16 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 83-1
1:390
§ 83-1. Dangerous buildings prohibited.
It is unlawful to construct, maintain or permit to remain any building, part
of a building or structure which endangers the health, safety or welfare of
the public in the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 83-2. Each day a separate offense.
Each day's violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a
fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.) or to imprisonment for
any term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
§ 83-4. Intention; when effective.
This chapter is intended to maintain and preserve the public peace, health
and safety in the Borough of Merchantville and shall take effect immediately
after final passage and publication as provided by law.
Chapter 84
TOWING
§ 84-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to secure towing, recovery, and storage
services for motor vehicles that are:
(1) Standing in violation of current laws or ordinances, and/or that
pose a safety hazard or a security risk, under circumstances where
the owner or the operator is incapable of or unwilling to relocate
the vehicle; or
(2) Abandoned on public or private property; or
(3) Recovered stolen, and unable to be immediately claimed by the
rightful legal owner; or
(4) The instrument or fruits of a crime; or
(5) Otherwise determined by the Police Department to require lawful
removal and/or storage.
B. This community caretaking function, which is administered by the
Police Department, requires a high degree of competence, integrity,
reliability, expertise, and responsible business ethics on the part of the
towing operator (hereinafter, "operator"). Accordingly, the
specifications contained herein are designed to secure the services of a
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1
1:391
§ 84-2. Word usage and definitions.
professional, emergency towing/recovery contractor, at a competitive
and reasonable cost, while protecting the property rights and financial
interests of vehicle owners.
A. As used in this chapter and unless otherwise indicated by the context,
the words or terms herein shall have the meanings indicated. When not
consistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include
words in the singular number and words in the singular number include
the plural number.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Merchantville.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Police of the Borough of
Merchantville.
CRUISING — The operation of an unengaged wrecker along a public
street at a slow rate of speed or in any fashion calculated, designed or
having the effect of soliciting towing business on a public street.
IMPOUND AREA — The fenced-in area specifically used by a tower, on
the approved towing list of the borough, for storage of towed vehicles.
Not more than two (2) "impound areas" may be contained with each
one-half (1/2) acre of any one (1) storage facility.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SHALL — Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
STORAGE FACILITY — A storage lot or storage area, and shall mean
the location within two (2) miles of the geographic boundary of the
Borough of Merchantville, consisting of a minimum of one-half (1/2)
acre and used for storage of vehicles towed by towing operators on the
list approved by the borough.
TOWING LIST — The list of towing operators and wreckers maintained
by the Police Department under the direction and supervision of the
Chief of Police to provide, on a rotating basis, towing service and
storage at the request or call of authorized personnel or members of
the Police Department in cases of emergency, accidents involving motor
vehicles and for disabled, abandoned or illegally parked, operated
vehicles.
TOWING OPERATOR — A person engaged in the business of offering
towing services, whereby damaged, disabled, illegally parked, operated
or abandoned motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from the
places where they are damaged, disabled, impounded or abandoned by
use of a wrecker, tow truck or other vehicles designed for that purpose.
§ 84-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 84-2
1:392
§ 84-3. Towing list.
The Chief of Police shall establish and maintain a list of qualified towing
operators who shall be issued licenses to provide, on a rotating basis,
towing services at the request of the Merchantville Police Department.
Towing operators on the list will be scheduled and treated equally and fairly.
§ 84-4. Licensed required; annual renewal; reinspection.
To be placed on the towing list, towing operators shall be qualified and
required to apply for and hold a license to perform towing services at the
request or call of the Police Department. The license shall be issued to all
qualified towing operators approved by the Chief of Police to be placed on
the towing list. Said license shall be subject to annual renewals by the Chief
of Police on April 1 of each year. Prior to issuance of any license or renewal,
the Chief of Police shall cause an inspection to be made of the required
storage facility and towing equipment to verify compliance with this chapter
and all other applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
§ 84-5. Application for license.
TOWING SERVICE — That service performed, rendered or provided by
towing, removing, transporting or conveying any kind of vehicle which
is or has been damaged, abandoned, impounded, disabled or otherwise
unable to be moved under its own power, for which a charge is made
against the owner or operator of the vehicle.
WRECKER — A vehicle designed and equipped for removing and
transporting wrecked or disabled vehicles. This term shall also include
a flatbed, tow truck or other vehicle used for or to perform towing
services.
A. Applications for licenses hereunder shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police upon forms prepared and made available by the borough. The
application form shall be properly completed, signed and accompanied
by the application and license fee. The Chief of Police shall investigate
and review all applications for compliance with the terms of this
chapter and minimum standards of operator performance mandated by
statute. The background and driving records of all applicants and
employees shall be checked by the Police Department.
B. Among other things, the applications shall contain:
(1) The name of the applicant, with both the home and business
address of the applicant as well as home and business telephone
numbers.
(2) A statement whether applicant is an individual, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or other type of entity.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:393
§ 84-6. Application and license fee; renewal fee.
The application and license fee under this chapter shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.). The annual renewal fee shall be in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.)
§ 84-7. Operator performance.
The following minimum standards shall be required of all operators seeking
to be placed on the towing list with the borough for towing and storage
services:
(3) The names and addresses of all persons owning an interest in the
applicant and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of all
officers and stockholders with the interest held by each.
(4) The names of all employees, with their drivers' license and social
security numbers.
(5) The description of all vehicles and equipment to be used in
providing towing service, setting forth the year, make, model, serial
number, license and registered owner of each vehicle.
(6) The location within five (5) miles of the geographic boundary of the
Borough of Merchantville wherein the equipment is maintained
and stored; the name and address of the owner, lot and block
number and size of storage facility or impound area.
A. Equipment.
(1) The operator must maintain the following equipment:
(a) One heavy duty wrecker — Minimum 25 ton capacity.
(b) One medium duty wrecker — 20 ton capacity.
(c) One light duty wrecker — 10 ton capacity.
(d) One flat bed truck.
(2) Wreckers used by the operator must be of such construction to tow
any type of vehicle and to pass inspection of the Borough Police
Department.
(3) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a shovel, broom and any other
equipment necessary to clean up broken glass, oil and other fluids
and any other debris from the scene of an accident. It shall be the
operator's responsibility to clean up such debris if requested to do
so by any officer of the Borough Police Department at the scene of
the accident, at no cost to the vehicle owner, driver or
representatives.
(4) Wreckers shall be maintained in good condition, comply with all
applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, et seq., be available twenty-
§ 84-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 84-7
1:394
§ 84-8. Removal of vehicles.
four (24) hours a day and be identified on each side with the name
and address of the operator. There shall be no marking on wreckers
indicating affiliation with Police Department, such as "official police
towing."
(5) At the time of submission of its bid, the operator shall submit to the
borough satisfactory proof of ownership of the required number of
wreckers necessary to meet the borough's requirements.
A. Abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle of any size, in any condition, left
anywhere within the borough limits upon any street or public right-ofway,
public easement, public avenue, alley, thoroughfare, or public or
quasi-public places including parks and playgrounds, without a current
registration, vehicle identification plates, insurance, determined
abandoned by the Police Department pursuant to 39:4-56.5, etc. and all
vehicles as defined by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1. When the borough obtains a
Court Order from a Municipal Judge to remove a vehicle from private
property, the vehicle will be deemed to be abandoned for purposes of
this section and the requirements of this section shall apply.
B. Disabled vehicle. Any vehicle left anywhere within the borough limits
due to its inability to operate resulting from motor vehicle accident or
mechanical failure.
C. Impounded vehicle. Any suspected stolen, unregistered, unsafe vehicle
or a vehicle involved in criminal investigation on which a "HOLD" has
been placed by the Police Department.
D. Otherwise determined by the Police Department to require lawful
removal and/or storage.
E. General procedures.
(1) Operator shall be notified by the Department of Police for the
removal of all vehicles whether considered abandoned, disabled or
impounded. Operator must arrive prepared to remove all vehicles
within twenty (20) minutes of notification, unless otherwise
specified by the Police Department. If the operator fails to respond
within the allotted time, the borough may, within its discretion,
notify another vendor to effect immediate removal and towing of
vehicles. Any towing charges assessed by the vendor to the
borough shall be passed on to the operator.
(2) Operator must be available for removal and storage of vehicles
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, including the
removal of abandoned vehicles.
(3) In the event that the owner of a vehicle also arrives at the scene to
which operator has been summoned, with approval of the Police
§ 84-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-8
1:395
§ 84-9. Storage of vehicles.
Department the owner shall be allowed to remove the vehicle at no
expense to himself or the borough.
(4) In the event operator is required to perform additional unspecified
services in furtherance of its obligations hereunder, such services
shall be provided at reasonable cost. Such services shall not affect
the basic towing and storage charges outlined in these
specifications. Such services and the costs to be charged therefore
shall be reported and supplied to the borough forty-eight (48) hours
before the performance of these services. The borough shall have
the right to discontinue any additional unspecified service it deems
not to be in furtherance of this chapter.
(5) The borough shall have the exclusive right to define what
constitutes "motor vehicle" for purposes of this chapter. Anything
deemed by the borough at its sole discretion not to be a "motor
vehicle" may be removed or in any other way dealt with by the
borough without compensation to the operator.
(6) The borough shall have the exclusive right to determine what
constitutes a "salvage" vehicle for the purpose of this chapter. The
borough shall have the exclusive right to determine what
constitutes a "scrap/shredder" vehicle for the purpose of this
chapter.
(7) In the event that a vehicle has been wrongfully removed pursuant
to this chapter, the vehicle shall be returned to the owner at no
charge. On occasion, operator will be required to tow certain
wrongfully removed vehicles back to the initial towing site. In the
event the Police Department authorizes the impounding of any
vehicle for investigation from the "victim" of a crime or offense,
said vehicle shall be returned to the owner upon completion of the
investigation at no charge to the victim.
(8) Any municipal owned vehicles shall be towed free of charge.
(9) Operator shall change flat tires on any borough owned vehicle, free
of charge, when requested by the borough.
(10) Operator must accept all major credit cards for all towing services
and associated costs.
A. All vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter must be stored at the
operator's storage facilities, with the following exception: On occasion,
operator will be required to tow certain vehicles, which are involved in
criminal investigation, or other investigations to a designated facility
for further investigation, at no charge to the borough.
B. All vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be stored in a
separate holding area of operator's storage facilities. Only vehicles
§ 84-8 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 84-9
1:396
§ 84-10. Disposal of vehicles.
towed pursuant to this chapter shall be stored in said holding area and
there shall be no co-mingling of these with any other vehicles. Within
this designated area, abandoned or disabled vehicles shall be separated
from impounded vehicles. Impounded vehicles shall be stored in a
separate, enclosed, secure facility which shall be able to provide space
for a minimal of two (2) vehicles towed for criminal investigation. There
shall be no additional charge for inside storage, if required.
C. All vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be stored according
to the month in which they were towed and shall be marked
appropriately on the windshield.
D. Operator shall be responsible for each vehicle in his storage area,
including but not limited to damage or theft, until final disposition or
removal is ordered by the borough. All vehicles, regardless of condition,
must be stored singly and so arranged to permit inspection and
subsequent removal if necessary. Adequate walkway inspection space
must be provided at all times.
E. The owner of any vehicle towed shall have the right to remove property
belonging to him from the stored vehicle at no cost to the owner unless
a "Police Hold" is marked on tow form. Vehicle owner or his
representative shall have the right to take photos of a stored vehicle for
insurance purposes at no cost to the vehicle owner or his
representative. Any property removal disputes will be referred to the
police department.
F. All valuables found in vehicles, such as jewelry or currency, shall be
turned into the Police Department. After-market items such as audio
equipment, auto accessories shall be stored and inventoried by the
operator.
G. All vehicles and/or property stored pursuant to this chapter shall be
produced no later than two (2) hours upon demand by the Police
Department.
A. Release of vehicles to owners or lien holders.
(1) No vehicle shall be released to either owners or lien holders
without a "Police Release form." Vehicles shall be available for
release between 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 Noon, Saturday, except for legal holidays. It
shall be the responsibility of the Borough Police Department, to
notify the owners of vehicles, when known, when vehicles are
turned over to the operator for removal and storage. Additionally,
the operator shall notify in writing, the owner(s) and lien holder(s)
of the location of the vehicle and all costs associated with its
removal.
§ 84-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-10
1:397
(2) Upon the release of a vehicle to its owner or lien holder, all
ownership rights and responsibilities shall revert to the owner or
lien holder. The borough shall not be liable for daily storage fees for
any day following the date of release, whether or not the owner
actually reclaims possession of the motor vehicle from the operator.
Operator shall not impose any additional charges upon an owner or
lien holder which are not expressly indicated. All vehicles shall be
released by operator upon receipt of a police/vehicle release form
from the Police Department.
(3) The Borough Police Department shall notify the operator of all
released vehicles stored at the operator's storage facilities
pursuant to this chapter. However, any failure to provide such
information cannot be used as a basis for liability against the
borough.
(4) The operator shall notify the borough of any released vehicle which
remains unclaimed by the owner by way of a monthly written
report.
B. Disposal by public sales.
(1) Pursuant to state law, abandoned and disabled vehicles may be
disposed of after remaining unclaimed for a period of thirty (30)
days and may be sold at public auction. Impounded vehicles must
be held for a period of at least ninety (90) days prior to sale at
public auction.
(2) Prior to each sale, all vehicles to be sold shall be numbered by the
operator for identification purposes.
(3) The operator shall be required to complete all necessary
documents to obtain the appropriate titles for the vehicles. Each
sale shall be advertised as required by law and the advertisement
shall state the date of the sale, the lowest minimum bid for each
vehicle and the towing and storage fees accrued up to the date of
sale. The operator shall be responsible for all costs associated with
advertisement fees and any fees necessary to obtain junk titles.
(4) It shall be exclusively within the authority of Borough of
Merchantville to determine which vehicles are exposed to public
sale. The operator is required to have all vehicles advertised for
sale available for inspection and sale in accordance with the public
advertisement. Operator shall make said sale vehicles available to
the public for inspection one (1) hour prior to the scheduled sale
time.
(5) Operator shall be entitled to reimbursement, from the successful
purchaser, for the towing fee plus accrued daily storage fees in
accordance with the fee schedule as set forth in the corresponding
resolution. The daily storage fees shall commence the day of the
tow and shall end the day of the public sale of the vehicle.
§ 84-10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 84-10
1:398
§ 84-11. Records and inspections.
(6) Operator shall furnish the borough in advance of each public sale,
the amount of operator's lien calculated to the date of the sale.
Failure to do so shall be deemed a waiver by the operator of the
right to enforcement of said lien.
(7) Each successful purchaser at the public sale shall reimburse the
operator for accrued towing and storage fees for the vehicle he/she
purchases. The remainder of the purchase price, if any, shall be
paid to the borough by the successful purchaser. All monies will be
collected by the operator and turned over to the Borough.
(8) Operator may participate in the public sale as a bidder.
(9) The borough will not be responsible for charges due and owing the
operator from a claimant or purchaser of a vehicle, nor will it assist
the operator in collecting such charges.
(10) Any monies received by the borough upon sale of any property
pursuant to law shall be the property of the borough and shall not
be subject to any charges, claims or liens by the operator, his agent,
or servant.
(11) The borough reserves the right to retain possession of any vehicles
or vehicle parts, ownership of which the borough has obtained
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157 and N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1, needed for
municipal purposes. The borough shall not be assessed any towing
or storage charges for these vehicles.
(12) It shall be exclusively within the authority of the borough to sell
some, or all, vehicles in multiple lots rather than individually.
Salvage vehicles shall be sold as a lot only auction.
(13) The borough shall hold public sales at its discretion and shall not
be liable for any expenses incurred by operator as a result of failure
to hold sales.
C. Disposal of scrap/shredder vehicles. The operator shall dispose of all
vehicles which have been determined to be scrap/shredder vehicles by
Borough of Merchantville shall not be reimbursed by the borough for
any towing and storage fees for any scrapped/ shredder vehicle and/or
stored pursuant to this chapter.
A. Operator shall maintain a record of all property found anywhere in a
towed vehicle, including the trunk and glove compartment, if open or
key available, and shall be responsible until claimed by owner.
B. Operator shall maintain records of all vehicles towed, stored, and
released by him under this chapter, as well as all services rendered
pursuant to this chapter including additional unspecified services
§ 84-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-11
1:399
§ 84-12. Charges for services.
The fee schedule or charges established for the towing and road services by
towing operators on the rotating borough list maintained by the Borough of
Merchantville Police Department under the direction of the Chief of Police
and for storage in conjunction therewith, shall be adopted by Resolution of
the Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville, with reference to this
Section of Chapter 84.
§ 84-13. Standby services.
§ 84-14. Record of vehicle towed.
Every licensed towing operator called by the Police Department shall keep a
record of the name and address of the owner of the towed vehicle and shall
performed in furtherance of operator's obligations hereunder. Records
shall be kept for a period of seven (7) years.
C. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall have access to any part of the
storage area at any time of the day or night, for inspection purposes,
including both indoor and outdoor area.
D. Authorized representatives of the Department of Police, shall have
access to any of the records required to be kept by the operator. These
representatives will include the Chief of Police, Detective Sergeant, or
any other person designated by the Chief of Police or Mayor.
A. In addition to the other services herein outlined, the operator will be
required to furnish extra towing equipment and service during storm
periods, periods of snow emergencies, traffic emergencies, disasters,
etc., and for any other reason when so designated by the Mayor and/or
Chief of Police, or their duly authorized representatives. During such
periods which are herein referred to as standby periods, the operator
shall be required to furnish adequate equipment and service to be held
ready to remove passenger vehicles, trucks, tractor trailers and other
heavy vehicles and equipment.
B. Standby service will begin when the Chief of Police, or his authorized
designee, calls the operator initially and will end when he terminates
the standby status by calling the operator.
C. The Borough reserves the right, during any emergency, to designate
temporary areas owned or leased by the Borough for the storage of
disabled vehicles to said area at the direction of the Chief of Police.
D. During said emergencies, the operator shall be entitled to make regular
charges to the owners of the vehicles so removed and where storage
space is made available by the operator, the operator shall be entitled to
charge the owner of the vehicle the lawful daily storage charge in
addition thereto.
§ 84-11 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 84-14
1:400
file reports as required by the Chief of Police which shall include but not be
limited to itemized towing and storage charges per vehicle.
§ 84-15. Violations; penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be removed
from this towing list and, in addition, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100) for each offense.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be charged as a
separate offense.
§ 84-16. Termination of license.
Any towing operator on the towing list who fails to properly respond to
calls in the established response time, fails to provide adequate service or
otherwise violates the terms and provisions of this chapter, falsifies any
information with regard to his application or violates the Department of
Insurance rules shall be subject to license termination by the Chief of Police.
Chapter 86
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 84-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-16
1:401

Part 1
[Adopted 4-14-1T9r6a9ffiAcs Ord. No. 450]
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 86-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Part 1, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-1
1:403

ARTICLE II
Prohibiting Parking and Time Limit Parking
§ 86-2. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 86-3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. [Amended
6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 467; 6-23-1975 by Ord. No. 502]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedules I and IA attached to and made a part of this
Part 1.43
§ 86-3.1. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Added 12-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 581]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
specified during the hours specified in Schedule IB attached to and made a
part of this Part 1.44
§ 86-4. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule II at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule II of any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule II attached to and made a part of this Part
1.45
43.Editor's Note: See § 86-23, Schedule I, No Parking, and § 86-23.1, Schedule IA, No Parking
Area.
44.Editor's Note: See § 86-23.2, Schedule IB, No Parking Certain Hours.
45.Editor's Note: See § 86-24, Schedule II, Time Limit Parking.
§ 86-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4
1:405

ARTICLE III
One-Way Streets and Speed Limits
[Amended 11-9-1998]
§ 86-5. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III attached to and
made a part of this Part 146 are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 86-5.1. Speed Limits. [Added 11-9-1998]
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule X, Section 86-27.6, attached hereto and
made a part hereof this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of
speed indicated.
B. The speed limit for both directions of traffic upon any streets or parts
thereof not referenced in Section 86-27.6 shall be established at
twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
46.Editor's Note: See § 86-25, Schedule III, One-Way Streets.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5.1
1:407

ARTICLE IV
Stop Intersections; Yield Intersections; Intersections Prohibiting
Right Turns on Red Signal
§ 86-6. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this Part 147 are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 86-7. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule V attached to and made a part of this Part 148 are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield right-of-way signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
§ 86-7.1. Intersections prohibiting right turns on red signal
designated. [Added 12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 512]
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII
attached to and made a part of this Part 1,49 whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such a turn on the red signal.
§ 86-7.2. Crosswalks for bicycle paths. [Added 5-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-08]
A. Two (2) mid-block crosswalks across Browning Road are hereby
established at 24' south of southern curbline of North Chestnut Avenue
and 54' south of the southern curbline of North Chestnut Avenue at the
intersection for a distance of 36' along the path of the proposed
municipal bicycle path thereof.
B. A mid-block crosswalk across Morris Street is hereby established at 20'
south of the southern curbline of North Chestnut Avenue at the
intersection for a distance of 26' along the path of the proposed
municipal bicycle path thereof.
C. Any crosswalk markings shall be installed in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
D. Any signs shall be erected and maintained to affect the abovedesignated
crosswalk as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
47.Editor's Note: See § 86-26, Schedule IV, Stop Intersections.
48.Editor's Note: See § 86-27, Schedule V, Yield Intersections.
49.Editor's Note: See § 86-27.2, Schedule VII, Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
§ 86-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-7.2
1:409
§ 86-7.3. Intersections prohibiting left turns on red signal
designated. [Added 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person shall operate a vehicle to make a left turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule
XI attached to and made a part of this chapter whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such a left turn.
§ 86-7.4. Pedestrian crosswalks. [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No.
12-08]
E. That this section shall take effect upon approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation.
A. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
from the northeast corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and
Morris Street, to a point commencing 16 feet east of the southeast
corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and Morris Street,
ending at a point 24 feet east of the southeast corner of the intersection
of West Maple Avenue and Morris Street.
B. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across South Centre
Street, from the point commencing 28 feet north of the northeast
corner of the intersection of South Centre Street and Locust Street, and
ending 34 feet north of the northeast corner of the intersection of South
Centre Street and Locust Street, to a point commencing 700 feet south
of the southeast corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and
South Centre Street, ending at a point 706 feet south of the southeast
corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and South Centre
Street.
C. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across Chapel Avenue,
from the northeast corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and
Victoria Street, to a point commencing 538 feet south of the southeast
corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and Victoria Street, ending
at a point 546 feet south of the southeast corner of the intersection of
Chapel Avenue and Victoria Street.
D. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across Chapel Avenue,
from the southwest corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and
Victoria Street, to a point commencing 166 feet north of the northwest
corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and Victoria Street, ending
at a point 174 feet north of the northwest corner of the intersection of
Chapel Avenue and Victoria Street.
E. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across Browning Road,
from the point commencing 760 feet south of the southwest corner of
the intersection of Browning Road and West Maple Avenue, ending at a
point 768 feet south of the southwest corner of the intersection of
Browning Road and West Maple Avenue, to a point commencing 174
feet north of the northeast corner of the intersection of Browning Road
§ 86-7.2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-7.4
1:410
and Volan Street, ending at a point 182 feet north of the northeast
corner of the intersection of Browning Road and Volan Street.
F. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across Browning Road,
from the point commencing 160 feet south of the southeast corner of
the intersection of Browning Road and West Maple Avenue, ending at a
point 168 feet south of the southeast corner of the intersection of
Browning Road and West Maple Avenue, from a point commencing 300
feet south of the southwest corner of the intersection of Browning Road
and West Maple Avenue, ending at a point 308 feet south of the
southwest corner of the intersection of Browning Road and West Maple
Avenue.
G. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
from the southeast corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and
West Maple Avenue, to a point commencing 130 feet west of the
northwest corner of the intersection of Alexander Avenue and West
Maple Avenue, ending at a point 138 feet west of the northwest corner
of the intersection of Alexander Avenue and West Maple Avenue.
H. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
from the southwest corner of the intersection of Chapel Avenue and
West Maple Avenue, to a point commencing 576 feet east of the
northeast corner of the intersection of Morris Street and West Maple
Avenue, ending at a point 584 feet east of the northeast corner of the
intersection of Morris Street and West Maple Avenue.
I. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
commencing from a point 312 feet east of the northeast corner of the
intersection of West Maple Avenue and Morris Street, ending at a point
320 feet east of the northeast corner of the intersection of West Maple
Avenue and Morris Street, further commencing from a point 344 feet
east of the southeast corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue
and Morris Street, ending at a point 352 feet east of the northeast
corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and Morris Street.
J. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
commencing from a point 334 feet west of the southwest corner of the
intersection of West Maple Avenue and Linden Avenue, ending at a
point 342 feet west of the southwest corner of the intersection of West
Maple Avenue and Linden Avenue, further commencing from a point
178 feet west of the northwest corner of the intersection of West Maple
Avenue and Linden Avenue, ending at a point 186 feet west of the
northwest corner of the intersection of West Maple Avenue and Linden
Avenue.
K. Crosswalks are hereby established at the intersection of South Centre
Street, West Chestnut Avenue and East Chestnut Avenue, commencing:
(1) At the northwest corner of South Centre Street across to the
northwest corner of West Chestnut Avenue, using the present curb
cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of six (6) feet; and
§ 86-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-7.4
1:411
(2) At the northwest corner of South Centre Street across to the
southeast corner of East Chestnut Avenue, using the present curb
cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of six (6) feet; then
(3) At the southwest corner of South Centre Street across to the
southwest corner of West Chestnut Avenue, using the present curb
cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of six (6) feet.
L. A crosswalk is hereby established at the southeast corner of Alexander
Avenue to the southwest corner of Alexander Avenue, using the present
curb cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of six (6) feet,
further commencing from a point of intersection of the west curbline of
Alexander Avenue for the first crosswalk boundary, and going 8 feet
west on the south side curbline of West Chestnut Avenue for the second
crosswalk boundary, both boundary lines continuing across West
Chestnut Avenue at a width of 8 feet into the present curb cuts enabling
access for the disabled into the Merchantville Bike Path.
M. A crosswalk is hereby established from the northwest curbline of West
Chestnut Street south 18 feet along the Morris Street curbline, ending
at a point 30 feet south along the Morris Street curbline, further
commencing from the northeast curbline of West Chestnut Street south
18 feet along the Morris Street curbline, ending at a point 30 feet south
along the Morris Street curbline.
N. A crosswalk is hereby established from the northwest curbline of West
Chestnut Street south 18 feet along the Browning Road curbline,
ending at a point 30 feet south along the Browning Road curbline,
further commencing from the northeast curbline of West Chestnut
Street south 18 feet along the Browning Road curbline, ending at a
point 30 feet south along the Browning Road curbline.
O. Crosswalks are hereby established at the intersection of East Park
Avenue, East Chestnut Avenue and Gilmore Avenue, commencing:
(1) At the present curb cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of
six (6) feet, across East Park Avenue and Gilmore Avenue to the
existing concrete island; then
(2) At the present curb cuts enabling access for the disabled, a width of
six (6) feet, across East Park Avenue and East Chestnut Avenue to
the existing concrete island.
P. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
from the northwest corner of the intersection of Linden Avenue and
West Maple Avenue, to a point commencing 8 feet west of the northwest
corner of the intersection of Linden Avenue and West Maple Avenue, to
a point commencing 8 feet west of the southwest corner of the
intersection of Linden Avenue and West Maple Avenue; to a point
ending at a point 16 feet west of the southwest corner of the
intersection of Linden Avenue and West Maple Avenue.
§ 86-7.4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-7.4
1:412
§ 86-7.5. Impeding the flow of traffic prohibited. [Added 9-9-2019
by Ord. No. 19-09]
Q. A mid-block crosswalk is hereby established across West Maple Avenue,
from the southwest corner of the intersection of Hamilton Avenue and
West Maple Avenue, to a point commencing 8 feet west of the southwest
corner of the intersection of Hamilton Avenue and West Maple Avenue,
to a point commencing 118 feet east of the northwest corner of the
intersection of Clinton Avenue and West Maple Avenue; to a point
ending at a point 126 east of the northwest corner of the intersection of
Clinton Avenue and West Maple Avenue.
R. Any crosswalk markings shall be installed in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
S. Any signs used to affect the above-designated crosswalks shall be
erected and maintained authorized by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
T. This section shall take effect upon approval by the New Jersey
Commissioner of Transportation, his agents, servants and/or
employees.
A. Within the area herein designated is hereby established a "Don't Block
the Box" intersection for the enforcement of N.J.S.A. 39:4-67 prohibiting
the impeding of the flow of traffic:
(1) From the southeast corner of the intersection of East Maple Avenue
and Westminster Avenue, to a point 20 feet north of the southeast
corner of the intersection of East Maple Avenue and Westminster
Avenue in the center line of East Maple Avenue; thereafter
(2) West along the center line of East Maple Avenue a distance of 31
feet; thereafter
(3) To a point 20 feet south of the center line of East Maple Avenue, to
the southwest corner of the intersection of East Maple Avenue and
Westminster Avenue; and thereafter
(4) From the southwest corner of the intersection of East Maple
Avenue and Westminster Avenue a distance of 31 feet, ending at the
southeast corner of the intersection of East Maple Avenue and
Westminster Avenue.
B. Any crosswalk markings shall be installed in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
C. Any signs used to effect the above-designated crosswalks shall be
erected and maintained as authorized by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
§ 86-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-7.5
1:413
D. This section shall take effect upon approval by the New Jersey
Commissioner of Transportation, his agents, servants and/or
employees, if applicable.
§ 86-7.5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-7.5
1:414
ARTICLE V
Special Provisions
§ 86-8. Prohibited activities.50 [Added 10-15-2002 by Ord. No.
02-12]
§ 86-8.1. Areas designated. [Added 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12]
A. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard upon or in any of
the places stated in Section 86-8.1A hereof.
B. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard upon or in any of
the places stated in Section 86-8.1B:
(1) While endangering or in any manner to create a risk or danger to
any person or property; or
(2) In any manner to impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
C. No person shall place, locate or leave a skateboard ramp in any public
roadway, including the entire paved and improved surface thereof,
including gutter areas, from curb-to-curb where curbs exist, or on any
public sidewalk in any manner which constitutes a traffic hazard or
which endangers or creates a risk to any person or property.
D. No person shall use or ride or operate a skateboard upon any public
roadway in the Borough of Merchantville unless that person is wearing
a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4
bicycle helmet standard) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990
Standard for Protective Headgear in Bicycling, or a properly fitted and
fastened skateboard helmet whose standards are substantially similar
to that of the bicycle helmet as referenced above.
A. The places referred to in Section 86-8(A) are as follows:
(1) All public and private sidewalks, roadways, including the entire
paved and improved surface thereof, including gutter areas and
curbs, from curb-to-curb where curbs exist, parking lots, driveways
and courtyards within the boundaries being the portions of Maple
Avenue, Cove Road, Church Road, Plymouth Place, South Centre
Street, North Centre Street, West Chestnut Street, East Chestnut
Street, West Park Avenue, East Park Avenue, Chapel Avenue and
Browning Road that are situated within the Borough of
Merchantville, and Lexington Avenue from Maple Avenue to the
boundary of Merchantville Borough and Pennsauken Township.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 86-8, All-night parking of commercial and noncommercial vehicles
prohibited, added 6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 467, was repealed 4-8-1996.
§ 86-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-8.1
1:415
§ 86-8.2. Definitions. [Added 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — Skateboard has as its usual and common meaning: it
includes a single platform mounted on wheels designed or suitable or in fact
used for riding underfoot or a board with rollerskate wheels or other similar
wheels attached to the underside.
SKATEBOARD RAMPS — Skateboard ramps include all ramps commonly
referred to as such platforms manufactured or contrived surfaces of any
and every pattern or configuration and other similar devices and things
designed for use for riding a skateboard upon or above any area.
§ 86-8.3. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-15-2002 by Ord. No.
02-12]
(2) The curbs, ramps and courtyards at, around, leading to and/or
adjacent to the municipal complex on South Centre Street and
Maple Avenue, the Borough Garage, and the property located at
North Centre Street and West Chestnut Street, more commonly
referred to as the "Gazebo."
B. The places referred to in Section 86-8(B) are all public roadways situate
in the Borough of Merchantville.
A. A police officer of the borough who shall observe any person using,
operating or riding upon a skateboard in violation of Sections 86-8,
86-8.1 or 86-8.2 shall:
(1) Upon the first violation, take possession of the skateboard for a
minimum period of 48 hours, after which the skateboard shall be
returned to the parent or guardian of a minor violator or, in the
case of an adult violator, to the violator himself.
(2) Upon the second violation, take possession of the skateboard for a
minimum of 72 hours and issue a summons and complaint to the
violator providing for a fine of $25 payable to the Merchantville
Borough Municipal Court in accordance with Subsection B of this
section; after said 72 hour period, the skateboard shall be returned
to the parent or guardian of a minor violator or, in the case of an
adult violator, to the violator himself.
(3) Upon a third violation and upon such subsequent violation, issue a
summons and complaint to the violator, returnable before the
Merchantville Borough Municipal Court, which shall treat and
dispose of such complaint in accordance with Subsection B of this
section.
B. Any person violating any provision of Sections 86-8, 86-8.1 or 86-8.2
shall, upon conviction, be subject to:
§ 86-8.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-8.3
1:416
§ 86-9. (Reserved)51
§ 86-10. Handicapped parking.52 [Added 4-8-1996]
The parts of streets described in Schedule IX of this Part 153 are hereby
designated as parts of streets authorized for designation, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, as restricted parking spaces for use by persons
displaying on their vehicle a windshield placard or wheelchair symbol
license plates issued by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.
§ 86-11. through § 86-12. (Reserved)
(1) A fine, the amount of which shall be within the discretion of and
shall be fixed by the Merchantville Borough Municipal Court or
other court or judicial officer having appropriate jurisdiction, but
which shall in no case be greater in the amount than that permitted
by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as amended and supplemented and other
applicable law; or
(2) A period of community service within the meaning and limits of and
as referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as amended and supplemented
and other applicable law; or
(3) Both such a fine and such a period of community service.
C. With respect to every skateboard ramp on a public street or sidewalk
which a police officer observes to be a traffic hazard or endangering or
creating a risk to any person or property and in violation of this article,
if the violator or violators of this article can be identified and notified
immediately, he, she or they shall be given reasonable opportunity to
remove the ramp to a lawful place. If the ramp is not so removed within
a reasonable time or if the notice cannot be immediately given for any
reason, the ramp shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of
within seven (7) days in accordance with the law and borough
procedures as appropriate.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 86-9, Parking between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., added
6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 467, was repealed 4-8-1996.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 86-10, Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts,
added 3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 564, as amended was repealed 4-8-1996.
53.Editor's Note: See § 86-27.5, Schedule IX, Handicapped Parking Zones.
§ 86-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-11
1:417

ARTICLE VI
Overnight Parking
[Amended 4-8-1996]
§ 86-13. Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 86-13.1. Overnight parking; exceptions. [Amended 2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-01; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
The following shall constitute exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in
Schedule VI against parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
on any street in the Borough; provided, however, that no motor vehicle shall
be permitted to be parked on any street for more than 24 continuous hours:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any motor vehicle upon any of the highways,
streets, roads, avenues or alleys, or parts thereof, as designated in
Schedule VI,54 between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing
time standard, in the Borough of Merchantville.
B. [Deleted 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 00-01]
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part 1, a fine of $24 shall be
imposed for the first offense under this section. For subsequent offenses
under this section, a fine of $51 shall be imposed. [Added 5-12-1997;
amended 10-15-1997; 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 00-01; 12-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-18; 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-20]
A. A resident, upon making written application for the permission
provided for in this and the following subsections to the Chief of Police,
shall be issued up to two (2) insignia per property, which will authorize
such resident or a member of his household to park a motor vehicle duly
registered in the State of New Jersey to the resident's address, which is
owned by such resident or a member of his household, on the public
streets of the Borough where parking is not otherwise prohibited
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. In situations involving an application by a resident for additional
insignia, or which involve an application by a resident for insignia for a
vehicle not registered in the State of New Jersey, the Chief of Police
shall be satisfied that the resident making written application for the
permission provided for in this and the following subsections has not
ample driveway space, no driveway, garage or other legal off-street
parking space on his premises, whereupon the Chief of Police shall
issue to such resident insignia authorizing such resident or a member of
his household to park a specific motor vehicle or vehicles duly
registered in the State of New Jersey to the resident's address, owned
by or\ principally used by him or a member of his household, on the
public streets of the Borough where parking is not otherwise prohibited
54.Editor's Note: See § 86-27.1, Schedule VI, No Parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 86-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-13.1
1:419
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The Chief of Police shall
render a decision on said written application within ten (10) days of the
filing thereof.
C. In situations involving an application by a non-resident for insignia for a
vehicle registered or not registered in the State of New Jersey, the Chief
of Police shall be satisfied that the resident making written application
for the permission provided for in this and the following subsections has
not ample driveway space, no driveway, garage or other legal off-street
parking space on his premises, whereupon the Chief of Police shall
issue to such resident insignia authorizing such resident, a member of
his household, or a non-resident, to park a specific motor vehicle or
vehicles on the public streets of the Borough where parking is not
otherwise prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The
Chief of Police shall render a decision on said written application within
ten (10) days of the filing thereof.
D. All such insignia issued under Subsections A and B of this Section
86-13.1 shall be valid for the period of time in which the resident owns
the vehicle designated. All such insignia issued under Subsection C of
this section shall be issued for a period of one year or less, at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, commencing on the date the
application is granted, and ending on a date therein designated, and
shall be renewable upon the Chief of Police being satisfied on the
matters set forth in Subsection C, if applicable. The holders thereof
must reapply for such permit at its designated expiration date.
E. Such insignia shall be affixed or displayed upon the rear inside rearview
mirror of the motor vehicle being parked as permitted herein so as to be
visible from the front of the motor vehicle.
F. Any resident denied any permit under Subsection B may, within five (5)
days of the denial of said request, file a written appeal of said denial to
the Borough Police Board, which will decide each case on its merits and
render a written decision within fifteen (15) days of the filing of said
appeal.
G. Commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of less than
8,000 pounds shall be eligible for issuance of a parking permit under
this section.
H. There shall be no fee for insignia issued under Subsection A of this
article. There shall be a fee of one ($1.00) dollar, per insignia, for
insignia issued under Subsection B of this section. There shall be a fee
of ten ($10.00) dollars per insignia for insignia issued under Subsection
C of this section.
§ 86-13.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-13.1
1:420
ARTICLE VII
Parking Prohibited During Snow Plowing, Snow Removal and Other
Emergencies
§ 86-14. Parking prohibited due to snow accumulation.
§ 86-15. No parking emergency.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, no vehicle shall be parked on the following
streets or highways or portions thereof:
(1) Maple Avenue: entire length.
(2) Centre Street: entire length.
(3) Park Avenue: entire length.
(4) Browning Road: entire length.
(5) Cove Road: entire length.
(6) Church Road: entire length.
(7) Chapel Avenue: entire length.
(8) Lexington Avenue: entire length.
(9) North Chestnut Avenue: entire length.
(10) Prospect Street: entire length. [Added 4-8-1996]
(11) Volan Street: entire length. [Added 4-8-1996]
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. In addition to the prohibition in Section 86-14, upon a declaration of an
emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or sections of streets
where temporary "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are displayed.
The Chief of Police or in his absence a ranking police officer is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of
"EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are being or
will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 86-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-16
1:421
§ 86-16. Removal of unoccupied vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Part 1 shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 86-16 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-16
1:422
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 86-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-8-1996]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person violating any of the provisions of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable for a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 60 days or both, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge before whom such violation is heard and conviction
made.
§ 86-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-17
1:423

ARTICLE IX
Construction and Maintenance Operations on Roadways
[Added 4-8-199655]
§ 86-18. (Reserved)
§ 86-19. Preconstruction meeting; hazardous conditions; time
restrictions; safety; penalties.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or utility wishing
to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the
Merchantville Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such
period of construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who
fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or whose
plans are not approved by the Merchantville Police Department is in
violation of this section.
B. The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Merchantville Police
Department with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be
called in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If, for any reason,
emergency contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact
person does not respond to the call from the Merchantville Police
Department to correct a hazardous condition, the borough may respond
to correct such hazardous conditions, and any and all costs for such
emergency service by the borough shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such conditions.
C. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work
on any roadway in the borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the Chief of the Merchantville Police
Department, or his designee. If it is determined by the Chief or his
designee that the construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
D. Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless
approved by the Merchantville Police Department.
E. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Merchantville Police Department that the
same is necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of
traffic.
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IX, Effect and Short Title, as
amended.
§ 86-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-19
1:425
§ 86-20. through § 86-22. (Reserved)
F. The Merchantville Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or
other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard
or for any violation of this section.
G. It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or
equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all
construction, signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed.
H. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for the fine and any penalties as per
Section 86-17 of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 86-19 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-20
1:426
ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 86-23. Schedule I, No Parking. [Amended 6-28-1971 by Ord. No.
467]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-3, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Alexander Avenue East Maple Avenue to Chestnut Avenue
Centre Street East Locust Avenue south to the borough
line
Centre Street West Maple Avenue south to the borough
line
Centre Street West North Chestnut Avenue north to the
borough line
Chapel Avenue East Maple Avenue to Spruce Street
Church Road Both Entire length
Clifton Avenue West Entire length
Cove Road Both Entire length
Euclid Avenue West Maple Avenue to Chestnut Avenue
Franklin Avenue East Entire length
Loccust Street North Centre Street to Prospect Avenue
Maple Avenue North Lexington Avenue to Linden Avenue
Maple Avenue South Lexington Avenue to Irvin Avenue
Maple Terrace West Maple Avenue to Spruce Street
Morris Street East Maple Avenue to Chestnut Avenue
Morris Street East Maple Avenue to Volan Street
North Chestnut
Avenue [Repealed
11-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 599]
Park Avenue North From a point 349 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Franklin Avenue
east to Cove Road
Park Avenue South Maple Avenue to Franklin Avenue
§ 86-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-23
1:427
Name of Street Side Location
Poplar Avenue
[Repealed
5-14-2012 by Ord.
12-04]
Poplar Avenue
[Repealed
5-14-2012 by Ord.
12-04]
Russell Avenue North Entire length
Somerset Avenue South Prospect Avenue to Plymouth Place
South Chestnut
Avenue
Both Franklin Avenue to Cove Road
Avenue
South Chestnut
Avenue
North Centre Street to Poplar Avenue
South Chestnut
Avenue
South Morris Street west to the borough
line
Stanley Avenue
[Added 8-11-1975
by Ord. No. 505]
South Entire length
Victoria Street Both Chapel Avenue to Volan Street
Victoria Street North Volan Street to Woodbine Avenue
Volan Street56 North Morris Street to Browning Road
Volan Street South Victoria Avenue to Morris Street
Woodbine Avenue South West End Avenue to Hamilton
Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue East Maple Avenue south to the borough
line
§ 86-23.1. Schedule IA, No Parking Area. [Added 6-23-1975 by Ord.
No. 502]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-3, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time in any portion of the area described below:
A. On the north side of Maple Avenue from the northwest curbline of Park
Avenue westwardly 446 feet; on the south side of Maple Avenue from a
point 120 feet west of the southwest curbline of Chapel Avenue to a
point 418 feet east of the northeast curbline of Chapel Avenue; on the
southwest side of Chapel Avenue from the south curbline of Maple
Avenue to a point 65 feet southeast of the south curbline of Maple
56.Editor's Note: Volan Street was also amended 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09; repealed
3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01.
§ 86-23 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-23.1
1:428
§ 86-23.2. Schedule IB, No Parking Certain Hours. [Added
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 581]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-3.1, no person shall park
a vehicle during the hours indicated in any portion of the area described
below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
West Maple
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
(school days)
From a point of 256 feet 7
inches east of Morris
Street to a point 396 feet
8 inches east of Morris
Street
§ 86-24. Schedule II, Time Limit Parking. [Amended 4-8-1996]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-4, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets thereof:
Street Side
Time
Limit
(minutes) Hours Location
Centre Street East 60 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Locust Street to
Maple Avenue
Hamilton Avenue
[Added
10-15-1997]
West 60 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Maple Avenue to
a point 110 feet
south of Maple
Avenue
Maple Avenue North 120 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Centre Street to
Clifton Avenue
Maple Avenue South 120 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Centre Street to
Prospect Street
Maple Avenue South 15 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Poplar Street to
a point 120 feet
east of Poplar
Street
Maple Avenue South 60 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Poplar Street to
West End
Avenue
Avenue; on the northeast side of Chapel Avenue from the south curbline
of Maple Avenue to a point 200 feet southeast of the south curbline of
Maple Avenue. All distances shall be measured along the face of curbs
from the intersection of the curblines, projected.
§ 86-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-24
1:429
Street Side
Time
Limit
(minutes) Hours Location
Maple Avenue
[Added
5-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-04]
North 15 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Euclid Street
west to
Pennsauken
boundary
Poplar Street Both 15 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Maple Avenue to
a point 85 feet
south of Maple
Avenue
§ 86-25. Schedule III, One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-5, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Street Direction Limits
Alexander Avenue [Added
9-8-1975 by Ord. No. 506]
North Entire length
Clifton Avenue North Entire length
Crump Lane [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-12]
West Entire length
East Chestnut Avenue
[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-07]
West From East Park Avenue to
a point 38 feet east of
East Park Avenue
East Chestnut Avenue
[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-07]
East From East Park Avenue to
a point 68 feet east of
East Park Avenue
Euclid Avenue [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-12]
North Entire length
Franklin Avenue South Entire length
Maple Terrace North From Maple Avenue to
Locust Street
Oak Terrace [Added
4-13-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04A]
North From Volan Street to
Browning Road
Poplar Avenue North From Maple Avenue to
Myrtle Avenue
§ 86-24 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-25
1:430
Street Direction Limits
Poplar Avenue [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-12]
South From Myrtle Avenue to
Maple Avenue
St. James Avenue South From Maple Avenue to
Somerset Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue South From Maple Avenue to
Locust Street
§ 86-26. Schedule IV, Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-6, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
Browning Road and West Chestnut Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Chestnut Avenue
Browning Road and Woodbine Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Woodbine Avenue
Browning Road and Myrtle Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Myrtle Avenue
Browning Road and Oak Terrace [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Oak Terrace
Browning Road and Volan Street [Added
12-14-1998]
Volan Street
Chapel Avenue and Stanley Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Stanley Avenue
Chapel Avenue and Victoria Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Victoria Street
Chapel Avenue and Russell Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Russell Avenue
Chapel Avenue and Spruce Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Spruce Street
Church Road and Ivins Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Ivins Avenue
§ 86-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-26
1:431
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
Church Road and Glenwood Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Glenwood Avenue
Church Road and Plymouth Place [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Plymouth Place
Cove Road and East Chestnut Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Chestnut Avenue
Cove Road and East Rogers Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Rogers Avenue
Cove Road and Gilmore Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Gilmore Avenue
Cove Road and East Cedar Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Cedar Avenue
Cove Road and East Walnut Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Walnut Avenue
East Chestnut Avenue and Gilmore Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998]
Gilmore Avenue
East Chestnut Avenue and Clifton Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Clifton Avenue
East Chestnut Avenue and Fithian Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Fithian Avenue
East Park Avenue and East Chestnut Avenue
(north side of East Park Avenue) [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Chestnut Avenue
East Park Avenue and Gilmore Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998]
Gilmore Avenue
East Maple Avenue and Westminster Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Westminster Avenue
East Maple Avenue and Greenleigh Court
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Greenleigh Court
§ 86-26 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-26
1:432
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
East Maple Avenue and Prospect Street
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Prospect Street
East Maple Avenue and Maple Terrace
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Maple Terrace
East Maple Avenue and Franklin Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Franklin Avenue
East Maple Avenue and Fithian Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Fithian Avenue
East Park Avenue and East Chestnut Avenue
(south side of East Park Avenue) [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
East Chestnut Avenue
Franklin Avenue and Crump Lane [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Crump Lane
Gilmore Avenue and Cedar Avenue Cedar Avenue
Gilmore Avenue and Walnut Avenue Walnut Avenue
Gilmore Avenue and East Cedar Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Cedar Avenue
Gilmore Avenue and East Rogers Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Rogers Avenue
Gilmore Avenue and East Chestnut Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Chestnut Avenue
Graham Avenue and Woodbine Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Woodbine Avenue
Hamilton Avenue and Myrtle Avenue Myrtle Avenue
Lexington Avenue and Volan Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Volan Street (both sides)
Locust Street and Woodlawn Avenue Woodlawn Avenue
Locust Street and Maple Terrace [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Maple Terrace
§ 86-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-26
1:433
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
Maple Terrace and Locust Street [Added
8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 608; deleted
12-14-1998]
Morris Street and Volan Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Volan Street (both sides)
Morris Avenue and Chestnut Avenue
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-12]
Chestnut Avenue
Myrtle Avenue and Irvin Avenue [Deleted
12-14-1998]
Myrtle Avenue and Linden Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Linden Avenue
Myrtle Avenue and Hamilton Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Hamilton Avenue (both
sides)
Myrtle Avenue and Poplar Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Poplar Avenue (both sides)
North Centre Street and East Rogers Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998]
East Rogers Avenue
North Centre Street and West Rogers Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998]
West Rogers Avenue
North Centre Street and East Chestnut
Avenue [Added 12-14-1998; amended
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Chestnut Avenue
North Centre Street and West Chestnut
Avenue [Added 12-14-1998; amended
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Chestnut Avenue
North Centre Street and East Walnut Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Walnut Avenue
North Centre Street and West Walnut Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Walnut Avenue
North Centre Street and West Cedar Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Cedar Avenue
North Centre Street and East Cedar Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
East Cedar Avenue
§ 86-26 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-26
1:434
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
North Chestnut Avenue and Gilmore Avenue Gilmore Avenue
Plymouth Place and Somerset Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Somerset Street
Plymouth Place and Sussex Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Sussex Street
Poplar Avenue and Myrtle Avenue Myrtle Avenue
Poplar Avenue and Woodbine Avenue Woodbine Avenue
Prospect Street and Somerset Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Somerset Street
Prospect Street and Locust Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12; 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Locust Street
Prospect Street and Locust Street [Added
10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Prospect Street
Somerset Avenue and Greenleigh Court Greenleigh Court
Somerset Avenue and St. James Avenue St. James Avenue
Somerset Avenue and Westminster Avenue Westminster Avenue
South Centre Street and West Chestnut
Avenue [Added 12-14-1998; amended
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Chestnut Avenue
South Centre Street and Locust Street
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Locust Street
South Centre Street and Church/School
Parking Lot [Added 12-14-1998; amended
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-12]
Parking Lot
Sussex Street and St. James Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
St. James Avenue
Sussex Street and Westminster Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Westminster Avenue
Victoria Street and Volan Street [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-08]
Volan Street
Volan Street and Lexington Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Lexington Avenue (both
sides)
§ 86-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-26
1:435
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
Volan Street and Morris Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Morris Street
Volan Street and Oak Terrace Oak Terrace
Volan Street and Springfield Avenue
[Amended 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Springfield Avenue
Volan Street and Springfield Avenue [Added
10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Volan Street
West Cedar Avenue and Leslie Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Leslie Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Morris Street
[Added 12-14-1998]
Morris Street
West Chestnut Avenue and Morris Street
(North of Railroad) [Added 12-14-1998]
Morris Street
West Chestnut Avenue and Morris Street
(South of Railroad) [Added 12-14-1998]
Morris Street
West Chestnut Avenue and Springfield Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Springfield Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Lexington Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Lexington Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Alexander Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Alexander Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Linden Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Linden Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Clinton Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Clinton Avenue
West Chestnut Avenue and Euclid Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Euclid Avenue
West End Avenue and Myrtle Avenue [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Myrtle Avenue
West Maple Avenue and Linden Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Linden Avenue (both
sides)
§ 86-26 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-26
1:436
At Intersection of Stop Sign On
West Maple Avenue and Hamilton Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Hamilton Avenue
West Maple Avenue and West End Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
West End Avenue
West Maple Avenue and Lexington Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Lexington Avenue (both
sides)
West Maple Avenue and Springfield Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Springfield Avenue (both
sides)
West Maple Avenue and Morris Street [Added
12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
Morris Street (both sides)
West Maple Avenue and Clinton Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998]
Clinton Avenue
West Maple Avenue and West Park Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
West Park Avenue
West Walnut Avenue and Leslie Avenue
[Added 12-14-1998; amended 9-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-12]
Leslie Avenue
§ 86-27. Schedule V, Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-7, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield rightof-
way signs having sides thirty-six (36) inches in length shall be installed
as indicated:
Intersection Yield Sign On
Victoria Street and Volan Street Volan Street
§ 86-27.1. Schedule VI, No Parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. [Added
4-8-199657]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-13, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any of the
following described streets or parts thereof:
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 86-27.1, Schedule VI, No Parking
12:00 Midnight to 6:00 a.m., added 6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 467, as amended.
§ 86-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-27.1
1:437
Name of Street Side Location
All Streets Both Entire length
§ 86-27.2. Schedule VII, Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
[Added 12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 512]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-7.1, no person shall turn
a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the following locations, whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such a turn on the red signal:
Location
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal
Chapel Avenue and Maple Avenue All
Cove Road and East Park Avenue
[Added 11-26-1979 by Ord. No.
551]
From eastbound on Park Avenue to
southbound on Cove Road
Maple Avenue and Centre Street All
Maple Avenue and Cove Road
[Added 11-26-1979 by Ord. No.
551]
From eastbound on Maple Avenue
to southbound on Church Road and
St. James Avenue
Maple Avenue and Cove Road
[Added 11-26-1979 by Ord. No.
551]
From westbound on Maple Avenue
to northbound on Cove Road
Park Avenue and Centre Street All
§ 86-27.3. Schedule VIIA, Metered Parking Permitted (Streets).
[Added 4-8-1996]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-29, the installation of
parking meters be and hereby is authorized on the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Centre Street East Walnut Avenue to a point 200 feet
south of Maple Avenue
Centre Street West Chestnut Street to Maple Avenue
Chestnut Street North Centre Street to Alexander Avenue
(former railroad right-of-way)
Maple Avenue North Chapel Avenue to Franklin Avenue
Maple Avenue South Chapel Avenue to Maple Terrace
Park Avenue North Maple Avenue to Gilmore Avenue
§ 86-27.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-27.4
1:438
§ 86-27.4. Schedule VIII, Metered Parking Permitted (Areas).
[Added 4-8-1996]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-29, the installation of
parking meters be and hereby is authorized on the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Block Lot
26 18.02
26 4.01
26 3.01
26 2.02
29 1
29 9
§ 86-27.5. Schedule IX, Handicapped Parking Zones. [Added
4-8-1996]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 and Section 86-10,
the following described parts of streets be and hereby are designated
handicapped parking zones, and no person shall park a vehicle therein
unless such vehicle displays a windshield placard or wheelchair symbol
license plates issued by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.:
Name of Street Side Location
Locust Street South From a point 120 feet west of Maple
Terrace to a point 145 feet west of
Maple Terrace
Maple Avenue North From a point 109 feet west of Centre
Street to a point 134 feet west of
Centre Street
Woodlawn Avenue West From a point 240 feet north of Locust
Street to a point 265 feet north of
Locust Street
§ 86-27.6. Schedule X, Speed Limits. [Added 11-9-1998]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-5.1, speed limits are hereby
established upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 86-27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-27.6
1:439
Name of Street
Speed
Limit Location
Browning Road 25 West Chestnut Street to Pennsauken
boundary
Chapel Avenue 25 West Maple Avenue to Pennsauken
boundary
Church Road 25 East Maple Avenue to Cherry Hill
boundary
Cove Road 25 Pennsauken boundary to East Maple
Avenue
East Maple Avenue 30 South Centre Street to Pennsauken
boundary
Lexington Avenue 25 Pennsauken boundary to West Maple
Avenue
North Centre Street 25 West Chestnut Street to Pennsauken
boundary
South Centre Street 25 Pennsauken boundary to West
Chestnut Street
West Chestnut
Street
25 North Centre Street to Pennsauken
boundary
West Maple Avenue 30 Pennsauken boundary to South Centre
Street
West Park Avenue 25 West Maple Avenue to South Centre
Street
West Park Avenue 25 South Centre Street to Pennsauken
boundary
§ 86-27.7. Schedule XI, Prohibited Left Turns On Red Signal (Stop
Intersections). [Added 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86-7.3, no person shall operate
a vehicle to make a left turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the following locations, whenever an official sign is
present prohibiting such a left turn:
Location Stop Sign On Time
Block 26, Lot 18.02
[Added 1-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
Ingress/egress to/from
parking lot onto South
Centre Street
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.;
2:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
Monday through Friday
§ 86-27.6 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-27.7
1:440
Part 2
[Adopted 11P-a8r-1k9in8g2 MAsetOerrds. No. 59758]
ARTICLE XI
Parking Meters
§ 86-28. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the terms used herein shall be defined as
follows:
PARKING METER — A device which shall indicate thereon the length of
time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place, which shall
have as a part thereof a receptacle for receiving and storing coins of United
States money, a slot or place in which such coins may be deposited, a timing
mechanism which shall indicate the period of time during which parking is
permissible and which shall display an appropriate signal when such period
of time shall have elapsed and also brief instructions as to the operation of
such device.
§ 86-29. Metered parking streets and areas. [Amended 4-8-1996]
The streets and areas described in Schedules VIIA and VIII of this chapter
are hereby designated as streets and areas authorized for the installation of
parking meters.
§ 86-30. Parking meter space markings.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall cause lines or
appropriate markings to be painted upon the surface of said streets in the
locations where parking meters are installed, outlining and designating the
space for which each parking meter is to be used, and each vehicle parking
adjacent to any such meter shall be parked within said lines or markings. It
shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across or without such
lines or markings or in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the
space designated thereby.
§ 86-31. (Reserved)
§ 86-32. Coins to be deposited. [Amended 4-8-1996]
Whenever a vehicle shall be parked in an individual parking space where a
parking meter has been installed, and where such vehicle does not display
a permit issued under Chapter 55, the person parking such vehicle shall
deposit in said meter a five-cent coin or coins, a ten-cent coin or coins
or a twenty-five-cent coin or coins of United States money, if such meter
indicates that legal parking is permitted only on such deposit, and place
such meter into operation.
58.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Part 2, Parking Meters, Adopted
3-14-1955 As Ord. No. 374, As Amended.
§ 86-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-33
1:441
§ 86-33. Time purchased. [Amended 4-8-1996; 10-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-09; 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01; 10-20-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
§ 86-34. Overtime parking.
If such vehicle shall remain parked in said parking space beyond the time
limit fixed therefor or parts thereof, the parking meter shall so indicate,
and in that event the vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime. Such
overtime parking shall be a violation of this Part 2 and shall subject the
operator of such vehicle to the penalty prescribed herein.
§ 86-35. Hours of operation.
A. For the streets described in Schedule VIIA of this chapter, upon
depositing the coin or coins as required and placing such meter into
operation, such parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
for 12 consecutive minutes for each five-cent coin so deposited, for 24
consecutive minutes for each ten-cent coin so deposited, and for 60
consecutive minutes for each twenty-five-cent coin so deposited;
provided, however, that such parking shall be limited to not more than
two hours at any one time.
B. For the areas described in Schedule VIII of this chapter, upon
depositing the coin or coins as required and placing such meter into
operation, such parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
for two consecutive hours for each twenty-five-cent coin so deposited;
provided, however, that such parking shall be limited to not more than
10 hours at any one time.
C. The owner of a commercial business within the Borough may purchase
a decal from the Borough Clerk for any vehicle owned by it, or a regular
employee of the business, which is regularly used in the delivery of
goods and services sold by the business, which permits an identified
motor vehicle to park in the metered parking spaces as described in
Section 86-30 of this chapter, without the requirement to deposit the
coin or coins as required, and such parking space may be lawfully
occupied by such vehicle without time limitation. The costs of this decal
shall be in the sum of $120.00 per year, per identified motor vehicle.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 86-33A, for the streets
described in Schedule VIIA of this chapter, a meter may be placed into
operation and such parking space lawfully occupied by a vehicle for the
first 12 consecutive minutes of lawful occupancy without depositing the
coin or coins as required.
E. Failure to deposit such coin or coins shall constitute a violation of this
Part 2 and subject such person to the penalty prescribed in Section
86-40.
§ 86-33 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-35
1:442
§ 86-36. Deposit of slugs, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Part 2 to deposit
or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, metal disk or other
substitute for a five-cent, ten-cent or twenty-five-cent coin of the United
States.
§ 86-37. Tampering with meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Part 2 for
any person to deface, tamper with or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the authority of this Part 2.
§ 86-38. Duties of police officers.
A. Said parking meters shall be operated Monday through Saturday
during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. [Hours
were amended 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-09 and repealed
3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
B. The meters shall not be operated on Sunday. In addition, the Borough
Council may, by resolution, for special circumstances, suspend the
operation of the parking meters in all or a portion of the areas in which
they are operating for a period or periods not to exceed 40 days.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Part 2 for
any person, partnership or corporation to cause, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in his, her or its name to be parked overtime in any
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough of
Merchantville, acting in accordance with the instruction of the Director
of the Department of Public Safety, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to it is or has been parked in
violation of the provisions of this Part 2, and issue a summons for
same.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) The time during which such vehicle is or has been parked in
violation of the provisions of this Part 2.
(4) Any other facts or knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of all the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the
owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in
violation of the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 86-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-39
1:443
§ 86-39. Coin collector.
The Chief of Police shall designate some member or members of his
Department to collect the coins deposited in parking meters in such manner
as he shall from time to time designate and to deliver them promptly to the
Borough Treasurer.
§ 86-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-10-1984 by Ord. No.
619; 4-8-1996; 10-15-1997; 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 00-01; 12-8-2003
by Ord. No. 03-18; 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-20]
§ 86-41. (Reserved)59
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person who violates or who aids, abets or assists in the violation of any
of the provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction, be liable for a fine
of $24.
B. Any person who violates Section 86-33A of this Part 2 by parking in a
metered zone, as designated by Schedule VIIA of this Part 2, in excess
of two hours or any person who violates Section 86-33B of this Part 2 by
parking in a metered zone, as designated by Schedule VIII of this Part 2,
in excess of 10 hours shall be subject to a fine of $34.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 86-41, Additional meter zones, was repealed 4-8-1996.
§ 86-39 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 86-41
1:444
Chapter 87
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
§ 87-1. Findings.
It is hereby determined and declared that the abandonment, or storage out
of doors of any motor vehicle not currently in use for transportation and
not currently licensed or registered, on any public street or on any public
or private lands within the borough is contrary and inimical to the public
welfare in that such vehicles so abandoned or stored attract or may attract
young children who being so attracted may play in and about them and be
injured in so doing, and in that such vehicles so abandoned or stored out of
doors deteriorate and are unsightly and are detrimental to and depreciate
the value of properties in the neighborhood where they are located and in
the borough as a whole.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Includes any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer,
truck, truck-trailer or other vehicle which:
IMPOUND, IMPOUNDMENT or PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT — Refers to
the sequestration of the vehicle or junk automobile body at a place of
storage.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE or JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Any automobile
which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit,
without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use in highway transportation
or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle or otherwise
abandoned.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer,
truck, truck-tractor or other vehicle and shall have the meaning as ascribed
Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law;
A.
Has been parked in any public street or on any public lands for a period
of forty-eight (48) hours;
B.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction of traffic and the driver
or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it shall not obstruct traffic;
C.
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of forty-eight (48) hours (said period of time
may be extended, for good cause, by the Police Department); or
D.
E. Is found without one (1) or more tires.
§ 86-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-2
1:445
to the foregoing words as contained and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being the owner
or having any legal right in or to the motor vehicle or other vehicle as herein
defined. The term "person" when applied to lands, housing, residential,
commercial or industrial units which are leased rather than owned by the
occupants shall be deemed to mean and include the owner of the leased
structures.
PLACE OF STORAGE — Such site or location as the Chief of Police of the
borough shall from time to time establish and provide.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 87-3. Abandonment and storage regulations.
§ 87-4. Impoundment of abandoned vehicles.
Whenever any officer of the Merchantville Police Department finds any
motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body which has been
abandoned, kept or stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such
member of the Merchantville Police Department shall remove, secure the
removal of and/or impound said motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth:
A. Abandonment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
or suffer or permit the abandoning of any motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body out of doors upon any public or
private lands in the Borough of Merchantville or on any public street or
between the right-of-way side lines of any public right-of-way therein.
B. Storage prohibition. No person shall place, keep or store any junk
automobile or junk automobile body, as heretofore defined in this
chapter, on any public or private property within the Borough of
Merchantville.
C. Presumption. If any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body shall be abandoned on private lands for five (5) working days or
more, it shall be presumed that the owner or tenant in possession of
said land has abandoned it there or permitted or suffered it to be
abandoned there.
D. Exclusion. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the
placing, keeping or storage of any motor vehicle, junk automobile or
junk automobile body in an enclosed garage, barn or other building.
A. Public property. Whenever any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body is found on any public street, highway or public
property, an emergency condition is herewith declared to exist, and any
officer of the Merchantville Police Department is hereby authorized to
immediately remove, secure the removal of and/or impound the motor
§ 87-2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 87-4
1:446
vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body without the necessity
of notice prior to said impoundment. After impoundment, the
Merchantville Police Department shall use diligent efforts to identify
and locate the owner of the impounded motor vehicle, junk automobile
or junk automobile body and notify the owner in accordance with
§ 87-4C.
B. Private lands.
(1) Regulations. Whenever a motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body is found on any private land in violation of this
chapter, then any officer of the Merchantville Police Department in
furtherance of enforcement of this chapter shall affix to the vehicle
in question a sticker bearing the information more particularly set
forth on Exhibit 1 attached to this chapter and made a part hereof
by reference.60 Said sticker shall, in addition to such additional
information as is provided, indicate that unless the violation is
corrected within five (5) working days so noted, the violation is
continuing, and any member of the Merchantville Police
Department is authorized to proceed in accordance with the law to
impound the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body and to remove said motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body to a place of storage. Notice of said impoundment
shall be given to the owner of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or
junk automobile body or the owner or tenant of the private land on
which the violation is occurring in the manner hereinafter
established.
(2) Exclusion. Nothing heretofore mentioned shall be deemed to
prevent any of the following activities from being conducted on
private lands under the conditions or by the people referred to:
(a) One (1) motor vehicle within the definition set forth above,
which does not possess the current year's registration, may be
maintained on a single parcel of land having on it a singlefamily
residential dwelling as long as the motor vehicle is in
complete and operable condition.
(b) Owners of motor vehicles being held for sale or resale in a
commercial zone are exempted from the provisions of this
chapter.
(c) Owners of a motor vehicle which would otherwise come under
the provisions of this chapter who are in the military service
stationed outside the State of New Jersey shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in Subsection B(2)(a) above.
60.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is available for inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk
during regular business hours.
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:447
(d) Owners of antique motor vehicles which are classified as such
under State statutes are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Exempt certificates. Any person who possesses, owns or maintains
a motor vehicle covered under any one (1) of the exclusions
referred to above shall obtain from the Chief of Police an exempt
certificate which shall indicate that the motor vehicle in question
comes under one (1) of the exclusions referred to in Subsection
B(2) above. Said exempt certificate shall be valid for one (1) year
from the date of issuance. All owners of exempt certificates shall
display the exempt certificate on the windshield or other prominent
place on the motor vehicle in question so that it is readily
observable by the enforcement officials under this chapter. No fees
shall be charged for the issuance of an exempt certificate.
C. Notice of impoundment.
(1) Notice of the impoundment of any motor vehicle, junk automobile
or junk automobile body shall be given to the owner of said motor
vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body or to the owner or
tenant of lands upon which a violation is occurring pursuant to
§ 87-3C above, in writing, by certified mail, at the last known
address of the party to be served and shall contain the following:
(a) The time and place of impoundment.
(b) Location of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk
automobile body.
(c) The reason for impoundment.
(d) The account and nature of penalties and costs that may be
entered against him.
(e) A statement that a sale of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or
junk automobile body will occur after thirty (30) days if the
motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body is not
reclaimed.
(2) The address of the owner as shown on the records of the State
Division of Motor Vehicles shall be deemed sufficient for the
purpose of this subsection.
(3) Notice of Director. Upon the impoundment of any vehicle pursuant
to this chapter, the member of the Merchantville Police Department
so impounding the vehicle shall give immediate notice to the
Director of Motor Vehicles on forms prescribed by him for
verification of ownership.
§ 87-4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 87-5
1:448
§ 87-5. Sale of impounded vehicles.
Whenever any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body
impounded by the Police Department shall remain unclaimed for a period
of thirty (30) days, the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body shall be sold under the direction of the Borough Clerk of the Borough
of Merchantville or his designate at public auction to the highest bidder.
Such auction held shall take place after notice of such sale has been given
at least seven (7) days prior thereto by one (1) publication in the newspaper
circulated in the borough and upon the mailing of a copy of said notice
to the owner of the motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile
body and/or to the owner or tenant of the lands upon which a violation is
occurring and the holder of any security interest filed with the Director
of the Division of Motor Vehicles by certified mail at least (7) days prior
to the sale. All revenue collected from the sale of the motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body shall be retained by the Borough of
Merchantville as a cost of administration.
§ 87-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 87-7. Continuance of violation.
A continuance of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Borough Council shall have the
right to apply to the courts of this state for injunctive relief or other relief,
in addition to the penalties provided for herein.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this chapter, the
maximum penalty on conviction for a violation shall be a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in the general parties clause
of this section is not intended to state an appropriate penalty for every
violation. Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty
at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 87-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:449
Chapter 89
WATER COMMISSION
Chapter 91
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Weeds, adopted 12-12-1949 as Ord.
No. 345, was repealed 8-11-1975 by Ord. No. 503. See Ch. 14, Brush,
Weeds and Trees.]
Chapter 93
YARD SALES
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings as
indicated:
PERSON — Any person or persons, firm, association, club, partnership or
corporation.
YARD SALE — Any casual or occasional sale of tangible personal property,
including all sales known as "yard sales," "garage sales," "flea market
sales," "lawn sales," "attic sales," "rummage sales" or "bazaar sales."
§ 93-2. Limitations.
No person may conduct more than three yard sales in any twelve-month
period. No yard sale may be conducted on any location within the Borough
of Merchantville more than three times in any twelve-month period.
§ 93-3. Hours and days of sale.
Yard sales shall not commence before 8:30 a.m. and must be terminated by
sundown.
§ 93-4. Items to be sold restricted.
Yard sales shall offer for sale only used items of personal property owned by
the person conducting the yard sale or by the owner of the property upon
which the sale is conducted. No new merchandise shall be offered for sale.
§ 93-5. Advertising.
No advertising of yard sales shall be permitted except as follows:
A. One or more discreet advertisements in the classified advertising
section of a newspaper.
§ 87-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 93-5
1:450
§ 93-6. Exemptions.
§ 93-7. Conduct; additional rules; inspections.
B. A writing sent by mail.
C. A sign, not greater than three feet by four feet, on the property when
the sale is to be conducted. Such sign shall not be posted earlier than
two days prior to the day the sale is to be conducted and shall be
removed within 12 hours of the conclusion of the sale.
D. Not more than two signs, neither of which shall be greater than 1/2 feet
by two feet, on property other than that on which the sale is to be
conducted. Prior to posting any such sign, the applicant shall receive
permission to post such sign from the owner of the property where the
sign is to be posted. Such sign or signs shall be posted not earlier than
the day the sale is to be conducted and shall be removed within 12
hours of the conclusion of the sale.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Any sale conducted by a merchant or other business establishment
at a place of business where sales are permitted by Chapter 94,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville or permitted
as a nonconforming use.
(3) Any casual sale conducted within a building or structure and
consisting of not more than seven items.
B. Where a person is moving from the location in which the sale is being
conducted or the person is the executor, administrator or heir of the
owner or tenant of the property on which the sale is being conducted,
the provisions of § 93-5 of this chapter shall not be applicable. In lieu
thereof, the person shall be permitted to conduct a yard sale for not
more than six calendar days. On only one of such days shall the person
be permitted to display property outside of a structure, and on only one
such day shall the person be permitted to advertise the sale by means of
advertising listed in § 93-5C and D of this chapter.
A. The person conducting a yard sale and the owner and\or tenant of the
premises on which a yard sale is conducted shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of good order on the premises during
the hours in which a yard sale is conducted. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any streets in the vicinity of
such premises. All persons shall obey the reasonable orders of the
Police or Fire Departments of the Borough of Merchantville in order to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 93-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-7
1:451
§ 93-8. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed in any way to alter any of
the provisions of Chapter 94, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville or permit any act forbidden therein.
Chapter 94
ZONING
B. All persons conducting and all premises upon which a yard sale is
conducted shall be subject to all reasonable rules as may be made, from
time to time, by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Merchantville and shall be subject to inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer, Chief of Police and Fire Chief, or any of their
agents, or duly authorized representatives of the Borough of
Merchantville.
§ 93-7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 93-8
1:452
ARTICLE I
Short Title and Purpose
§ 94-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Merchantville."
§ 94-2. Purpose.
To promote the appropriate use or development of land in the borough in
a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters; to provide adequate light, air and open space; to promote
the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations
that will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods and the
community and preservation of the environment; to provide sufficient space
in appropriate locations for a variety of residential, recreational and
commercial uses and open space; to encourage the location and design
of transportation routes which will promote the free flow of traffic while
discouraging traffic routes which will result in congestion or blight; to
promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements, and to that end to
regulate the height, design, appearance, number of stories and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of the area of the lot that
may be occupied, the size of yards and other open space, the density of
population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
commerce, trade, residence or other purposes and the height, size and
location of these uses within the limits of the borough, these regulations are
hereby established and shall hereafter apply.
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:453

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 94-3. Construction of terms.
Whenever used herein, the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The
word "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 94-4. Incorporation of statute definitions by reference.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term is intended to have the
meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless
a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 94-5. Terms defined.
Certain words, phrases and terms of this chapter are defined for the
purpose thereof as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A use or building customarily incidental
to the principal use or building, located on the same lot with such principal
use or building.
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as part of an existing
improvement when such improvement changes or affects the exterior of the
improvement.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
ALTER — [Deleted 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
ALTERATION — Any change in the appearance of a building, structure,
site or improvement which is not otherwise covered by the definition of
Demolition.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
BASEMENT — The portion of a building in which the ceiling or underside
of beams averages more than four (4) feet above the natural grade where
such grade meets the outside walls of the building, and which has a clear
floor-to-ceiling height of six (6) feet or more. Such space shall be considered
to be a story. (See "cellar.")
BOROUGH — The Borough of Merchantville, New Jersey.[Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
BUILDING — See definition in Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3).
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the area of a horizontal section of
a building taken at its greatest outside dimensions on the ground floor,
including all attached structures and detached accessory buildings, to the
total lot area.
BUILDING FACE SIGN — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that such
sign is parallel to and does not project more than twelve (12) inches from
§ 94-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:455
the facade of such building or structure. Lettering, messages and graphics
applied to awnings shall be considered a "building face sign," and such
awnings may exceed the twelve-inch projection set forth herein for other
"building face signs."
CELLAR — Any space in which the ceiling or underside of beams averages
less than four (4) feet above the natural grade where such grade meets the
outside walls of the building. Such space shall not be considered to be a
story. (See "basement.")
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document that states that the
Regulated Activity or Demolition that is required to be approved by this
Commission pursuant to Article VIIIB, § 94-51.5 has been approved by the
Commission.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
CHANGE OF TENANCY — As determined by the Zoning Officer, a change
in the occupancy of a building, or portion thereof, which utilizes the same
parking requirement as that which is set forth for the preceding legal
occupant of the space, in accordance with the standards set forth in § 94-53
of this chapter, and which is essentially similar in function to the prior use.
CHANGE OF USE — A change in the occupancy of a building which does
not meet the definition of a change of tenancy.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle (automobile, truck, van or
bus) used for a commercial purpose, in interstate or intrastate commerce,
for the transportation of property, goods, wares and merchandise or for the
transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit. The display of
commercial, omnibus or contractor registration plates on any motor vehicle
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be presumptive evidence that the
vehicle is a "commercial vehicle."
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission of the Borough of
Merchantville.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
CONDITIONAL USE — See definition in Municipal Land Use Law.
CONVENIENCE STORES — A store, generally less than 5,000 square feet
in size, where the primary business is the sale of packaged goods and/or
groceries and a wide variety of sundries, including, but not limited to, food,
beverages, cigarettes, candy, confectionery items, film and film processing,
small appliances, clothing, toys, nonprescription medicines, cards, pain
relievers and pharmacy items purchased with or without medical
prescriptions, health, hygiene and medical aids and supplies, refrigerated
items, cosmetics, paper products, seasonal decorations and similar
items.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
DEMOLITION — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
building, structure, site or improvement. Demolition includes the removal of
a building, structure or improvement from its site. A project that proposes
to remove a facade or surface of a building or structure for the sole purpose
of immediately replacing such facade or surface with a new facade or
surface shall not be considered a Demolition, although such work may
§ 94-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-5
1:456
be a Regulated Activity pursuant to Article VIIIB, § 94-51.5A(3)(c).[Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
DWELLING UNIT or DWELLING — One (1) or more rooms used or intended
to be used for living purposes by one (1) or more persons living together and
maintaining a common household, having separate cooking and sanitary
facilities and accessible from the outdoors either directly or through an
entrance hall shared with other dwelling units.
EMERGENCY REPAIRS — Those immediate remedial actions necessary to
preserve the continued habitability of a site or improvement and/or the
health and safety of its occupants or others where time will not permit
the owner to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness prior to the
undertaking.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
APARTMENT — A suite of rooms designed for or occupied by one (1)
family or household and situated in a building containing three (3) or
more such suites of rooms.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A detached building on a lot
designed and occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family or
household.
B.
DETACHED BUILDING or DETACHED DWELLING — A building or
dwelling which has yard or open areas on all sides, having no common
or party walls with any other building or dwelling.
C.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two (2) families or households.
DUPLEX — A detached building occupying a single lot where the
family dwelling units are separated by a horizontal floor unpierced
except for access to the outside or to a common basement or cellar.
(1)
SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling which has a common
or party wall with one (1) adjacent dwelling and yard or open
areas on all other sides. Each of two (2) adjacent "semi-detached
dwellings" shall have a separate, full complement of utilities and
facilities and separate means of ingress and egress.
(2)
D.
ATTACHED DWELLING — A one-family dwelling which has common or
party walls with two (2) or more adjacent one-family dwellings. Each
dwelling in a group of "attached dwellings" shall have a separate, full
complement of utilities and facilities and separate means of ingress and
egress.
E.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A building containing three (3) or more
dwelling units. It includes apartment houses, apartment hotels and
grouped houses wherein each household occupies a separate dwelling
unit, but all dwelling units may share some facilities, utilities or
services, such as entrance halls, electric or water connections,
basement areas, heating plant or refuse disposal facilities.
F.
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:457
FAMILY — A group of individuals living together in a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan
based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization
and stability, and not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship, and living together in a more or less stable and permanent
relationship, as opposed to one which is short-term or transient.
GARAGE —
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of
a building, including those portions of basements, mezzanines and
intermediate floored tiers and penthouses which have a headroom height
of at least seven (7) feet. Floor area shall be measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating buildings.
Covered walkways, open roofed-over areas that are paved, roofed porches
and similar spaces which are roofed shall have the floor area multiplied by
a factor of fifty hundredths (0.50) and then included in "gross floor area."
"Gross floor area" shall not include such features as pipe trenches; exterior
open terraces, decks or steps; parking lots; chimneys; or roof overhangs.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The weight specified by
the manufacturer, loaded weight of a single or combination (articulated)
vehicle or registered gross weight, whichever is greater. The GVWR found
on the vehicle's identification plate shall be presumptive evidence of the
vehicle's GVWR. In the event that the GVWR set forth on the vehicle's
identification plate is in conflict with the GVWR stated on the vehicle's New
Jersey registration certificate, then and in that event the GVWR on the
vehicle identification plate shall be deemed controlling for purposes of this
chapter.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
natural grade around the perimeter of the foundation to the highest point of
the roof or parapet, exclusive of chimneys and similar fixtures.
COMMUNITY GARAGE — A building or group of buildings for housing
private automobiles or house trailers in which no business is carried on,
except the renting of storage space for such motor vehicles or adjuncts,
permitted as a use accessory to a multiple dwelling.
A.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building, either attached or detached from a
dwelling, or space accessory, including a carport or garage attached to
a dwelling, for housing automobiles, trucks, house trailers or any other
motorized vehicle requiring registration with the New Jersey Division
of Motor Vehicles, in which no business, service or industry connected
directly or indirectly with motor vehicles or house trailers is carried on
or permitted as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling.
B.
REPAIR GARAGE — A building or any portion thereof for the housing,
maintenance or repair of private automobiles, commercial trucks,
house trailers or other self-propelled vehicles, conducted as a business
for gain.
C.
§ 94-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-5
1:458
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area of the Borough designated as an Historic
District pursuant to § 94-51.2 or § 94-51.4 of Article VIIIB.[Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
HISTORIC SITE — A site within the Borough designated as an Historic Site
pursuant to Section 94-51.4 of Article VIIIB.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-19]
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, charitable activity or occupation being
conducted wholly or in part from a residence or the residential premises
as an accessory use. For purposes of the regulation of "home occupations"
under the terms of this chapter, they shall be exempt from site plan review
and the following standards shall apply:
A. No nonresident of the building may be employed on the premises.
No more than five hundred (500) square feet or the equivalent of
forty percent (40%) of the first floor area of the building, whichever is
smaller, shall be used for such purposes.
B.
The home occupation remains subordinate and incidental to the
principal residential use.
C.
D. No display of products or equipment shall be visible from the street.
The residential character of the neighborhood or building shall not be
changed.
E.
The occupation shall be conducted entirely within either the dwelling
or accessory building, but not both.
F.
G. No occupational sound shall be audible outside the building.
Articles shall not be offered for sale from the premises as a normal and
customary part of the activity.
H.
No machinery or equipment shall be used which will cause interference
with radio and television reception in the neighboring residences.
I.
The use does not reduce the parking or yard requirements of the
principal residential use.
J.
K. There are no signs indicating the presence of the activity.
There are no external indications that the site contains a business
activity, such as the outdoor storage of materials or equipment or the
use of the premises for the storage of commercial vehicles.
L.
There are no customer visits to the site as a normal and customary part
of the activity.
M.
There are no deliveries to or pickups from the site as a normal and
customary part of the activity, except as may be provided by ordinary
mail and delivery services, such as the United States Postal Service,
United Parcel Service and Federal Express.
N.
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:459
IMPROVEMENT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot which is covered by
buildings and other surfaces which are more impervious than the natural
surface, including but not limited to paving, patios, decks, pools and
driveways.
LOT — See definition in Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5).
LOT AREA — In square feet, determined by the limits of the lot lines
bounding the lot, not including any portion used or intended for use as a
street or street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land located at the junction of, and fronting on,
two (2) or more intersecting streets. A "corner lot" shall be considered to
have two (2) front yards and two (2) side yards.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line abutting and extending along a street line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot fronting on one (1) street only.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
closely parallel streets.
LOT, THROUGH CORNER — Any lot with three (3) street fronts.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal width measured parallel to the lot
frontage at the required front yard setback line.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, USE OR LOT — See definitions in
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5).
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground. Temporary signs, as described and regulated
herein, shall not be considered to be "portable signs."
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession, including the
offices of physicians, dentists, chiropractors, podiatrists, optometrists,
architects, engineers, landscape architects, attorneys, artists, authors,
musicians and other similar professional occupations. The issuance of a
state or local license for regulation of any gainful occupation is not
dispositive of professional standing.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Activity identified as such in Section 94-51.5(A)
of Article VIIIB.[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
RESIDENTIAL ZONES — All areas of the Borough of Merchantville
designated on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Merchantville as
residential districts.
SIGN — Any item, device or structure containing a logo, graphics or
lettering of any style intended to convey information and/or location so as
to be visible from any thoroughfare.[Added 2-26-01 by Ord. No. 01-02]
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not affixed to either a building or the
ground.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — Site plan review shall not be required for the
following:
§ 94-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-5
1:460
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — A site plan not defined as either minor or exempt.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Review as a "minor site plan" shall be required for
the following unless the proposal meets the definition of "site plan, exempt":
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement
shall be considered to be a "story" but a cellar shall not.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor area with headroom of five
(5) feet or less occupies at least forty percent (40%) of the total floor area
of the story directly beneath.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map or as required by this chapter, forming the
dividing line between the street and the property line. For the purposes of
relating the "street line" to the setback requirements of this chapter, this
definition shall control.
A. Single-family and two-family dwellings.
B. A change of tenancy, as defined herein.
Building or site alterations which do not involve a change of use,
additional parking, additional impervious coverage or additional floor
area.
C.
Additions or improvements to an attached dwelling on a fee simple
lot, subject to prior approval by any association of owners within the
development who have legal authority to review and approve exterior
improvements. [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
D.
A. A change of use, as defined herein.
A new development, building alteration or building addition which
requires no more than four (4) additional parking spaces and which
involves a gross floor area of no more than one thousand (1,000) square
feet of new construction.
B.
A site improvement which involves a change in traffic flow, designated
parking spaces or designated loading spaces and which does not
increase the paved surface of the site by more than ten percent (10%)
and which does not involve the addition of more than four (4) parking
spaces.
C.
Conditional uses, provided that they meet the other qualifying
standards set forth herein for a minor site plan. If they exceed any
of the qualifying standards for minor site plan review, they shall be
reviewed as major site plans. [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
04-19]
D.
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:461
YARD — A portion of a lot extending between any building and a lot line or
street line. All "yard" dimensions shall be measured parallel to the horizon
and at right angles to either a straight street line or lot line or perpendicular
to the point of tangency of curved street lines or lot lines.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of a lot between
the street line and the nearest point of the building to the street line,
extending to the side lot lines from such point in lines parallel or concentric
to the street line. On lots with multiple lot frontages, such as corner lots,
the "front yard" standards shall apply to all lot frontages.
YARD, REAR — The area extending across the full width of a lot between
the rear lot line and the nearest point of the building to the rear lot line,
extending to the side lot lines from such point in lines parallel or concentric
to the street line.
YARD, SIDE — The area extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
lying between each side lot line and the nearest point of the building to a
side lot line. On corner lots, all yards not meeting the definition of a front
yard shall be considered to be "side yards."
§ 94-5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-5
1:462
ARTICLE III
General Provisions and Exceptions
§ 94-6. General regulations.
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected nor shall any existing
building or structure be moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or
enlarged nor shall any land be designated or used for any purpose other
than those included among the uses listed as permitted uses in each district
by this chapter; nor shall any space contiguous to any building be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the area
and yard, projection, minimum size, height, off-street parking, accessory
use and building, fence and other such regulations set forth in this chapter
for the district in which such building or space is located.
§ 94-7. Area regulation.
No yard or other space provided about any building or structure for the
purpose of complying with this chapter shall be considered as a yard or
other open space for another building or structure.
§ 94-8. Corner lot vision clearance.
Within a triangular area which extends a distance of twenty (20) feet from
the point of intersection of the curblines of two (2) streets, no fence or wall
shall be erected and no hedge or shrub shall be maintained more than two
and one-half (2 1/2) feet above the mean curb level, except that shade trees
trimmed up to a distance of ten (10) feet as measured from the ground shall
be permitted hereunder.
§ 94-9. Antennas. [Added 9-28-1998; amended 2-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-03; 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
A. Purpose. This section is intended to provide regulations, standards and
procedures for the use, dimensions and placement of antennas within
the Borough of Merchantville. The purpose of this provision is to
promote the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics and maintenance
of a desirable visual environment as that term is used in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-2(i). The right of a private property owner to use an antenna is
recognized subject to the terms and conditions of this section. The
regulations imposed by this section are intended to permit such use in
harmony with the intent and purpose of the Borough's Zoning Code and
Master Plan and the FCC objective to promote interstate satellite
recovered communications.
B. Use. Antenna, including structural supports, shall be permitted as an
accessory use provided that the antenna conforms to the requirements
of this section. An antenna is permitted as an accessory use only on a lot
that contains a principal structure.
§ 94-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-9
1:463
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this section the term "antenna" shall
mean any and all satellite dish antennas along with any antenna
designed for the reception of television and/or radio signals. Such
definition expressly excepts antennas utilized in conjunction with the
reception and/or transmission of cellular telephonic signals.
D. Permits and approvals.
(1) A building permit shall be required for the installation of any
antenna having a diameter greater than thirty-nine and thirtyseven
one hundredths (39.37) inches or which does not comply
with the requirements of this section.
(2) Submission procedures. For any antenna which requires a building
permit pursuant to Subsection D(1), a property owner shall submit
an application and a plan to the Construction Official. The
application and plan shall include the following information:
(a) The location of the proposed antenna;
(b) Engineering drawings of the proposed antenna demonstrating
its method of support and its foundations;
(c) The method of installation;
(d) The materials to be used;
(e) The height and diameter of the antenna and related structures;
(f) The location of all existing buildings and structures and all
accessory buildings or structures on the lot, if any;
(g) All existing and proposed plantings and/or fencing intended to
provide screening;
(h) The lot and block number(s) of the lot(s) from the Borough of
Tax Map, and the length and bearings of the lot lines of the
property in question;
(i) Any and all information deemed necessary by the zoning/
construction official to meet any other requirements of this
section not listed above.
E. Design standards. Antennas, as accessory uses, shall be permitted as
follows:
(1) Antennas having a diameter not more than thirty-nine and thirtyseven
one hundredths (39.37) inches (small antenna):
(a) May be located in any zoning district;
(b) Must be installed in a location where such small antennas shall
not be visible from the right-of-way provided such location
§ 94-9 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-9
1:464
does not prevent the reception of an acceptable quality signal
or impose unreasonable expense or delay.
(c) May be roof-mounted, building-mounted or ground-mounted;
(d) If roof-mounted or building-mounted, the antenna may not
project more than three (3) feet above peak of a roof in the
case of a peaked roof or more than three (3) feet above the flat
roof line in the case of a flat roof;
(e) If roof-mounted on a peaked roof or if building-mounted, the
antenna shall be mounted on a roof or wall surface which faces
a rear or side yard and if roof-mounted on a flat roof, the
satellite dish antenna shall be mounted on the center of the
roof structure;
(f) If roof-mounted, building-mounted or ground mounted, the
antenna shall not be visible from the public right-of-way;
(g) If ground-mounted, may be placed on a pole, and;
(h) If ground-mounted, must be set back from rear and side
property lines at least: (i) six (6) feet, or (ii) the height from the
ground to the highest point of the antenna, whichever distance
is greater.
(2) Antennas having a dish diameter greater than thirty-nine and
thirty-seven one hundredths (39.37) inches, but not more than two
(2) meters or seventy-eight and seventy-four one hundredths
(78.74) inches (large dishes):
(a) May be located in any zoning district in which commercial or
industrial uses are permitted;
(b) Must be ground-mounted only and located in the rear or side
yard;
(c) May not be visible from the public right-of-way;
(d) May not be located in any required buffer area;
(e) Must be set back from rear and side property lines at least (i)
six (6) feet or (ii) the height from the ground to the highest
point of the antenna whichever distance is greater;
(f) May not be pole-mounted; and
(g) In the case of a satellite dish antenna, must be erected so that
the bottom of the antenna is no more than thirteen (13) inches
above the ground.
(3) Antennas utilized for the noncommercial transmission and
reception of radio signals shall be permitted as an accessory
structure provided any structure erected to accommodate such
§ 94-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-9
1:465
antenna shall be the minimum height necessary to enable the
successful transmission and/or reception of radio signals but in
no event shall such structure exceed the height of the principal
structure to which such use is accessory.
(4) For purposes of applying Subsections E(1)(g), E(2)(d) and E(2)(f),
"ground" shall exclude any berms, hills, mounds or like conditions
that are located in such area.
(5) In the event of an assertion that any limitation contained herein
results in the prevention of the reception of an acceptable quality
signal or imposes unreasonable expense or delay on the applicant,
it shall be the applicant's burden of proof to establish such
assertion to the satisfaction of the Board.
(6) Prohibited diameter. Any antenna having a dish diameter greater
than two (2) meters or seventy-eight and seventy-four one
hundredths (78.74) inches is prohibited.
(7) Exception to design standards. The design standards shall not
apply to any public law enforcement apparatus, public safety
apparatus or installations mounted within a fully enclosed principal
building.
(8) Screening. To the extent feasible given the locational requirements
of receiving antennas, any ground-mounted antenna shall be
screened so that it is not visible from an adjacent residential
property at ground level. Screening may be by use of opaque
fencing, or shrubbery, or both.
(9) Foundations. Any ground-mounted antenna shall be erected on a
secure ground-mounted foundation.
(10) Construction. All antennas shall be constructed to withstand wind
velocities of at least one hundred (100) m.p.h. and are subject to
any additional construction requirements imposed under the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(11) Reception. Antennas shall be placed in such a manner so that they
do not interfere with the reception of neighboring properties.
(12) Any connection, whether electrical or otherwise, from an antenna
to the principal building or structure shall be by underground
cable.
(13) Any antenna shall be used only by the occupants or residents of the
principal building or structure on the subject premises. No
connection shall be permitted, whether electrical or otherwise, to
adjacent properties.
F. Number. In the case of satellite dish antennas the following shall apply:
§ 94-9 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-9
1:466
§ 94-10. Fire limits.
The fire zones are hereby established to include all sections of the borough
within the business districts and shall comply with all the regulations as set
forth in Chapter 29 of the Code of the Borough of Merchantville.
§ 94-11. Height exceptions.
§ 94-12. Noxious or offensive uses.
No building, structure, lot or parcel of land shall be used for any trade,
business or purpose which is or may be reasonably expected to be noxious
or offensive by reason of causing or emitting dust, gas, garbage, odor,
refuse matter, smoke, vapor or noise, including the housing of internalcombustion
engines or machinery, air-conditioning units, exhaust fans and
heat exchangers, unless the objectionable noise, gases and vibrations are
eliminated.
§ 94-13. Fences. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 03-06; 5-8-2006
by Ord. No. 06-04; 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
(1) Residential districts. There may be one (1) small dish for each
dwelling unit on a lot. In addition to the permitted small dishes,
there may be no more than one (1) large dish for each building on a
residential lot.
(2) Business districts. There may be one (1) small dish for each
business use on a lot. In addition to the permitted small dishes,
there may be no more than one (1) large dish for each building on a
lot.
G. Fees. The fee for an application to erect a satellite dish antenna shall be
as set forth in the Section 94-108 (C)(9) of this chapter.
A. The height limitations of this chapter do not apply to any roof-mounted
flagpole, mast, monument, standpipe, amateur radio tower, belfry,
elevator bulkhead, chimney flue, church spire, clock tower, scenery loft,
stage tower, television antenna, water tank or similar appurtenances
usually carried above roof level; provided, however, that in no event
shall such appurtenance exceed sixty (60) feet in height from curb level,
and in no event shall the aggregate horizontal base area of such
appurtenance(s) exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the roof area.
B. No ground-mounted flagpole, mast, monument, standpipe, amateur
radio tower, television antenna or similar appurtenance shall exceed
the height limitations imposed for the particular district in which said
appurtenance is to be constructed or erected.
C. [Repealed 2-26-2000 by Ord. No. 01-03]
A. General. Fences or walls, except a wall of a building, shall only be
erected in the rear and side yard, shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
§ 94-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-13
1:467
and shall not project beyond the front building line except as otherwise
set forth herein. Barbed wire or similar material shall not be used in the
erection or maintenance of a fence. An "ornamental iron fence", defined
as a fence comprised of wrought iron or material such as aluminum, to
resemble wrought iron, having multi-finished surface, and being black,
having pickets, posts and gates, shall be permitted in the rear and side
yard of a property. An ornamental iron fence shall also be permitted in
the front yard (as defined, a corner lot will have two (2) front yards) of a
building, being it residential or business, in accordance with the terms
and conditions set forth immediately hereafter.
B. Ornamental iron fence — front yard. An ornamental iron fence — front
yard is a fence comprised of wrought iron or material such as
aluminum, to resemble wrought iron, having a multi-finished surface,
and being black, having pickets, posts and gates shall be no higher than
thirty-six (36) inches, at any point, and not less than thirty (30) inches in
height, and at least seventy-five (75%) percent open as to the fence and
any shrubbery, tree, ornamentation or other features that will hinder
visibility through the fence. Plastic, vinyl, wood or wire, are not
acceptable materials for an ornamental iron fence. An ornamental iron
fence shall not be located in any public right-of-way, and may be located
in a residential or business district and may be installed in the front
yard of a property, as defined in this chapter, Section 94-5, providing
that it complies with the requirements of this section, including but not
limited to the requirements of Section 94-8. An ornamental iron fence
located on a corner lot, or within fifteen (15) feet of a driveway,
intersecting a public walkway, street or right of way, shall be compliant
with the above requirements. Attached to this section is a sample of
three (3) ornamental iron fences, which are acceptable in accordance
with the terms of this section. Using reasonable judgment the Zoning
Officer of the Borough of Merchantville may approve an ornamental
iron fence, if it is similar to the samples referred to above.61
C. Ornamental iron fence — rear yard. An ornamental iron fence - rear
yard shall be no higher than sixty (60) inches at any point. Plastic, vinyl,
wood or wire are not acceptable materials for an ornamental iron fence
— rear yard. An ornamental iron fence — rear yard may be installed in
the rear yard of a property, as defined in this chapter, Section 94-5
"Terms Defined", "Yard, Rear", providing that it complies with the
requirements of this section. Attached to this section is a sample of
three ornamental iron fences, which are acceptable in accordance with
the terms of this section. Using reasonable judgment the Zoning Officer
of the Borough of Merchantville may approve an ornamental iron fencerear
yard, if it is similar to the samples referred to above.62
D. Pools. Swimming pools and wading pools, as defined and otherwise
regulated in Chapter 75, Swimming Pools, of the Code of the Borough of
61.Editor's Note: Samples may be found in the office of the Zoning Officer.
62.Editor's Note: Samples may be found in the office of the Zoning Officer.
§ 94-13 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-13
1:468
§ 94-14. Outdoor displays.
Outdoor displays of items to be sold on the premises shall be permitted only
if shown on an approved site plan.
§ 94-15. Structures prohibited as dwellings.
No barn, building or structure of a temporary nature or garage, house
trailer, camper, outbuilding, shack or tent shall be used, either temporarily
or permanently, for living or sleeping purposes in any district.
§ 94-15.1. Storage; Prohibited Uses. [Added 2-9-2004 by Ord. No.
04-01; Amended 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08]
§ 94-15.2. Outside storage of firewood; regulations. [Added
1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-03; amended 1-11-2010 by Ord. No.
09-19]
Merchantville, shall be fully enclosed with fencing a minimum of five
(5) feet and a maximum of six (6) feet in height. Fencing erected to
enclose a swimming pool or wading pool shall only be erected in the
rear and side yard and shall not project beyond the front building line.
Swimming pools or wading pools, shall conform in all other respects
with the provisions set forth for each residential zoning district as
specifically found in Section 94-22A(4), Section 94-28A(4) and Section
94-31A(4).
A. The parking, storage and/or use of commercial-type truck bodies,
intermodal containers or trailers, which shall include any truck body
commonly used for the haulage of goods and materials, whether or not
such truck body, intermodal container or trailer remains on wheels or is
affixed to a foundation, is prohibited in the Borough of Merchantville,
unless said truck body, intermodal container or trailer is installed on a
permanent foundation upon the issuance of a valid building permit and
zoning permit in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code and the Merchantville Borough Land Use Code. This
prohibition shall not apply to the loading or unloading of said truck
bodies, intermodal containers or trailers on industrial or commercial
sites when said units are properly licensed under the motor vehicle
laws of its state of origin.
B. Any truck body, intermodal container or trailer currently existing upon
private property upon adoption of this section which otherwise violates
the provisions of this section shall not be considered a violation of the
provisions of this section until four months following the effective date
of this section, after which time any such use shall be considered a
violation. It is the intention of this section to give all property owners
sufficient time to remove any truck body, intermodal container or trailer
before being in violation of the terms of this section.
§ 94-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-15.2
1:469
§ 94-16. Projections.
A. No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned
property, except that firewood may be temporarily stored in the front
yard for a period of ten (10) days from the date of its delivery.
B. Outside storage of firewood; generally.
(1) The firewood shall be cut/split, prepared for use, and stored in
neat, secure stacks. The firewood shall be neatly stacked, and may
not be stacked closer than three (3) feet to any lot line. The
firewood as stacked shall be not higher than four (4) feet from
grade, except when the firewood is stacked within five (5) feet of a
fence, where firewood can be stacked as high as the adjacent fence.
Fences as used in this section shall not include hedges and other
vegetation. The firewood shall be stored a minimum of eight (8)
inches off the ground and on a well supported, non-rotting base.
(2) There shall be no more than two (2) cords of wood stored at any
time, and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of a fireplace cord shall be
stored on a porch of a residential structure.
C. All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
promptly and properly disposed of within ten (10) days and shall not be
allowed to remain on the premises.
D. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting
disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or
inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and may be
abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
E. Firewood may be stored upon a residential property solely for use on
the premises and not for resale.
A. Windowsills, belt courses and other ornamental features shall not
project more than six (6) inches into the required front, side or rear
yard.
B. Cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys shall not project more than two (2)
feet into the required front, side or rear yard.
C. Ground floor entrance steps and turf terraces, when open to the sky,
may project into the front, side or rear yard. Handicapped ramps, when
open to the sky and meeting the standards of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, shall be permitted to project into front, side or rear
yards but only to the extent necessary to meet the functional
requirements of such a ramp, and further that such a ramp shall not be
located within three (3) feet of any front, side or rear lot line.
D. An open or enclosed outside stairway or fire escape leading to a floor
above the ground shall not project more than four (4) feet into and only
into the required rear yard.
§ 94-15.2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-16
1:470
E. A patio or deck shall be included as part of the building for purposes of
calculating front, rear and side yard clearances.
§ 94-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-16
1:471

ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Use Districts; Zoning Map
§ 94-17. Use districts designated.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Merchantville is hereby
divided into the following six (6) use districts:
R-1 Residential Single-Family District
R-2 Residential Single-Family District
R-3 Residential Single-Family District
R-4 Residential Multifamily District
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 Neighborhood Business District
§ 94-18. Zoning Map.63
The boundaries of said use districts shall be as shown upon the map
attached to and made a part of this chapter entitled the "Zoning Map,
Borough of Merchantville" on file in the office of the Borough Clerk. The
map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matter and information
shown by said map were all fully described herein.
§ 94-19. Schedule of District Regulations.64
Area, yard and other district regulations shall be as shown upon the table
attached to and made a part of this chapter entitled the "Schedule of
District Regulations, Borough of Merchantville" which shall be read along
with the text of this chapter, and such information shown thereon shall be
as much a part of this chapter as if it were all fully described herein.
A. Zoning Map amendments.
(1) Ordinance 2015-06. The Zoning Map is amended to add Block 9,
Lots 2, 3 and 4 to the B-2 Neighborhood Business District. [Added
6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
63.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: The Schedule of District Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 94-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-19
1:473

ARTICLE V
R-1 Residential Single-Family District
§ 94-20. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 94-21. Area and yard requirements.
§ 94-22. Permitted accessory uses and buildings.
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Single-family dwellings with home occupations.
C. All other uses required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
A. See attached Schedule of District Regulations.65
B. The minimum front yard setback shall be the same as the average front
yards located within two hundred (200) feet on either side of the side lot
lines of the applicant's premises; provided, however, that no front yard
shall be less than thirty (30) feet in depth or shall be required to have a
depth greater than forty-five (45) feet.
C. The minimum side yard may be reduced from nine (9) feet to the
greater of ten percent (10%) of lot width or six (6) feet.
D. The minimum rear yard may be reduced from twenty-five (25) feet to
the greater of twenty percent (20%) of lot depth or twenty (20) feet, but
in any event, the minimum rear yard shall be two (2) feet for each three
(3) feet in building height.
A. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) A single dog house, enclosed kennel or pen designed to contain and
containing no more than two (2) dogs, provided that same shall not
be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6) feet nor
exceed five (5) feet in height.
(2) A detached private garage, provided that same shall not be
constructed to house more than two (2) private automobiles or
have an overall area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet.
Such a garage shall not be closer to the principal building than ten
(10) feet and shall be set back from the side property lines a
minimum of six (6) feet and from the rear property line a minimum
of three (3) feet. The front yard setback for a detached private
garage shall be one and one-half (1 1/2) times the minimum front
yard setback requirement for the principal building.
65.Editor's Note: Said Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-22
1:475
§ 94-23. Conditional uses.
Permitted conditional uses shall be as follows:
(3) A stationary outdoor fireplace in a rear yard, provided that same
shall not be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6)
feet nor exceed five (5) feet in height. In the case of a corner lot, a
stationary outdoor fireplace meeting all other requirements herein
may be placed in the side yard.
(4) A private swimming or wading pool; provided, however, that the
inside wall of same shall not be erected, installed or maintained
nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any side or rear property line or
structure, and that the deck, equipment and any other structures
associated with the pool shall be no nearer than six (6) feet to any
side or rear property line. Such a swimming or wading pool shall
only be located in the rear yard, or in the case of a corner lot, it
shall be no closer to any street line than two (2) times the required
front yard setback for the principal building. Such a swimming or
wading pool shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the rear yard area, or in the case of corner lots, it shall not
occupy more than five percent (5%) of the total lot area.
(5) One accessory building in addition to a garage; provided, however,
that such accessory building shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as a detached private garage and shall contain no
more than 100 square feet. [Amended 9-23-1996]
B. The total area occupied by all accessory buildings and structures,
including swimming and wading pools, shall not occupy more than
seven percent (7%) of the total lot area.
A. Professional offices in a single-family dwelling, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(1) All lot and other bulk requirements of the R-1 District are followed.
(2) The office use of the building shall occupy no more than thirty-five
percent (35%) of the floor area of the main building and shall be
conducted within the main building only.
(3) The owner of the property shall be the resident of the property
although it shall not be necessary for the resident to be the
professional practitioner.
(4) There shall be no exterior display or exterior sign other than a
professional nameplate affixed to the building not exceeding one
and one-half (1 1/2) square feet and a freestanding sign noting the
profession and practitioner located not closer than three (3) feet to
the street line and not exceeding three (3) square feet in size. The
latter sign may be illuminated but nonflashing.
§ 94-22 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-23
1:476
(5) There shall be no activity producing any offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, electrical or radio interference.
(6) No more than four (4) resident or nonresident full-time persons, or
the equivalent thereof, shall be employed in the operation of the
professional office. This limitation shall apply to all professionals
and supporting staff.
(7) One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each two
hundred (200) square feet of floor area devoted to the professional
use, and two (2) additional parking spaces shall be provided for the
residential portion of the dwelling.
(8) No off-street parking shall be located in the area lying between the
principal building and the street but shall be located in the side or
rear yard only. In reviewing the design and location of off-street
parking areas, careful consideration shall be given to any potential
adverse effects on adjoining or nearby residential properties
related to stormwater runoff, headlight glare or other problems
normally associated with parking areas. Adequate buffers or
screening shall be provided between parking areas and adjoining
single-family residential properties. Off-street parking areas,
whether paved or finished with gravel, shall be counted as a part of
total improvement coverage, and they shall occupy no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard area.
(9) The application for the conditional use shall follow all the
requirements of this chapter for site plan review in order to assure
that such use will not adversely affect neighboring properties or
the general welfare.
(10) A separate conditional use approval shall be obtained for each new
professional office user of a property.
B. All conditional uses as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., subject to any and all conditions set forth therein.
§ 94-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-23
1:477

ARTICLE VA
R-2 Residential Single-Family District
§ 94-24. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 94-25. Applicability of other provisions.
All other provisions applicable to the R-1 District shall apply to the R-2
District, except that there shall be no conditional uses permitted in the R-2
District.
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Single-family dwellings with home occupations.
C. All other uses required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 94-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-25
1:479

ARTICLE VI
R-3 Residential Single-Family District
§ 94-26. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 94-27. Area and yard requirements.
§ 94-28. Permitted accessory uses and buildings.
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Single-family dwellings with home occupations.
C. All other uses required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
A. See attached Schedule of District Regulations.66
B. The minimum front yard setback shall be the same as the average front
yards located within two hundred (200) feet on either side of the side lot
lines of the applicant's premises; provided, however, that no front yard
shall be less than twenty (20) feet in depth or shall be required to have a
depth greater than thirty-five (35) feet.
C. The minimum side yard may be reduced from eight (8) feet to the
greater of twelve percent (12%) of lot width or six (6) feet.
D. The minimum rear yard may be reduced from twenty-five (25) feet to
the greater of twenty percent (20%) of lot depth or twenty (20) feet, but
in any event, the minimum rear yard shall be two (2) feet for each three
(3) feet in building height.
A. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) A single dog house, enclosed kennel or pen designed to contain and
containing no more than two (2) dogs, provided that same shall not
be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6) feet nor
exceed five (5) feet in height.
(2) A detached private garage, provided that same shall not be
constructed to house more than two (2) private automobiles or
have an overall area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet.
Such a garage shall not be closer to the principal building than ten
(10) feet and shall be set back from the side property lines a
minimum of six (6) feet and from the rear property line a minimum
of three (3) feet. The front yard setback for a detached private
garage shall be one and one-half (1 1/2) times the minimum front
yard setback requirement for the principal building.
66.Editor's Note: Said Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-28
1:481
(3) A stationary outdoor fireplace in a rear yard, provided that same
shall not be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6)
feet nor exceed five (5) feet in height. In the case of a corner lot, a
stationary outdoor fireplace meeting all other requirements herein
may be placed in the side yard.
(4) A private swimming or wading pool; provided, however, that the
inside wall of same shall not be erected, installed or maintained
nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any side or rear property line or
structure and that the deck, equipment and any other structures
associated with the pool shall be no nearer than six (6) feet to any
side or rear property line. Such a swimming or wading pool shall
only be located in the rear yard, or in the case of a corner lot, it
shall be no closer to any street line than two (2) times the required
front yard setback for the principal building. Such a swimming or
wading pool shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the rear yard area, or in the case of corner lots, it shall not
occupy more than five percent (5%) of the total lot area.
(5) One accessory building in addition to a garage; provided, however,
that such accessory building shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as a detached private garage and shall contain no
more than 100 square feet. [Amended 9-23-1996]
B. The total area occupied by all accessory buildings and structures,
including swimming and wading pools, shall not occupy more than ten
percent (10%) of the total lot area.
§ 94-28 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-28
1:482
ARTICLE VII
R-4 Residential Multifamily District
§ 94-29. Permitted principal uses.
Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
§ 94-30. Area and yard requirements.
§ 94-31. Permitted accessory uses and buildings.
A. Single-family dwellings.
B. Single-family dwellings with home occupations.
C. All other uses required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
A. See attached Schedule of District Regulations for the requirements for
detached single-family dwellings.67
B. The minimum front yard setback shall be the same as the average front
yards located within two hundred (200) feet on either side of the side lot
lines of the applicant's premises; provided, however, that no front yard
shall be less than twenty (20) feet in depth or shall be required to have a
depth greater than thirty-five (35) feet.
C. The minimum side yard may be reduced from eight (8) feet to the
greater of twelve percent (12%) of lot width or six (6) feet.
D. The minimum rear yard may be reduced from twenty-five (25) feet to
the greater of twenty percent (20%) of lot depth or twenty (20) feet, but
in any event the minimum rear yard shall be two (2) feet for each three
(3) feet in building height.
A. Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) A single dog house, enclosed kennel or pen designed to contain and
containing no more than two (2) dogs, provided that same shall not
be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6) feet nor
exceed five (5) feet in height.
(2) A detached private garage, provided that same shall not be
constructed to house more than two (2) private automobiles or
have an overall area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet.
Such a garage shall not be closer to the principal building than ten
(10) feet and shall be set back from the side property lines a
minimum of six (6) feet and from the rear property line a minimum
of three (3) feet. The front yard setback for a detached private
garage shall be one and one-half (1 1/2) times the minimum front
yard setback requirement for the principal building.
67.Editor's Note: Said Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-31
1:483
§ 94-32. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(3) A stationary outdoor fireplace in a rear yard, provided that same
shall not be placed nearer to a side or rear property line than six (6)
feet nor exceed five (5) feet in height. In the case of a corner lot, a
stationary outdoor fireplace meeting all other requirements herein
may be placed in the side yard.
(4) A private swimming or wading pool; provided, however, that the
inside wall of same shall not be erected, installed or maintained
nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any side or rear property line or
structure, and that the deck, equipment and any other structures
associated with the pool shall be no nearer than six (6) feet to any
side or rear property line. Such a swimming or wading pool shall
only be located in the rear yard, or in the case of a corner lot, it
shall be no closer to any street line than two (2) times the required
front yard setback for the principal building. Such a swimming or
wading pool shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the rear yard area, or in the case of corner lots, it shall not
occupy more than five percent (5%) of the total lot area.
(5) One accessory building in addition to a garage; provided, however,
that such accessory building shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as a detached private garage and shall contain no
more than 100 square feet. [Amended 9-23-1996]
B. The total area occupied by all accessory buildings and structures,
including swimming and wading pools, shall not occupy more than ten
percent (10%) of the total lot area.
A. Two-family dwellings subject to the lot area, yard and other bulk
requirements for single-family dwellings in this district. Where two (2)
semi-detached dwellings are to be placed on adjoining lots, each lot
shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) the area and lot width
requirements which are set forth for single-family detached dwellings
in the Schedule of District Regulations.68 For semi-detached dwellings,
the minimum requirement for the single side yard shall be eight (8)
feet.
B. Multifamily buildings, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage of twenty-five percent (25%).
(4) Maximum total improvement coverage of fifty percent (50%).
68.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-31 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-32
1:484
(5) Maximum building height of two (2) stories and thirty (30) feet.
(6) Maximum dwelling unit density of fourteen (14) units per acre.
(7) Minimum setback from all property lines of twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Attached dwellings, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Minimum lot area of two thousand (2,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width of twenty (20) feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage of forty percent (40%).
(4) Maximum total improvement coverage of sixty percent (60%).
(5) Maximum building height of two (2) stories and thirty (30) feet.
(6) Maximum dwelling unit density of eight (8) units per acre.
(7) Minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet.
(8) Minimum rear yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet.
(9) Minimum side yard setback of ten (10) feet for each end unit.
D. Senior citizen multifamily buildings subject to the requirements for
other multifamily buildings.
E. All conditional uses as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., subject to any and all conditions set forth therein.
§ 94-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-32
1:485

ARTICLE VIII
B-1 Central Business District
§ 94-33. Permitted principal uses. [Amended 2-12-1996; 9-24-2018
by Ord. No. 18-11]
Permitted principal uses in the B-1 District shall be as follows:
§ 94-33.1. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No.
18-11]
The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements and procedures
applicable to conditional uses, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. A
conditional use shall not be approved for any site unless the use is
specifically approved as a conditional use in the zone for which it is
proposed by the Planning/Zoning Board. The following conditional uses
shall be permitted in the B-1 Central Business Zoning District as follows:
A. Retail sales of goods and services.
B. Physical fitness studios, yoga studios, martial arts studios.
C. Art studios, displays, and/or art galleries for artistic endeavors and
production, including painting, sculpting, ceramics, jewelry, glass
blowing, photography, and hand-made furniture.
D. Travel agencies, real estate offices and opticians.
E. Offices and professional offices other than those listed in § 94-33D
above but not on the street-level floor along the Park Avenue and Centre
Street frontages.
F. Restaurants.
G. Apartments over other permitted uses but not on the street-level floor.
H. Banks and other similar financial institutions.
I. Senior citizen multifamily buildings.
A. Retail and/or wholesale sales businesses whose sales include any type
of firearm, including, but not limited to, handguns, rifles, ammunition
and the like, provided the following conditions have been met:
(1) Such use is not within 1,000 feet of any property used for school
purposes or which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board.
(2) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(3) If the lot, or any portion thereof, for which the application for a
conditional use is made is in the Historic District, the requirements
§ 94-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-33.1
1:487
of the Historic District section of this chapter (Article VIIIB,
§§ 94-51.1 through 94-51.10) have been met.
(4) A site plan application has been made for the lot, the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use approval
have been met.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by §§ 94-52,
94-52.1 and 94-53, and the parking required for the proposed
conditional use is located on the lot for which the application is
made, or on a contiguous lot which must be subject to a covenant
running with the land reserving that parking for the proposed
conditional use.
(6) Such use is located on the ground floor only.
(7) The area and yard requirements of § 94-34 have been met.
(8) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
shall be free of nuisance characteristics.
(9) If any signs are to be located upon the lot, the requirements of
Article X, Signs, have been met.
(10) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
B. Any kind of manufacturing, fabricating, altering, finishing or
assembling, except as necessarily incidental to a retail trade or service
use, provided the following conditions have been met:
(1) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(2) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
§ 94-33.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-33.1
1:488
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(3) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
C. Microbrewery, craft-brewery, craft-distillery tasting room, winery
tasting room and similar uses, provided the following conditions are
met.
(1) State licensing requirements are met.
(2) No outdoor storage.
(3) Business operations close by 11:00 p.m.
D. Alternative treatment centers which are authorized to grow and
provide registered qualifying patients with usable marijuana and
related paraphernalia (including cultivation, manufacturing, and/or
dispensing of medical marijuana), in accordance with the provisions of
the New Jersey Compassionate Use Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et
seq., provided the following conditions are met:
(1) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 200 feet of
any property used for school purposes or which is owned by or
leased to any elementary school, secondary school or school board.
(2) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 50 feet of
any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Residential Zoning District or an adjacent
community's residential-only zoning district.
(3) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 200 feet of
another similar facility (i.e., alternative treatment center or
authorized recreational marijuana retail facility).
(4) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(5) A site plan application has been made for the lot, and the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use have been
met.
(6) The proposed facility shall be so located and of such size and
character that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
§ 94-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-33.1
1:489
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and the
use shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(7) In addition to the above:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with surrounding land uses.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent properties.
(8) Hours of operation shall be restricted to 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(9) Use or consumption in any manner of marijuana is not permitted on
the premises of any medical marijuana dispensary at any time.
(10) Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted to be on
the premises of any medical marijuana dispensary at any time
unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver and they
are in the presence of their parent or guardian.
(11) Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit
depicting the activities of the dispensary placed within the interior
of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent
public viewing from outside such building or premises.
(12) Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment
advertising or directing attention to a dispensary, including, but not
limited to, prerecorded or live music or sounds, is prohibited.
E. Authorized recreational marijuana retail facility, involving the sale of
marijuana and related paraphernalia for recreational purposes to
members of the general public, if permitted by state law, provided the
following conditions are met:
(1) No authorized recreational marijuana facility shall be located
within 200 feet of any property used for school purposes or which is
owned by or leased to any elementary school, secondary school or
school board.
(2) No authorized recreational marijuana facility shall be located
within 50 feet of any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Residential Zoning
District or an adjacent community's residential-only zoning district.
(3) No Authorized Recreational Marijuana Facility shall be located
within 200 feet of another similar facility (i.e., Alternative
Treatment Center or Authorized Recreational Marijuana Retail
Facility).
§ 94-33.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-33.1
1:490
§ 94-33.2. Prohibited uses. [Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06;
amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
The following uses are expressly prohibited in the B-1 Zoning District:
(4) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to NJSA 40:55D-12;
(5) A site plan application has been made for the lot, and the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use have been
met.
(6) The proposed facility shall be so located and of such size and
character that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and the
use shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(7) In addition to the above:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with surrounding land uses;
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent properties.
(8) Hours of operation shall be restricted to 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m.
(9) Use or consumption of marijuana is permitted on the premises of
an authorized recreational marijuana retail facility only if it is used
or consumed indoors and only if the product is purchased at that
retail facility. No outside purchases may be consumed on the
premises.
(10) Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted to be on
the premises of any authorized recreational marijuana retail facility
at any time unless they are a qualified patient or a primary
caregiver, and they are in the presence of their parent or guardian.
(11) Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit
depicting the activities of the dispensary placed within the interior
of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent
public viewing from outside such building or premises.
(12) Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment
advertising or directing attention to a dispensary, including, but not
limited to, prerecorded or live music or sounds, is prohibited.
§ 94-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-33.2
1:491
§ 94-33.3. Permitted principal uses — Maple Avenue Redevelopment
Zone. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-04; amended 9-24-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-11]
Permitted principal uses in the Maple Avenue Redevelopment Zone shall be
the same as the B-1 Central Business Zoning District, with the exception
of convenience stores and senior citizen multifamily buildings, which are
prohibited.
§ 94-33.4. Conditional uses — Maple Avenue Redevelopment Zone.
[Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06; amended 9-24-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-11]
The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements and procedures
applicable to conditional uses in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. A
conditional use shall not be approved for any site unless the use is
specifically approved as a conditional use in the zone for which it is
proposed by the Planning/Zoning Board. The following conditional uses
shall be permitted in the Maple Avenue Redevelopment Zone as follows:
A. Tattooing, body piercing, retail service businesses whose service
includes any type of massage (excepting yoga studios, certified
ayurvedic healing operations and physical therapy uses which are
expressly permitted in the B-1 Zoning District), establishments that
show film or video of any kind, pool, billiards or bingo, boarding homes
and community residential homes.
A. Tattooing and body piercing establishments.
B. Retail and/or wholesale sales businesses whose sales include any type
of firearm, including, but not limited to, handguns, rifles, ammunition
and the like.
C. Retail service businesses whose services include any type of massage
(excepting yoga studios and certified ayurvedic healing operations
which are permitted uses in the Maple Avenue Redevelopment Zone
within the B-1 Zoning District.
D. All conditional uses as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., subject to any and all conditions set forth therein.
E. The Planning/Zoning Board shall not approve any conditional use
application for any use under Subsections A through D unless the
following general conditions have been met:
(1) Such use is not within 1,000 feet of any property used for school
purposes or which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board.
(2) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 94-33.2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-33.4
1:492
(3) If the lot, or any portion thereof, for which the application for a
conditional use is made is in the Historic District, the requirements
of the Historic District section of this chapter (Article VIIIB,
§§ 94-51.1 through 94-51.10) have been met.
(4) A site plan application has been made for the lot, the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use approval
have been met.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by §§ 94-52,
94-52.1 and 94-53 and the parking required for the proposed
conditional use is located on the lot for which the application is
made, or on a contiguous lot which must be subject to a covenant
running with the land reserving that parking for the proposed
conditional use.
(6) Such use is located on the ground floor only.
(7) The area and yard requirements of § 94-34 have been met.
(8) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
shall be free of nuisance characteristics.
(9) If any signs are to be located upon the lot, the requirements of
Article X, Signs, have been met.
(10) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
F. Any kind of manufacturing, fabricating, altering, finishing or
assembling, including licensed, except as necessarily incidental to a
retail trade or service use, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(2) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
§ 94-33.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-33.4
1:493
§ 94-34. Area and yard requirements.
§ 94-35. Accessory uses and buildings.
Permitted accessory uses and buildings include parking and loading areas,
enclosed trash and recycling dumpsters and bins and accessory buildings
for storage. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted. Accessory buildings
shall be limited in size based on the size of the principal building, and they
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the building coverage of the
principal building.
shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(3) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
A. See attached Schedule of District Regulations.69
B. There shall be no front yard required. However, in no case shall a
building be erected or constructed within twelve (12) feet of the
curbline of any street as now established and existing at the date of the
passage of this chapter, and eighteen (18) feet of the curbline on either
the north or south side of Maple Avenue as now established and existing
as of the effective date of this chapter, and including the east and west
sides of South Centre Street from Maple Avenue South to the borough
line.
C. For properties situated on the east side of Centre Street between Maple
Avenue and Park Avenue, the minimum rear yard requirement shall be
three (3) feet.
D. Where a building extends through from street to street, it may occupy
the entire distance from property line to property line of each street on
which the lot abuts, and provided that other that the front yard
restriction shall be observed on both streets.
69.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-33.4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-36
1:494
§ 94-36. Provisions of Historic District shall apply. [Amended
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
The provisions set forth for the Historic District in Article VIIIB of this
chapter shall apply to the B-1 District in its entirety.
§ 94-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-36
1:495

ARTICLE VIIIA
B-2 Neighborhood Business District
§ 94-37. Permitted principal uses. [Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No.
18-1170]
Permitted principal uses in the B-2 District shall be as follows:
§ 94-37.1. Conditional uses. [Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06;
amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements and procedures
applicable to conditional uses in the B-2 District in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67. A conditional use shall not be approved for any site unless the
use is specifically approved as a conditional use in the zone for which it is
proposed by the Planning/Zoning Board. Conditional uses shall be permitted
in the B-2 Neighborhood Business Zoning District as follows:
A. Retail sales of goods and services.
B. Physical fitness studios, yoga studios, martial arts studios.
C. Art studios, displays, and/or art galleries for artistic endeavors and
production, including painting, sculpting, ceramics, jewelry, glass
blowing, photography, and hand-made furniture.
D. Travel agencies, real estate offices and opticians.
E. Offices and professional offices.
F. Restaurants.
G. Apartments over other permitted uses but not on the street-level floor.
H. Multifamily buildings, subject to the requirements as set forth in the
R-4 District.
I. Banks and other similar financial institutions.
J. All other uses required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Tattooing and body piercing establishments.
B. Retail and/or wholesale sales businesses whose sales include any type
of firearm, including, but not limited to, handguns, rifles, ammunition
and the like.
C. Retail service businesses whose services include any type of massage
(excepting yoga studios and certified ayurvedic healing operations
which are permitted uses in the B-2 Zoning District.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 94-37.2, Conditional
Uses - Maple Avenue Redevelopment Zone, which followed.
§ 94-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-37.1
1:497
D. All conditional uses as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., subject to any and all conditions set forth therein.
E. The Planning/Zoning Board shall not approve any conditional use
application for any use under Subsections A through D, unless the
following general conditions have been met:
(1) Such use is not within 1,000 feet of any property used for school
purposes or which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board.
(2) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(3) If the lot, or any portion thereof, for which the application for a
conditional use is made is in the Historic District, the requirements
of the Historic District section of this chapter (Article VIIIB,
§ 94-51.1 through 94-51.10) have been met.
(4) A site plan application has been made for the lot, the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use approval
have been met.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by §§ 94-52,
94-52.1 and 94-53, and the parking required for the proposed
conditional use is located on the lot for which the application is
made, or on a contiguous lot which must be subject to a covenant
running with the land reserving that parking for the proposed
conditional use.
(6) Such use is located on the ground floor only.
(7) The area and yard requirements of § 94-38 have been met.
(8) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
shall be free of nuisance characteristics.
(9) If any signs are to be located upon the lot, the requirements of
Article X, Signs, have been met.
(10) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
§ 94-37.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-37.1
1:498
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
F. Any kind of manufacturing, fabricating, altering, finishing or
assembling, including licensed, except as necessarily incidental to a
retail trade or service use (except alternative treatment centers, which
are addressed in another subsection), provided the following conditions
are met:
(1) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
(2) The proposed use shall be so located and of such size and character
that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and
shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(3) In addition to the above, in the event that any use is located directly
adjacent to a residential use or zone:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with that residential use or zone.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent residential
land or buildings.
G. Microbrewery, craft-brewery, craft-distillery tasting room, winery
tasting room and similar uses, provided the following conditions are
met:
(1) State licensing requirements are met.
(2) No outdoor storage.
(3) Business operations close by 11:00 p.m.
H. Alternative treatment centers which are authorized to grow and
provide registered qualifying patients with usable marijuana and
related paraphernalia (including cultivation, manufacturing, and/or
dispensing of medical marijuana), in accordance with the provisions of
the New Jersey Compassionate Use Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et
seq., provided the following conditions are met:
(1) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 200 feet of
any property used for school purposes or which is owned by or
leased to any elementary school, secondary school or school board.
§ 94-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-37.1
1:499
(2) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 50 feet of
any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Residential Zoning District or an adjacent
community's residential-only zoning district.
(3) No alternative treatment center shall be located within 200 feet of
another similar facility (i.e., alternative treatment center or
authorized recreational marijuana retail facility).
(4) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12;
(5) A site plan application has been made for the lot, and the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use have been
met.
(6) The proposed facility shall be so located and of such size and
character that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and the
use shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(7) In addition to the above:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with surrounding land uses.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent properties.
(8) Hours of operation shall be restricted to 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(9) Use or consumption in any manner of marijuana is not permitted on
the premises of any medical marijuana dispensary at any time.
(10) Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted to be on
the premises of any medical marijuana dispensary at any time
unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver and they
are in the presence of their parent or guardian.
(11) Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit
depicting the activities of the dispensary placed within the interior
of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent
public viewing from outside such building or premises.
(12) Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment
advertising or directing attention to a dispensary, including, but not
limited to prerecorded or live music or sounds, is prohibited.
§ 94-37.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-37.1
1:500
I. Authorized recreational marijuana retail facility, involving the sale of
marijuana and related paraphernalia for recreational purposes to
members of the general public, if permitted by state law, provided the
following conditions are met:
(1) No authorized recreational marijuana facility shall be located
within 200 feet of any property used for school purposes or which is
owned by or leased to any elementary school, secondary school or
school board.
(2) No authorized recreational marijuana facility shall be located
within 50 feet of any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Residential Zoning
District or an adjacent community's residential-only zoning district.
(3) No authorized recreational marijuana facility shall be located
within 200 feet of another similar facility (i.e., alternative
treatment center or authorized recreational marijuana retail
facility).
(4) Notice of the application has been given, and publication made,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12;
(5) A site plan application has been made for the lot, and the Planning/
Zoning Board has approved such conditional use, and the
requirements and conditions of site plan/conditional use have been
met.
(6) The proposed facility shall be so located and of such size and
character that, in general, it shall be in harmony with the existing
development in the general area in which it is proposed to be
situated, particularly if it is located in the Historic District, and the
use shall be free of nuisance characteristics detectable to normal
senses beyond the boundaries of the property (including noise,
vibration, dust, odor and sanitation).
(7) In addition to the above:
(a) The location, size, activity, site layout, street access, pedestrian
and vehicular movement and possible assembly of people shall
be harmonious with surrounding land uses.
(b) The location and height of buildings, fences and landscaping
shall not discourage the appropriate development and use or
materially affect property values of the adjacent properties.
(8) Hours of operation shall be restricted to 12:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(9) Use or consumption of marijuana is permitted on the premises of
an authorized recreational marijuana retail facility only if it is used
or consumed indoors and only if the product is purchased at that
retail facility. No outside purchases may be consumed on the
premises.
§ 94-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-37.1
1:501
§ 94-38. Area and yard requirements.
§ 94-39. Accessory uses and buildings.
Permitted accessory uses and buildings include parking and loading areas,
enclosed trash and recycling dumpsters and bins and accessory buildings
for storage. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted. Accessory buildings
shall be limited in size based on the size of the principal building, and they
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the building coverage of the
principal building.
§ 94-40. Historic District review. [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
04-19]
The provisions set forth for the Historic District in Article VIIIB of this
chapter shall apply to the B-2 District in its entirety.
§ 94-41. through § 94-51. (Reserved)
(10) Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted to be on
the premises of any authorized recreational marijuana retail facility
at any time unless they are a qualified patient or a primary
caregiver and they are in the presence of their parent or guardian.
(11) Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit
depicting the activities of the dispensary placed within the interior
of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent
public viewing from outside such building or premises.
(12) Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment
advertising or directing attention to a dispensary, including, but not
limited to, prerecorded or live music or sounds, is prohibited.
A. See attached Schedule of District Regulations.71
B. There shall be no front yard required. However, in no case shall a
building be erected or constructed within twelve (12) feet of the
curbline of any street as now established and existing at the date of the
passage of this chapter, and eighteen (18) feet of the curbline on either
the north or south side of Maple Avenue as now established and existing
as of the effective date of this chapter, and including the east and west
sides of South Centre Street from Maple Avenue South to the borough
line.
71.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-37.1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-41
1:502
ARTICLE VIIIB
Historic Preservation Commission.72
[Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
§ 94-51.1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article:
§ 94-51.2. Designation of Historic District.
The Historic District as designated by this article shall be the B-1 Central
Business District and the B-2 Neighborhood Business District, as more
particularly described and defined in Articles VIII and VIIIA, respectively,
of the Zoning Ordinance and such other areas that are subsequently
determined to be Historic Districts pursuant to Section 94-51.4.
§ 94-51.3. Establishment.
A. To safeguard the heritage of the Borough by preserving that part of the
Borough which reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic and
architectural history;
B. To preserve the integrity of design of the buildings and streetscapes
within the Historic District, and the preservation of Historic Sites;
C. To maintain and improve property values;
D. To preserve and promote the Historic District as an essential element of
municipal character and identity and as an important factor in the
economy of the Borough;
E. To foster civic beauty;
F. To promote the use of the Historic District for the education, pleasure
and welfare of the citizens of the Borough and its visitors; and
G. To further assure that construction, alterations, repairs and
replacements such as lighting, fencing, walkways, signs, color and
landscaping are compatible with the Borough's historic, cultural,
aesthetic and architectural heritage.
A. The Historic Preservation Commission ("Commission") of the Borough
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The
Commission shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2)
alternate members appointed by the Mayor. At least two (2) of the
regular members shall be of Classes A and B. The regular members who
are not designated as Class A or B shall be designated as Class C. The
two (2) alternates must meet the qualifications of Class C and shall be
72.Editor's Note: Former Article VIIIB, Design District, was deleted 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
04-19.
§ 94-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.3
1:503
designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The classes are
defined as:
(1) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the Borough.
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable of or who has a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside
the Borough.
(3) Class C: any citizen of the Borough who shall hold no other
municipal office, municipal position or municipal employment
except for membership on the Planning Board.
B. Terms of regular members.
(1) The initial terms of the appointment of the regular members of the
Commission shall be as follows:
(a) One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
(b) Two (2) members shall be appointed for terms of three (3)
years.
(c) Two (2) members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years.
(2) All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years or
until appointment and qualification of a successor. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
C. Terms of alternate members.
(1) The initial terms of the appointment of the alternate members of
the Commission shall be as follows:
(a) Alternate No. 1 shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year.
(b) Alternate No. 2 shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years.
(2) All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two (2) years or
until appointment and qualification of a successor. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision, the term of any member who is
also a member of the Planning Board shall be coterminous with his
membership on the Planning Board.
E. Rules and Organization of the Commission.
(1) The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a
Vice Chairperson and a Secretary.
§ 94-51.3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.3
1:504
(2) The Commission shall establish a regular schedule of meetings at
least once a month or as often as required to meet the needs of its
business, to handle emergencies or to meet time constraints
imposed by law.
(3) A quorum for the transaction of business shall be three (3)
members.
(4) The Commission's Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations, decisions and applications
for Certificates of Appropriateness. A verbatim record of
Commission meetings and proceedings shall be kept and made
available in accordance with provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law.
(5) All Commission records and minutes shall be made public records,
and all Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public
Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
(6) The Commission shall adopt written bylaws and procedures for the
transaction of its business and for the consideration of applications
for Certificates of Appropriateness.
(7) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or
she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest.
(8) A member may be removed by the governing body for cause but
only after a public hearing if he or she requests one.
(9) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
F. Expenses and costs; employment of experts and staff. The governing
body shall make provision in its budget and shall appropriate funds for
the expenses of the Commission. The Commission may employ, contract
for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it
shall deem necessary. The Commission shall appoint and receive its
legal counsel from an attorney licensed to practice law in this State.
Expenditures pursuant to this Section shall not exceed, exclusive of
gifts and/or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body.
G. Powers and duties. It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to:
(1) Prepare a survey of Historic Sites of the Borough pursuant to
criteria identified in the survey report.
§ 94-51.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.3
1:505
§ 94-51.4. Designation of Historic Districts and Historic Sites.
(2) Make recommendations to the Planning Board and the governing
body on the preparation and periodic updating of the historic
preservation plan element of the Borough's Master Plan, including
but not limited to the addition or deletion of Historic Sites and
Historic Districts identified in the Borough's Master Plan.
(3) Make recommendations to the Planning Board and governing body
on the historic preservation implications of any plan element of the
Borough's Master Plan which has been or may be adopted.
(4) Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of Historic Sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
(5) Recommend to the governing body sites and districts to be
designated through amendment of this Article VIIIB. The criteria
and procedures for designation are set forth in Section 94-51.4 of
this Article VIIIB.
(6) Advise the Planning Board on development and zoning applications
affecting Historic Districts and Historic Sites, in accordance with
the procedures established in Section 94-51.6 of this Article VIIIB.
(7) Review all applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness in
accordance with the procedures established in Section 94-51.5 of
this Article VIIIB.
(8) Provide advisory, educational and informational services to
promote historic preservation in the Borough.
A. Criteria for designation. The Commission shall consider for nomination
districts and sites that have integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship and association and that meet one (1) or more
of the following criteria:
(1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the Borough, state or nation.
(2) Identification with a person or persons who significantly enriched
the Borough, state or nation.
(3) Site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the Borough, state or nation.
(4) Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture or engineering.
(5) Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the Borough, state or nation.
§ 94-51.3 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.4
1:506
(6) Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or
craftsmanship that render a site architecturally significant or
structurally innovative.
(7) Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a
district or site an established or familiar visual feature.
(8) Likely to yield information important in prehistory or history.
B. Procedures for designation. Based on the Commission's review of a
potential district or site or upon the recommendations of other Borough
bodies or of interested parties, the Commission shall consider
nomination of a district or a site according to the procedures outlined
below:
(1) The Commission or interested party shall prepare a nomination
report for each proposed district or site. For Historic District
designations, the report shall include a building-by building
inventory of all properties within the district; black and white
photographs of representative properties within the district; a
property map of the district showing boundaries; and a physical
description and statement of significance for the district. For
Historic Site designations, the report shall include one (1) or more
black-and-white photographs; the tax lot and block number of the
property as designated on the Official Borough Tax Map; and a
physical description and statement of significance for the site.
(2) The Commission shall refer its nomination report to the Planning
Board for review and consideration as an amendment to the Master
Plan of the Borough.
(3) The Planning Board may schedule a public hearing on the proposed
designation of a district, or site, in accordance with the procedures
set forth for adoption or amendment of the Master Plan as set forth
in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. At least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the Commission shall, by
personal service or certified mail:
(a) Notify each owner of a proposed Historic Site or of property
within a proposed Historic District that his or her property is
being considered for historic designation and the reasons
therefor.
(b) Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of
such designation and of his or her rights to contest such
designation.
(c) Notify each owner of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing by publication in the official newspaper of the
Borough. A copy of the nomination report shall also be made
§ 94-51.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.4
1:507
§ 94-51.5. Review of applications requiring a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
available for public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing.
(5) Upon Planning Board review and adoption of the Historic District
or Historic Site designation in the Master Plan, the Commission or
the Planning Board shall forward the adopted Master Plan to the
governing body. The governing body may disapprove or change or
take no action on the adoption of an ordinance to implement the
Historic District or Historic Site aspects of the Master Plan.
Governing body action on Historic District or Historic Site
designations shall be otherwise subject to those procedures and
statutes which apply to designation and regulation of Historic
Districts and Historic Sites, including but not limited to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65.1 and those that apply to a change of a zoning
designation and the adoption, revision or amendment of any
development regulation.
(6) Notice of designation shall be made public by publication in the
official newspaper of the Borough and distributed to all municipal
agencies reviewing development applications and permits. A
certificate or letter of designation shall be sent to each owner
affected by the designation.
(7) A protest of designation status signed by twenty percent (20%) or
more of the property owners within a designated Historic District
or by the owner of the property on which there is a designated
Historic Site may be filed with the Borough Clerk. Such designation
shall not become effective following the filing of such a protest
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of
the governing body.
A. Actions requiring Certificate of Appropriateness.
(1) A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission shall be
required before the issuance of a permit for the removal or
demolition of any building or structure defined as a dwelling unit in
Section 94-5 of the code of the Borough of Merchantville located
anywhere in the borough.
(2) A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission shall
also be required before the issuance of a permit for the removal or
demolition of any building or structure located anywhere in the
borough (regardless of whether it is a dwelling unit) having a
building footprint of 300 square feet or more.
(3) A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission shall
also be required before a permit is issued for any of the following
activities ("Regulated Activity") or, in the event that no permit is
§ 94-51.4 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.5
1:508
required, before any work can commence on any Regulated Activity
within any Historic District or involving an Historic Site:
(a) The demolition of an Historic Site or an improvement within an
Historic District.
(b) The relocation of an Historic Site or an improvement within an
Historic District.
(c) A change in the exterior appearance of an Historic Site or of
any improvement within an Historic District by addition,
alteration or replacement.
(d) Any new construction of a principal, or accessory structure on
any Historic Site or in any Historic District.
(e) Any replacement, alteration in or addition of signs, shutters,
outdoor displays, fences, hedges, awnings, off-street driveway
and parking materials or exterior lighting for an Historic Site
or an improvement within an Historic District.
B. Actions not requiring Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of
Appropriateness issued by the Commission is not required for:
(1) A Regulated Activity which is the subject of an application for
development before the Planning Board. In such instance, the
provisions of Section 94-51.6 shall govern.
(2) Changes to the interiors of structures.
(3) Material changes not visible from a public street.
(4) The repainting, repairing or exact replacement of any existing
improvement, provided that the work does not alter the exterior
appearance of the improvement. The following are some of the
activities which are permitted under this criteria:
(a) Complete identical replacement of existing windows and doors.
(b) Repair of existing windows and doors that does not change
their designs, scale or appearance, and the installation of
storm doors and windows;
(c) Maintenance and repair of existing roofing materials involving
no change in the design, scale or appearance of the structure.
(d) Structural repairs which do not alter the exterior appearance
of the structure.
(e) Replacement of existing clapboards, shingles or other siding
with identical material.
§ 94-51.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.5
1:509
(f) Maintenance and repair of existing clapboards, shingles or
other siding (including masonry) involving no change in the
design, scale or appearance of the structure.
(g) Exterior painting of existing structures using identical colors.
C. Emergency repair. When a structure or improvement affecting an
Historic Site or within an Historic District requires emergency repair,
emergency repair may be performed in accordance with borough codes
without the necessity of first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness.
Under such circumstances, the emergency repair performed shall be
only such as is necessary to protect the health and safety of the
occupants of the structure or others and/or to maintain the habitability
of the structure. A request for the Commission's review shall be made
simultaneously with the onset of emergency repair, and no further work
shall be performed on the structure until an appropriate request for
approval is made and approval is obtained in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article. All work performed under this
section shall conform to the criteria set forth in Section 94-51.7 of this
article.
D. Informal review of concept plan for proposed undertakings.
(1) At the request of applicants considering a regulated activity that
may require a Certificate of Appropriateness, as set forth above,
the Commission shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for
the proposed regulated activity for which the applicant intends to
prepare and submit an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness. Neither the applicant nor the Commission shall
be bound by any informal review.
(2) In the case of very minor projects involving exterior repairs or
alterations, the Commission, if the preliminary data and drawings
are sufficiently complete, may grant a Certificate of
Appropriateness at an informal meeting.
E. Application procedures.
(1) Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made on
forms available from the Zoning Officer at the Zoning Office.
Completed applications shall be delivered or mailed to the Zoning
Officer at the Zoning Office fourteen (14) days prior to a hearing
date of the Commission in order to appear on the agenda for the
next hearing date.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall refer all applications for a Certificate of
Appropriateness to the Commission.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall advise the applicant of the date, time and
place of the meeting at which his or her application is to be
reviewed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. An applicant
§ 94-51.5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.5
1:510
shall appear or be represented at any hearing to consider the
application.
(4) If the application is for demolition, the applicant must follow the
requirements of Chapter 20 of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville in addition to the requirements of this chapter. In
such case the applicant must also provide notice in accordance
with Sections 94-91 and 94-92 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Contents of applications.
(a) Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall include:
[1] Complete application forms, which contain a precise
written description of the proposed regulated activity.
[2] Sufficient photographs of the existing improvement or lot.
[3] Scaled drawings showing site plan layout and facade
elevations and specifying materials.
[4] For new construction applications, a streetscape elevation
drawn to scale, showing the new structure in the context
of neighboring buildings.
[5] The Commission may require the submission of additional
information reasonably necessary to make a decision.
F. Action on applications.
(1) The Commission shall reach a decision on the application and
report such decision to the Zoning Officer within forty-five (45)
days of submission or referral of the application to the Commission
by the Zoning Officer. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of
time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Commission.
(2) If an application is approved, the Commission shall issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness, which shall be forwarded to the
Zoning Officer or Construction Official, as appropriate. If the
Commission disapproves an application, the Commission shall state
its reasons, in writing, in resolution form which shall be forwarded
to the Zoning Officer or Construction Official, as appropriate.
(3) If the Commission issues a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Zoning Officer or Construction Official, as appropriate, shall issue
the permit to the applicant and provide the applicant with a copy of
the Certificate of Appropriateness. If the Commission issues a
Certificate of Appropriateness with conditions, the Zoning Officer
or Construction Official, as appropriate, shall include the
conditions in the permit and provide the applicant with a copy of
the Certificate of Appropriateness with conditions. If the
Commission disapproves an application, the Zoning Officer or
Construction Official, as appropriate, shall deny issuance of the
§ 94-51.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.5
1:511
§ 94-51.6. Review of development and zoning applications by
Historic Preservation Commission.
permit and provide the applicant with a copy of the resolution from
the Commission. Failure of the Commission to report within the
forty-five (45) day period shall be deemed to constitute a report in
favor of issuance of the permit without conditions.
(4) When a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued, the Zoning
Officer or the Construction Official, as appropriate, shall, from time
to time, inspect the work approved by the Certificate of
Appropriateness and report to the Commission any work not in
accordance with such Certificate of Appropriateness. The
Commission shall also make inspections of work approved by a
Certificate of Appropriateness whenever it considers such to be
desirable.
(5) A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be valid for a period of two
(2) years from the date of issuance unless reasonable extensions
are granted by the Commission. If a permit is also required for the
regulated activity and is obtained prior to the expiration of said two
(2) year period, then the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
valid for the life of the permit and any extensions thereof.
A. The Planning Board shall refer to the Commission every application for
development submitted to the Planning Board for development and/or
zoning changes in Historic Districts or on Historic Sites or identified in
any component element of the Master Plan. This referral shall be made
when the application for development is deemed complete or is
scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure to refer the
application as required shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
The Commission shall make its recommendations to the Planning
Board, which shall be conveyed through its delegation of one of its
members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application and
to explain any written report which may have been submitted.
B. The Commission's recommendations shall focus on how the proposed
development would affect an Historic Site or Historic District's historic
or architectural significance as outlined in Section 94-51.4(A) of this
Article VIIIB and shall be guided by the review standards established in
Section 94-51.7 of this Article VIIIB. In considering the Commission's
recommendations, the Planning Board shall be guided by the same
standards.
C. On all matters referred to the Commission which require approval or
action by the Planning Board, the decision of the Commission shall be a
recommendation only, which may be approved, disapproved or
amended by the Planning Board. In the event that the Planning Board
should disapprove or amend the decision of the Commission, it shall
state its reasons therefor at a public hearing and in its resolution of
memorialization.
§ 94-51.5 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.7
1:512
§ 94-51.7. Standards for review by Historic Preservation
Commission.
A. In regard to all applications, the Commission shall be guided by the
following standards:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event that replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual
qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
should be based on accurate duplication of features, substantiated
by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural
elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural materials and when such design is compatible with the
§ 94-51.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.7
1:513
size, scale, color, material and character of the property,
neighborhood or environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions and alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations
were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity
of the structure would be unimpaired.
B. In regard to applications for new construction, additions and
alterations, the following visual compatibility factors shall be
considered:
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) The proportion of a building's front facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(3) The proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of
the width of the windows to the height of the windows in a building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(4) The rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) The rhythm of spacing and buildings on streets. The relationship of
the building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(6) The rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship
of the entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) The relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
the materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
§ 94-51.7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.7
1:514
(10) The scale of a building. The size of a building, the mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(11) The directional expression of the front elevation. A building shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(12) Exterior features. A structure's related exterior features, such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those structures to which it
is visually related and shall be appropriate for the historic period
for which the structure is significant.
C. In regard to applications for demolition, the following matters shall be
considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in relation
to the criteria established in this article.
(2) If it is within an Historic District, its significance to the Historic
District and the probable impact of its demolition on the character
and ambience of the Historic District and the criteria which were
the basis of the designation of the Historic District.
(3) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
(5) Its importance to the Borough and the extent to which its historical
or architectural value is such that its demolition would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(6) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it would not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(7) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new residents,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design or making
the Borough an attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(8) Whether the property can be put to reasonable beneficial use
without the approval of the demolition application. The
Commission may ask applicants for additional information to be
used in making this determination.
§ 94-51.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.7
1:515
§ 94-51.8. Effect of approval or denial by Historic Preservation
Commission; appeals.
D. In regard to applications for removal, the following matters shall be
considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location and, if the
present location is within an Historic District, to the Historic
District as a whole.
(2) The reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its
present site.
(3) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the protection of the
interest and values referred to in this article.
(4) If the proposed new location is within an Historic District, visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection B of this section.
(5) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself.
(6) If it is to be removed from the Borough, the proximity of the
proposed new location to the Borough, including the accessibility
to the residents of the Borough and other citizens.
A. Approval: Issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed
to be final approval pursuant to this Article VIIIB. Such approval shall
neither cause nor prevent the filing of any collateral application or
other proceeding required by any other Borough ordinance to be made
prior to undertaking the Regulated Activity concerning the Historic Site
or the structure in an Historic District or the demolition.
B. Denial: Denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to
preclude the applicant from undertaking the Regulated Activity or
demolition applied for.
C. Postponement of demolition: In its review of applications for demolition,
the Commission may recommend the postponement of demolition for a
period not to exceed one (1) year. The Commission shall utilize this time
period to consult with the governing body, the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and Energy or other similarly qualified
organizations to ascertain how the Borough may preserve the site or
improvement to be demolished. The Commission shall be empowered to
assist the owner in developing plans to preserve the site or
improvement when moving or demolition would be a great loss to the
Borough.
D. Appeals: The granting or the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness
and/or the action of the Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official in
reliance upon same may be appealed to the Planning Board in the same
§ 94-51.7 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.8
1:516
§ 94-51.9. Enforcement; violation; notice; failure to comply.
manner as an appeal is taken pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to limit the right of judicial review of the
Borough action after an appeal is concluded by the Planning Board.
A. Any person who shall undertake any Regulated Activity which affects an
Historic Site or an improvement within an Historic District or removes
or demolishes a building or structure which requires a Certificate of
Appropriateness, without obtaining the approval of the Commission,
shall be deemed to be in violation of this article.
B. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer and/or Construction
Official shall personally serve upon the owner of the property whereon
the violation is occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and
giving the owner ten (10) days to abate the violation by restoring the
site or improvement to the condition it was in prior to the violation. If
the owner cannot be personally served within the Borough with said
notice, a copy shall be posted on the site and a copy sent to the owner at
his last known address as it appears on the Borough tax rolls.
C. In the event that the violation is not abated within ten (10) days of
service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer and/
or Construction Official shall cause to be instituted any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful activity; to restrain,
correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said site or
improvement; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in
or about such site or improvement.
D. If any person shall undertake any Regulated Activity or shall remove or
demolish a building or structure requiring a Certificate of
Appropriateness without first having obtained approval, he or she shall
be required to immediately stop the activity, apply for approval and take
any necessary measures to preserve the site or improvement affected,
pending a decision. If the Certificate of Appropriateness is denied, he or
she shall immediately restore the site or improvement to its pre-activity
status. The Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official is hereby
authorized to seek injunctive relief regarding a stop action on
restoration in the Superior Court, Chancery Division, not less than ten
(10) days after the delivery of notice pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
E. In the event that any regulated activity or demolition or removal of a
building or structure that requires a Certificate of Appropriateness
which would permanently and adversely change a property is about to
occur without approval having been issued, the Zoning Officer and/or
Construction Official is empowered to apply to the Superior Court of
New Jersey for injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent such actions.
§ 94-51.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.10
1:517
§ 94-51.10. Limitation on duties and powers of Historic
Preservation Commission.
No duties or powers of the Commission shall supersede or infringe on the
powers of other borough boards or committees.
§ 94-51.10 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-51.10
1:518
ARTICLE VIIIC
Special Residences and Shelters
[Added 12-12-1994; deleted 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-01]
§ 94-51.11. (Reserved)
§ 94-51.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-51.11
1:519

ARTICLE IX
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 94-52. General requirements.
A. All off-street parking shall be provided as further specified in this
article.
B. All off-street parking shall be maintained on the same lot with the
building or structure in any residential district. No off-street parking for
a single-family dwelling shall be permitted in the front yard except on
an improved driveway extending into and having unobstructed access
to the rear yard or private garage. The width of said driveway shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet, except that a ten-by-twenty-foot turnaround
shall be permitted where required by Camden County Planning Board
regulations.
C. In all business districts, off-street parking space as required may be
maintained on the same lot with the building or on another lot or lots
owned or controlled by the owner of the building, provided that such
parking space is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the
building; and provided, further, that the off-street parking space is
located within the same zoning district. In order to assure long-term
control of the off-site parking area, deed restrictions may be required.
D. None of the off-street parking requirements of this section shall be
required for any existing building or use not now conforming to these
requirements, unless said building or use shall be increased in area or
in intensity of use, in which case the provisions of this Article shall
apply, equivalent to the area added.
E. Where lighting facilities are provided on off-street parking spaces and
commercial parking lots, the lights shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from any building or structure containing rooms for dwelling
or convalescent purposes.
F. The off-street parking areas and commercial parking lots in all business
districts shall be provided with a protective masonry, structural iron or
steel curb or bumpers eight (8) inches in height wherever abutting a
public highway or sidewalk, which shall be so located as to prevent
parked vehicles from overhanging such highway or sidewalk.
G. Parking lots for multiple dwellings or similar uses shall be located in the
side and rear yards, and where a parking lot abuts a residential
property, there shall be a shrubbery strip of at least six (6) feet in height
and/or a solid wall of masonry or concrete at least five (5) feet high to
provide a barrier for privacy, subject to approval of the Planning Board.
H. The surface of all off-street parking areas, including driveways of
private dwellings, and commercial parking lots shall be paved with
macadam, concrete or preformed pavers so as to provide a dustless
surface and shall be so graded, pitched and drained as to prevent
§ 94-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-52
1:521
§ 94-52.1. Commercial vehicles.
§ 94-53. Parking schedule.
All uses permitted by this chapter or hereafter permitted in any of the use
districts established shall provide, as a minimum, the number of off-street
parking spaces specified in the following schedule:
surface water from flowing onto and over adjacent properties. Parking
areas for five (5) or more cars shall require a site plan showing details
for water drainage. The plan must be prepared by a licensed New
Jersey professional engineer and submitted to the Borough Engineer
and Planning Board for approval.
I. The minimum size of each commercial parking space shall be no less
than nine by eighteen (9 x 18) feet, with a maneuvering space of not
less than twenty-four (24) feet between rows of parking spaces.
A. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds may be
parked, stored or garaged off street within a residential zone within the
borough; provided, however, that such vehicle is parked, stored or
garaged to the rear of the front building line and, if outside a garage,
that it be parked on a hard surface.
B. The parking, storing or garaging of any commercial vehicle with a
GVWR of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or more and any commercialtype
of equipment, such as trailers, chippers, mixers, backhoes,
bulldozers, etc., are prohibited within the residential zones of the
borough.
C. Recreational vehicles and equipment owned and used by the owner or
occupant of the dwelling, such as boats, trailers, campers, etc., may be
parked, stored or garaged off street within the residential zones as long
as they are parked, stored or garaged to the rear of the front building
line and, if outside a garage, that they be parked on a hard surface.
D. Nothing herein, however, shall prohibit the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle for the purpose of performing services or making
pickups or deliveries in the regular course of business.
A. Auditoriums, clubs, community centers, theaters, sport centers or other
similar places of public assembly shall be provided with off-street
parking space accommodating not less than one (1) private automobile
for every three (3) seats comprising the total seating capacity of such
building or structure.
B. Stores for retail purposes, personal service shops, businesses and office
buildings shall be provided with off-street parking space
accommodating not less than one (1) private automobile for every two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor space used by or open to the
public.
§ 94-52 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-53
1:522
C. Multiple dwellings shall be provided with off-street parking space
accommodations for not less than two (2) private automobiles for each
apartment. Each parking space shall be clearly marked and a minimum
of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length.
D. Restaurants, tearooms or any other establishments serving food and/or
beverages, in which seats are provided for ten (10) persons or more,
shall be provided with off-street parking spaces accommodating not
less than one (1) private automobile for every three (3) seats.
E. Single-family dwellings shall be provided with off-street parking space
accommodating not less than two (2) private automobiles.
§ 94-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-53
1:523

ARTICLE X
Signs
§ 94-54. Scope of applicability. [Amended 2-26-2001 by Ord. No.
01-02]
In all use districts within the Borough of Merchantville, signs may be
erected, altered, maintained, used, removed or moved, only when in
compliance with the provisions of this Article and any and all other
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Merchantville relating to
the erection, alteration, maintenance, use, removal or moving of signs and
similar devices.
Any sign that is not expressly permitted by the ordinance or regulation of
the Borough of Merchantville shall be prohibited.
§ 94-55. General requirements applicable to all signs.
§ 94-56. Signs permitted.
A. The overall height of ground signs permitted herein shall not exceed
five (5) feet above the ground, except that signs over eighteen (18)
square feet may extend to an overall height of not more than ten (10)
feet above the ground, and an open space of at least three (3) feet in
height shall be maintained between the bottom of the sign and the
ground, provided that necessary supports may extend through such
spaces.
B. Identification signs for schools, churches, municipal buildings and
similar uses are allowed, provided that the size of any one (1) side of
any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. Such signs shall
be limited to one (1) per street frontage.
C. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it may cause danger to
traffic on a street by obscuring vision.
D. All signs in any district shall comply with all provisions and
requirements of the Building Code of the Borough of Merchantville and
its amendments or supplements governing same, including the windload
requirements.
E. No portion of any sign erected in a residential district shall be situated
within two (2) feet of the back edge of the sidewalk.
F. Illumination of signs. Signs with internal illumination are not allowed.
Only external illumination of signs by incandescent flood lamps is
allowed. [Added 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 01-02]
A. The following signs are permitted when located on the same lot or
property of the permitted use to which each refers:
§ 94-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-56
1:525
(1) One (1) nonilluminated or one (1) illuminated nonflashing whitelight
sign on the grounds of a single-family dwelling, appertaining
to professional use, provided that the sign does not exceed three
(3) square feet in area and bears only the name and occupation of
the practitioner.
(2) One (1) nonilluminated sign affixed to the wall of a multiple
dwelling or a professional office use in the R-1 District, provided
that each sign does not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet
in area and bears only the name and occupation of the practitioner.
(3) One (1) nonilluminated or one (1) illuminated nonflashing whitelight
sign, appertaining to a multiple dwelling, provided that such
sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
(4) One (1) nonilluminated sign advertising the sale or rental of a
building or lot, provided that such sign does not exceed six (6)
square feet in area. In case such a building or lot fronts on more
than one (1) street, similar signs may be erected on each frontage.
(5) One (1) nonilluminated sign bearing the words "sold" or "rented"
with the name of the person affecting the sale or rental, provided
that such sign complies with the regulations as provided in
paragraph (4) above, and provided further that such sign shall be
removed within seven (7) days after installation.
(6) Nonilluminated signs bearing the name and profession or trade of
each firm performing construction or repair work on the premises,
provided that such individual signs do not exceed six (6) square
feet in area and are removed upon completion of the work.
(7) For each street frontage, two (2) nonilluminated or two (2)
illuminated nonflashing white-light signs appertaining to a church,
convalescent or nursing home, school or other institution of a
similar nature, provided that such signs do not exceed a total of
eighteen (18) square feet in area per frontage.
(8) For each street frontage, one (1) nonilluminated or one (1)
illuminated nonflashing white-light sign appertaining to a civic or
service organization or club, provided that such sign does not
exceed twelve (12) square feet in area per frontage.
(9) One residential sign of professional appearance not to exceed 1.5
square feet in size attached to the dwelling, or to the dwelling's
mailbox, post or lamp post, which may set forth the names of the
residents, the address and street name and also may include a logo,
symbol or house number. [Added 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 01-02]
(10) One historical identification sign, which may identify an historic
structure or site, and may provide information about the
significance of the structure or site, and shall be posted by a
governmental entity or agency, or by the Merchantville Historical
§ 94-56 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-56
1:526
§ 94-56.1. When sign permit not required. [Added 2-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-03]
There shall be no sign permit required for any of the following kinds of
signs:
§ 94-56.2. Restaurants. [Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
Society, the Camden County Historical Society, the New Jersey
Historical Society or the Daughters of the American Revolution.
Historical Identification Signs shall not exceed 1.5 square feet in
size. [Added 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 01-02]
B. Signs necessary to public welfare, posted or erected by public authority,
or advertisements required by law are not intended to be regulated by
this chapter.
A. Commercial informational signs.
B. Legal nonconforming signs.
C. Official signs.
D. Political signs.
E. Residential signs.
F. Temporary signs.
G. Temporary interior advertising signs.
H. A-frame signs.
I. Bill-of-fare signs and/or menus.
J. Flags.
K. Signs relettered on the same signboard using the same colors and fonts.
L. Any mobile sign, except that a business may have one A-frame sign
immediately adjacent to its property unless the business faces multiple
streets, in which case the business may have one A-frame sign per
adjoining street.
A. Restaurants shall be permitted to display either Subsection A(1) or (2)
below, in addition to their primary sign with restaurant name and
description:
(1) A menu of food and/or beverages placed in the restaurant window
or a bill-of-fare/menu sign in a display case mounted on the exterior
of the restaurant building facade. Such window menu or display
case shall not exceed 1.5 square feet in area.
§ 94-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-56.2
1:527
§ 94-56.3. Flags. [Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 94-57. Commercial signs.
(2) A bill of fare of food and/or beverage offerings on a freestanding,
one-sided easel/pedestal, a double-sided A-frame sign or on a onesided
wall-mounted board with erasable text wherein such text
shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall be removed at the
end of the business day. White boards are not permitted on
freestanding signs or wall-mounted signs.
A. One flag shall be permitted for each storefront or building.
B. Any displayed flag shall be installed so that the bottom edge of the flag
shall be at least seven feet above the pavement, walkway, sidewalk,
and/or step.
C. The flag may be displayed only for decorative purposes and/or for an
expression of patriotism.
D. The flag may be displayed on a flagpole mounted to the exterior of a
building or storefront or mounted freestanding.
E. The flag dimensions shall not exceed three feet in width, five feet in
length and a total area of 15 square feet.
F. A sign permit is not required for the display of a flag.
G. This section does not apply to and does not prohibit and/or regulate the
display of flags on a single-family residence, two-family residence and
on any federal, state, or local governmental structure or building.
A. Scope. In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, signs may be erected, altered,
maintained, used, removed or moved only in compliance with the
provisions of this section. Approval of a sign may be granted only when
such sign conforms to the historical or distinctive character of the
building.
B. General regulations.
(1) Allowed signs. Overhanging signs, building face signs, window and
door glass signs, freestanding signs, temporary signs, directional
signs and traffic control signs are allowed as specifically provided
herein.
(2) Restrictions applying to all allowed signs.
(a) Signs may be placed only on the principal frontage of a
building facing a public street or public parking lot having a
principal entrance used by the public. The use of allowable
signs by first floor uses and by those uses which lie above or
below the first floor are limited as specifically set forth herein.
A first floor use located at the intersection of two (2) public
§ 94-56.2 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-57
1:528
streets shall be allowed to place signs on each of the two
(2) street frontages, with each street frontage regulated
separately.
(b) Total area. The total area of all signs on each street frontage
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the width of the street
facade of the building multiplied by twelve (12) feet. [e.g., a
building which is twenty-five (25) feet in width at the street
frontage is multiplied by ten percent (10%), resulting in two
and one-half (2 1/2) feet, which is then multiplied by twelve
(12) feet, yielding a total allowable sign area of thirty (30)
square feet.] Where there are multiple tenants on the first floor
of a building, the sign area limitation shall apply to that portion
of the first floor street frontage which is occupied by the use
which proposes the sign. Directional signs which are less than
three (3) square feet and traffic control signs which conform to
New Jersey Department of Transportation requirements shall
be permitted but shall not be included in the calculation of
total sign area.
[1] The area of a sign shall be calculated by multiplying its
greatest width by its greatest height, including any frame
but exclusive of any device solely providing support. For
signs which consist of letters or other graphics applied
directly to a building surface, the area shall be calculated
by enclosing the letters or other graphics with the smallest
rectangle which can contain all the letters or other
graphics and calculating the area of the rectangle by
multiplying its width by its height.
[2] A registered trademark, logo or iconographic sign shall be
a part of the sign or separate from the principal sign as a
second sign. The area of this type of display shall be
considered as a part of total sign area allowed and shall be
determined by enclosing it with the smallest rectangle
which can contain the display and calculating the area of
the rectangle by multiplying its width by its height. This
separate calculation of sign area for a trademark, logo or
iconographic sign can be applied even if the display item is
an integral part of a single sign with other information.
[3] Two-sided signs shall be measured by using the surface of
one (1) side only. Signs with more than two (2) sides shall
be measured by using the surface of the greatest number
of sides which is visible at one (1) time.
(c) Professionally made signs only. Only signs created and built by
professional sign fabricators are allowed.
§ 94-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-57
1:529
(d) Illumination of signs. Signs with internal illumination are not
allowed. Only external illumination of signs by incandescent
flood lamps is allowed.
(e) Sign content. The sign copy or message allowed on signs is
limited to the following:
[1] Primary copy:
[a] The registered name of the business.
[b] The names of the owners or proprietors.
[c] An identification of the trade or type of business.
[2] Secondary copy at a smaller size, such as:
[a] The hours of operation.
[b] The telephone number.
(f) Lettering style and sign graphics. Lettering for primary copy
shall be of a serif, script or other decorative lettering style.
Lettering for secondary copy may be of any lettering style.
(g) Materials for signs. Signs shall be made of durable materials
such as steel, bronze, copper, aluminum, painted or preserved
wood or other material which can be shown to be durable.
Plastic may be used for incidental components of signs,
including applied letters and graphics or as a facing applied to
a panel of a durable material. Plastic may be used for
structural components of signs or for panels forming or
supporting the sign's display area, provided that the plastic is
shown to be durable, suited for the intended use and
compatible in appearance and intent with the durable
materials listed in the first sentence of this subsection.
(h) Structural requirements. All signs shall be of sound
construction and shall be permanently affixed to either the
ground or building, as defined for each particular allowable
sign, in a manner conforming with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
(i) Maintenance. All signs shall be periodically maintained by the
owner of said signs in order to assure that the signs are not
dangerous to the safety of others. If a sign is determined to be
unsafe by an enforcement official of the Borough of
Merchantville, it shall be repaired by the owner of said sign
within fourteen (14) days of a notice requiring said repair.
Otherwise, said unsafe sign shall be immediately removed by
the owner. If said unsafe sign is not removed by the owner, the
borough shall be empowered to remove said sign and to assess
the owner of said sign an administrative fee of one hundred
§ 94-57 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-57
1:530
dollars ($100.), a sign removal fee of an additional one hundred
dollars ($100) and those fines which are otherwise authorized
by this chapter. Signs which do not conform with the
requirements of this chapter and which are in an unsafe
condition and cannot be repaired or which have been displaced
from their structural supports shall not be permitted to be
restored or replaced unless they are brought into compliance
with the standards of this chapter.
(j) Abandoned uses. All signs and their related supporting
structures which pertain to a use or business which is no
longer in existence or operation at that location shall be
removed within thirty (30) days from the date said use or
business ceases to exist or operate. If said signs are not
removed by the owner, the borough shall be empowered to
remove said signs and to assess the owner of said signs an
administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.), a sign
removal fee of an additional one hundred dollars ($100) and
those fines which are otherwise authorized by this chapter.
Subsequent uses or businesses shall make an application for a
new sign. All variances granted from this code, or
nonconforming characteristics of the preexisting sign, shall not
be allowed to continue or apply to any new signs. This shall
apply whether or not a prior owner has complied with this
regulation by removing the preexisting sign.
(k) Real estate signs. Real estate signs are permitted in the B-1 or
B-2 District in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] They shall not be illuminated.
[2] They shall not pertain to any property other than the one
at which it is posted.
[3] They shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
[4] They shall be removed within seven (7) business days after
the closing or settlement on said property or the execution
of a lease.
(3) Prohibited signs.
(a) Colored, flashing, blinking, twinkling, internally lit, animated
or moving signs of any type or signs which present an illusion
of movement are prohibited. Signs which incorporate a clock
with conventionally moving hands and signs which incorporate
digital time and temperature displays are permitted as part of
an otherwise allowable sign as set forth herein, and the sign
area for the portion of the sign which includes such an item
shall be computed in the same manner as a sign that
incorporates a logo.
§ 94-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-57
1:531
(b) Exposed-tube neon signs are prohibited. However, those which
reflect the period of an historically significant building may be
acceptable, but in no case shall lettering exceed six (6) inches
in height nor shall said sign exceed three (3) feet in width.
(c) No sign shall be erected or maintained on a lot, tract or parcel,
including any improvement thereon, unless the message on the
sign directly relates to the use of said lot, tract or parcel.
(d) Flags, banners, strings of banners, pennants, pinwheels, Atype
signs, sidewalk signs, curb signs and similar advertising
devices and search lights, balloons or other gas-filled figures
are prohibited.
(e) Portable signs are prohibited.
(f) No sign shall be placed in such a position that it causes or is
likely to cause danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any
street, sidewalk or right-of-way. No sign other than an official
sign may be placed within the right-of-way of any street within
the borough. However, overhanging signs shall be permitted to
extend from the building into the right-of-way in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(g) No sign shall be attached, affixed or painted on trees, fences,
rocks, curbs, walks, hydrants or benches, except for warning
signs, as defined herein, such as "No trespassing." No sign of
any type shall be attached to utility poles.
(h) No billboards, billboard-type signs or rooftop signs shall be
erected or maintained on any lot or in any location within the
borough.
(i) No vehicle shall be regularly parked, stopped or located in
such a manner as to be used as or considered as a sign.
C. Specific regulations for allowed signs.
(1) Overhanging signs.
(a) General. One (1) overhanging sign is allowed per principal
street/ground floor use. Overhanging signs are allowed only for
uses which are at the street or ground floor. The supports for
overhanging signs shall be made of metal with the design in
keeping with the character of the district.
(b) Area. Overhanging signs shall be no more than six (6) square
feet.
(c) Position. Overhanging signs shall be hung perpendicular to the
building face and shall be positioned so that the maximum
projection from the outer edge of the sign to the front plane of
the building does not exceed three (3) feet. The distance
§ 94-57 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-57
1:532
between the ground and the bottom of the sign shall be no
less than nine (9) feet. Overhanging signs shall be permitted to
extend beyond the front lot line.
(2) Building face signs.
(a) General. For a single above-street use, a building face sign may
identify the name of the business. For multiple above street
uses, a building face sign may identify only the name and
address of the building. Awnings and signs on awnings, which
are included in the definition of building face signs, may not be
illuminated.
(b) Area. All building face signs shall be included in the total sign
area.
(c) Position. For principal street/ground floor uses, signs shall be
painted, applied or fastened securely to the face of the building
in a position corresponding to the space occupied by the use.
For above-street uses, building face signs shall be placed
adjacent to the door serving the lobby or stairway which is the
primary entrance to the space occupied by the use. In any
event, no portion of any sign shall be higher than eighteen (18)
feet above ground elevation. Awnings shall be permitted to
extend beyond the front lot line.
(d) Signs on awnings. Building face signs may be placed only on
the flap of awnings. Flaps shall extend no lower than eight (8)
inches below the bottom frame of the awning, and no lower
than seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet above the ground. The flap
shall be considered to be the length of awning fabric which
extends below the lowest framing member of the awning and
shall be unrestrained at the lower edge of the flap. Any portion
of an awning which is fastened to a frame at the bottom edge of
the fabric shall not be considered a flap.
(3) Window and door-glass signs.
(a) General. Only one (1) window or door-glass sign is allowed per
use per principal street frontage. Window and door-glass signs
shall be painted on the window glass or consist of permanently
applied plastic film.
(b) Area. For principal street/ground floor uses, window signs shall
not exceed forty percent (40%) of the window area, and the
area of the window sign shall be included in the total sign area
allowed herein. For uses above the ground floor, window signs
shall be no more than thirty percent (30%) of the overall
window area. Door-glass signs shall be no more than thirty
percent (30%) of the overall glass area, and they shall be
included in the total sign area allowed herein.
§ 94-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-57
1:533
(c) Position. Window signs shall be placed only on fixed,
nonoperable window panes.
(4) Freestanding signs.
(a) General. Freestanding signs shall be permanently attached to
the ground. One (1) freestanding sign is allowed per building.
Freestanding signs are only allowed where the building
occupied by the use is thirty (30) feet or more from the street
frontage of the lot on which the building sits.
(b) Area. Freestanding signs shall be no more than fifteen percent
(15%) of the area of the wall of the building facing the street
frontage of the lot on which the building sits nor shall it exceed
twenty-five (25) square feet. The area of the wall shall be
considered to be the width of the street facade of the building
multiplied by twelve (12) feet.
(c) Position. Freestanding signs shall only be placed on land
owned or leased by the person. Freestanding signs shall not
exceed ten (10) feet in height, and all portions of the sign shall
be set back from the sidewalk a minimum of two (2) feet.
(5) Temporary signs.
(a) General. Temporary signs are allowed only within the window
area of principal street/ground floor uses. They shall be typed,
typeset or brush lettered or shall use decorative hand
calligraphy or hand lettering which is presented in a form
which is compatible in appearance. Ordinary handwritten
signs are not allowed.
[1] Intermittent display. Temporary signs displayed on an
intermittent basis are allowed without application to the
borough and within the limits set forth herein. The
intermittent display of temporary signs is limited to a
maximum of twenty-one (21) days of display, with a
minimum period of twenty-one (21) days between such
displays. The dates of the period of display shall be posted
on the temporary sign.
[2] Continuous display. Where continuous display of
temporary signs is desired, it shall be limited as set forth
herein. The temporary sign display area shall be identified
within a designated window. This area shall be marked
with an unobtrusive black line inked onto the window
surface. Temporary signs are not permitted outside this
display area. When there are continuous displays of
temporary signs without the designation of a display area,
and without the review and approval of such a display area
by the borough, the party shall be informed by the borough
of the requirement for a designated display area and shall
§ 94-57 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-57
1:534
§ 94-58. Political signs.
Signs relating solely to the candidacy of any person for a public office
or pertaining to a public question which will appear on a ballot shall be
permitted, provided that such signs shall be displayed no earlier than four
(4) weeks prior to any election in which such person is a candidate or such
issue is submitted to the voters, and the sign shall be removed within five
(5) days after the election. Any sign erected pursuant to this section shall be
unlighted and shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area. No more than
one (1) sign shall be permitted on any lot.
make application to the borough for the designation of
such a display area.
(b) Area. Temporary signs shall occupy no more than thirty
percent (30%) of the area of the window in which they are
displayed. Temporary sign display areas shall occupy no more
than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the window in which
they are designated.
(c) Position. Temporary signs shall be placed along the lower edge
of the window in which they are displayed. Temporary sign
display areas shall occupy the bottom area of the window in
which they are designated.
(d) Special events. Any person may have one (1) temporary sign
permit for an unusual commercial event, such as a grand
opening. Said temporary sign or signs shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the width of the street facade of the building
multiplied by twelve (12) feet for that portion of the building to
which the sign is attached, and said sign shall not exceed in
length the width of the street facade of the building. Said
temporary sign or signs shall be attached to the building and
shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the
facade, and they shall not extend above the roofline of the
building. No more than three (3) such signs shall be permitted
under any temporary sign permit. Such permit shall be valid
for no less than fifteen (15) consecutive days, and it shall not
exceed a total of thirty (30) days in any two (2) consecutive sixmonth
periods. At least six (6) months shall elapse between the
starting dates of such permits.
§ 94-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-58
1:535

ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses
§ 94-59. Continuation of use.
Any nonconforming use or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so occupied;
however, no nonconforming use, if once changed to a use permitted in the
district, shall be changed back to a nonconforming use. If a nonconforming
use of land or structure is abandoned, subsequent use of such land or
structure shall be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-60. Damage by fire or other causes.
If a nonconforming structure, including a sign, is totally destroyed by fire
or other cause, reconstruction of the structure shall be in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. Any nonconforming structure, including
signs, may be restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction
thereof.
§ 94-61. Extension.
A nonconforming use or structure cannot be extended, altered or increased
nor can the land associated with such use or structure be increased or
reduced in size or converted to any other nonconforming use or uses
without a variance.
§ 94-62. Nonconforming lots.
Any nonconforming lot legally existing on the date of adoption of this
chapter, and not under the same ownership with any contiguous lot, may
have a building permit issued for a permitted use without an appeal for
a variance, provided that the building and improvement coverages are
not exceeded; the new structure does not violate any height or setback
requirements, and parking requirements are met.
§ 94-63. Nonconforming signs.
In addition to the provisions of this Article, see also the provisions of Article
X of this chapter regarding signs.
§ 94-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-63
1:537

ARTICLE XII
Planning Board
§ 94-64. Establishment; composition. [Amended 2-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-03]
There is hereby established pursuant to c. 291, P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.) in the Borough of Merchantville a Planning Board of nine (9)
members and four (4) alternates consisting of the following classes:
§ 94-65. Terms.
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall
be for one (1) year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms
of office, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at
the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The terms of
all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such
terms shall be evenly distributed over the first four (4) years after their
appointment as determined by resolution of the governing body; provided,
however, that no term of any member shall exceed four (4) years; and
further, provided, that nothing herein shall affect the terms of any present
members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until
the completion of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter all
Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, except as
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one (1) of the officials of the municipality, other than a member
of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six (6) other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one (1) member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one (1) may be a member of the Board of Education.
E. Alternates: There shall also be four (4) residents of the Borough of
Merchantville appointed by the Mayor who shall be alternate members
and designated "Alternate No. 1", "Alternate No. 2", "Alternate No. 3"
and "Alternate No. 4." The alternate members shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV members. Their terms shall be for two (2)
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than two (2) alternate members shall expire in any
one (1) year. The roles of the alternate members shall be as set forth in
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
§ 94-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-65
1:539
otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in
which the appointment was made.
§ 94-66. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur other than by expiration of term, it shall
be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 94-67. Organization; officers.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may either be a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 94-68. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 94-69. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 94-70. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall have those powers and duties as set forth under
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 94-71. through § 94-73. (Reserved)
§ 94-65 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-71
1:540
ARTICLE XIII
Planning Board Acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment.73
[Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-01]
§ 94-74. Planning Board to exercise powers of Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c), as amended, the Planning Board of the
Borough of Merchantville shall exercise, to the same extent and with the
same restrictions, all of the powers of a Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 94-75. Participation by members on certain applications.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(c), as amended, the Class I and Class III
members of the Planning Board of the Borough of Merchantville shall
not participate in the consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d).
§ 94-76. Inconsistent references in Code.
All other inconsistent references in the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville are hereby deleted or amended consistent with the intent of
this article to allow the Planning Board of the Borough of Merchantville
to exercise, to the same extent and with the same restrictions, all of the
powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 94-77. through § 94-78. (Reserved)
§ 94-79. Powers.
The powers of the Planning Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and amendments and
supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-80. Appeals and applications.
A. Appeals to the Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment may
be taken by any interested party affected by any decision of an
administrative officer of the municipality based on or made in the
enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty
(20) days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Planning
Board acting as the Board of Adjustment without prior application to a
73.Editor's Note: Previous Article VIII, Zoning Board of Adjustment, was amended 1-14-2002
by Ord. No. 02-01 to delete § 94-74 through § 94-78 and amend § 94-79 through § 94-83.
§ 94-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-80
1:541
§ 94-81. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power as set forth in § 94-80A, the
Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-74, or amendments thereto or subsequent
statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that
end have all the powers of the zoning or enforcement official from whom the
appeal was taken.
§ 94-82. Time limit for decision.
The Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment shall render its
decision not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date an
appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative officer or not later
than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of the submission of
a complete application for development to the Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. Failure of the Board to render a decision
zoning or enforcement official shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Three (3) copies of the application shall
be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or application, but in any event
no less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the
applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers required
by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the Planning
Board acting as the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be
taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the
Board.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the zoning or
enforcement official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Planning
Board acting as the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of
New Jersey on application or notice to the zoning or enforcement
official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
D. An appeal from any final decision of the Planning Board acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d may be taken to the governing body,
provided that such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days of the date
of publication of such decision of the Planning Board acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such appeal shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
§ 94-80 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-82
1:542
within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable
to the applicant.
§ 94-83. Expiration of variance.
§ 94-84. through § 94-85. (Reserved)
A. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment permitting the
erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a
specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced, within twelve (12) months
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or
determination of the Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment;
except, however, that the running of the period of limitation herein
provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the
decision of the Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment to the
governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
B. The Planning Board acting as the Board of Adjustment may, upon good
cause shown, extend the period specified in Subsection A above for a
reasonable period of time in order to avoid undue hardship and
unfairness to the applicant.
§ 94-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-84
1:543

ARTICLE XIV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 94-86. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on
the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision as
a member of the Board.
§ 94-87. Meetings.
§ 94-88. Minutes.
Minutes for every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter
be made available for public inspection during the normal business hours
of the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 94-89. (Reserved)
§ 94-90. Hearings.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be scheduled by the Chairman or on the request
of any two (2) Board members. All meetings shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at a meeting unless a quorum is present other
than to adjourn the meeting to a specified time and place.
D. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
§ 94-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-90
1:545
§ 94-91. Notice requirements. [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
04-19]
For all hearings on an application for minor or major site plan approval
before the Planning Board, all hearings on an application or appeal before
the Planning Board, and all hearings for a Certificate of Appropriateness for
Demolition before the Historic Preservation Commission, the applicant shall
give notice thereof as follows:
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, c.
38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within two hundred (200)
feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing
and whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate or his
agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax
duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its President, a Vice President,
Secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
§ 94-90 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-91
1:546
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the
notice required to be given pursuant to § 94-91B of this Article to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located within
two hundred (200) feet of the subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal
boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or five hundred
(500) dwelling units. The notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk as a part of
the application for approval of the development.
G. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision,
or a site plan not defined herein as a minor site plan, requiring public
notice pursuant to this chapter shall be given, in the case of a public
utility, cable television company or local utility which possesses a rightof-
way or easement within the borough and which has registered with
the borough in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1, by serving a copy
of the notice on the person whose name appears on the registration
form on behalf of the public utility, cable television company or local
utility or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose
name appears on the registration form at the address shown on that
form.
H. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. At the time of the
hearing, the applicant shall file with the Board an affidavit of proof of
service, accompanied by a copy of the form of the notice served and a
copy of the certified list of property owners obtained from the Borough
Clerk as required by § 94-92.
I. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
J. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
§ 94-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-91
1:547
§ 94-92. List of property owners.
All applicants may obtain from the Borough Clerk a certified list of property
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to § 94-91
of this chapter. The Borough Clerk shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c,
within seven (7) days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt
of payment of a fee as set forth in § 94-108C(7) of this chapter, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicates of the names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice.
§ 94-93. Decisions.
§ 94-94. Withdrawal of applications.
No application filed with the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
may be withdrawn by the applicant without the consent of the board before
whom the application is pending. The board may condition its consent to
withdraw upon such terms and conditions as the board deems appropriate,
including for example the condition that the applicant reimburse the board
and any objector for all expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred in
responding to the application. No application fees shall be returned to the
applicant. In determining whether to grant consent for withdrawal of an
application, a board shall consider the following factors:
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within ten (10) days
of the date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by
tax block and lot in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a
copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for
copies of other public documents in the municipality.
C. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published by the borough
in the official newspaper of the municipality. Said notice shall be sent to
the official newspaper for publication within ten (10) days of the date of
any such decision.
A. The amount of time and effort spent by the municipality and its agents
in reviewing the application prior to the request for withdrawal.
§ 94-91 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-94
1:548
§ 94-95. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
B. The lack of finality that would result if the application were permitted to
be withdrawn.
C. The point in the proceedings at which time the request for withdrawal
is made.
D. The interests of any member of the public that has opposed the
application and whether any such person has retained counsel or
incurred other expenses.
E. Whether any conditions or terms could be imposed on the withdrawal to
mitigate the adverse consequences of withdrawal.
F. Any other relevant factors or considerations that bear on the request
for withdrawal.
§ 94-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-95
1:549

ARTICLE XV
(Reserved)
§ 94-96. through § 94-97. (Reserved)
§ 94-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-96
1:551

ARTICLE XVI
Site Plan Review
§ 94-98. When required.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or construction permit,
site plan approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, shall be required for all applications not meeting the definition
of "site plan, exempt." Minor site plans shall require only final approval.
Major site plans shall require preliminary and final approval which, at
the discretion of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, may be granted at the same time.
§ 94-99. Application procedures; information required.
§ 94-100. Review procedures.
A. Information required. Please see Joint Land Use Board Application,
attached to Chapter 94 as Exhibit A and made a part hereof. [Amended
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
B. Waiver and modification. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51 and/or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, the Planning Board may waive
or modify any of the above submission requirements in any instance
where the Planning Board finds that said requirement is not necessary
in order to review said site plan.
C. Procedures for filing. All information required by § 94-99A, as well as
proof of payment of taxes, shall be filed with the Borough Clerk at least
ten (10) days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board at which the applicant desires his application to be considered.
Upon acceptance of the application and the requisite fees, the Borough
Clerk shall retain one (1) copy of the application and other information
in his office for review by any interested person during normal business
hours and shall forward the remaining copies to the Zoning Officer, who
shall review the application and issue a report to the Planning Board as
to compliance or noncompliance of the proposed site plan with the
requirements of all borough ordinances.
A. Preliminary review of major site plans.
(1) The Planning Board shall make a preliminary review of the
application at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board occurring at least fourteen (14) days after the filing of the
application as set forth in § 94-99C.
(2) The applicant and/or his attorney, architect, engineer or contractor
shall be present at the preliminary review to testify as to the
proposed site plan application, and any other interested person
shall have the right to testify and be heard.
§ 94-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-100
1:553
(3) At the preliminary review, the applicant shall present proof of
notice as required by § 94-91. In the event that the applicant fails to
comply with the notice provisions of § 94-91, the application shall
not be considered until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Board at which proper proof of notice is presented.
(4) In conducting a preliminary review, the Planning Board may make
suggestions for modifications, revisions or alterations of the
proposed site plan. In the event that the applicant accepts such
modifications, revisions or alterations of the site plan, the applicant
shall file with the Borough Clerk, at least fourteen (14) days prior to
final review, all plans, drawings and other information necessary to
incorporate such modifications, revisions or alterations in the site
plan.
B. Final review of major and minor site plans.
(1) The Planning Board shall take final action on all applications for
site plan approval at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Board following preliminary review.
(2) The applicant and/or his attorney, architect, engineer or contractor
shall be present at the final review to testify as to the proposed site
plan application, and any other interested person shall have the
right to testify and be heard.
(3) At the final review, the applicant shall again present proof of notice
as required by § 94-91. In the event that the applicant fails to
comply with the notice provisions of § 94-91, final action shall not
be taken until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board at which proper proof of notice is presented.
(4) In the event that all plans and drawings and other information
incorporating all modifications, revisions or alterations of the
proposed site plan agreed to by the applicant at preliminary review
have not been filed as required by § 94-100A(4), the Planning Board
shall take no final action until same have been properly filed in
accordance with § 94-100A(4).
(5) The Planning Board shall either approve, approve with conditions
or disapprove the site plan.
(6) In the event of approval with conditions, no building permit shall be
issued until the applicant submits building plans incorporating the
conditions imposed.
(7) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued and no occupancy shall
take place until and unless all construction and required
improvements shall be completed in conformity with the approved
site plan and any conditions required under the terms of the site
plan approval.
§ 94-100 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-101
1:554
§ 94-101. Standards for review.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter and of the Merchantville
Master Plan, as amended, the following standards shall be used by the
Planning Board as guidelines in reviewing site plan applications:
A. The existing landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
possible and tree and soil removal kept to a minimum. Grade changes
shall be made in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas. New landscaping and grass and ground cover areas
shall be developed as screening and environmental protection for the
site.
B. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to
existing buildings and structures in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed development. Provision shall be made for
screening of all parking, service and loading areas, playgrounds,
equipment and storage areas from adjacent properties.
C. Adequate provision shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking. Special
attention shall be given to location and number of access points to the
public streets, width of interior drives, general interior circulation,
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and arrangement of
parking areas that are safe and convenient and do not detract from the
design of proposed structures and the neighboring properties.
D. Provision shall be made for the proper location and adequate intensity
and direction of outdoor lighting, so that lighting shall be reflected
away from adjoining premises and public rights-of-way. The size,
location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials of all signs shall
not detract from the design of the proposed buildings and structures
and the surrounding properties and streets or create confusion with
other signs or for drivers of vehicles or pedestrians, and shall conform
to the provisions of Article X.
E. There shall be a careful review by the Borough Engineer, at the
applicant's expense, of the anticipated average and maximum rates of
sewage flow from any proposed structure, and a determination shall be
made, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, that existing sewerage
and sewage treatment capacity are sufficiently adequate to convey and
treat such anticipated sewage flow.
F. The Planning Board, after consultation with the Borough Engineer, shall
determine that there is adequate provision for drainage from the
proposed site, such drainage to be so arranged that no deleterious
effect can reasonably be expected in this regard upon adjacent
properties or upon the general health and welfare of the community.
G. The Planning Board shall be assured that the proposed development
will not interfere with the ecological balance of the community or the
surrounding properties.
§ 94-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-101
1:555
§ 94-102. Miscellaneous regulations.
H. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection, disposition and
recycling of recyclable materials consistent with the goals of the State
Recycling Plan.
A. Performance assurances. In approving a site plan, the Planning Board
may require that the applicant first furnish to the borough a surety
performance bond, guaranty or other form of security, acceptable in
form and content to the Borough Solicitor, for the purpose of assuring
the completion and maintenance of such off-site and on-site
improvements included in the site plan as will affect the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as but not limited to drainage, streets,
curbs, gutters, curb cuts, fire hydrants, recreational areas, shade trees,
shrubbery, other landscaping, trash disposal, off-street parking, loading
and unloading zones, artificial lighting and sidewalks. Such surety
performance bond, guaranty or other form of security shall be required
for no more than two (2) years after issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
B. Failure to act deemed approval. The failure of the Planning Board to act
within the time periods prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall
constitute final approval; provided, however, that the time periods
prescribed herein may be extended by mutual agreement between the
Planning Board and the applicant.
C. Effect of County Planning Board approval.
(1) In the event that Camden County Planning Board approval of the
site plan is required, a building permit shall not be issued following
Merchantville Planning Board approval until the Merchantville
Planning Board is notified by the Camden County Planning Board.
(2) In the event that County Planning Board review and approval
results in any changes in the site plan, a building permit shall not
be issued until such changes are reviewed and approved by the
Merchantville Planning Board in accordance with § 94-100B.
§ 94-101 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-102
1:556
ARTICLE XVII
Administration; Enforcement; Permits
§ 94-103. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by one (1) or more annual
appointees of the Mayor with the confirmation of the Borough Council,
hereinafter called the "Zoning Officer," whose duty it shall be to ascertain
whether the erection, construction, alteration or use of buildings, premises
or land complies with the provisions of this chapter. He shall keep a record
of all applications and a record of all permits issued with a notation of
all special conditions involved and shall safely file and keep all such
applications and permits in the offices of the Borough Clerk or such offices
as the Borough Council shall provide.
§ 94-104. Applications for approval. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
13-05]
§ 94-105. Zoning permits and occupancy permits.
A. Prior to the erection, construction or structural alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof or change in use of any building,
lot or parcel of land, application forms in duplicate shall be obtained
from the Zoning Officer or Borough Clerk and filled out by the owner or
his authorized agent. Such forms shall be accompanied by a plot plan
drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions, radius and location of
the building or buildings in its or their exact relation to the lot and front
property lines and such other information as may be necessary to
determine compliance with or provide for the enforcement of this
chapter. One (1) application with accompanying plot plan shall be
returned to the owner, approved or rejected by the Zoning Officer.
Applications for certain uses are subject to site plan approval as
provided for in Article XVI.
B. Please see Joint Land Use Board Checklist, attached to Chapter 94 as
Exhibit B and made a part hereof. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-01]
A. Upon the completion, erection, location or alteration of any building or
portion thereof for which a building permit shall have been issued by
the Building Inspector, or upon any change in the use of hitherto
unused land or the change in any existing use, but prior to the use or
occupancy of such building or alteration of land, the owner of such land
shall notify the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Merchantville of such
completion or proposed change in use, whereupon the Zoning Officer
shall inspect the premises and, upon ascertaining that the erection,
location or alteration referred to in the building permit has been done
in conformity with said permit and in compliance with all other
applicable codes, and/or the use is in conformity with the terms and
provisions of this Chapter, the statutes of New Jersey or any other
§ 94-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-105
1:557
§ 94-106. Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector until all
applications required under this chapter have been granted or approved.
decision of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, shall issue a
certificate in writing to be designated a zoning permit or occupancy
permit, that said work has been inspected by him and the use approved
is in conformity with all zoning requirements of the Borough of
Merchantville. No person shall use or occupy any building hereafter
erected or located on any lot, or use or occupy any alteration of any
building hereafter made, or use or occupy any land, unless and until a
certificate of occupancy or conformity shall have been duly issued as
required by this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of
a single-family dwelling occupied immediately prior to commencement
of any alteration, the occupant shall not be required by this subsection
to vacate the premises pending the issuance of a final zoning permit or
occupancy permit. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
B. The zoning permit or occupancy permit required by this section is in
addition to and not in lieu of any and all other permits or certificates
that are or may be required by law or by any governmental agency or by
virtue of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough of
Merchantville or otherwise.
§ 94-105 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-106
1:558
ARTICLE XVIIA
Violations, Penalties and Fees
§ 94-107. Violations and penalties.
If any building or structure shall be erected, constructed, extended or added
to in violation of this chapter or any building, structure or land used or
maintained in violation of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation so
offending shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each day such a violation shall continue, to be collected in the
manner provided by law.
§ 94-108. Fees.
A. The fees set forth in this section are identified either as application fees
or escrow fees. The application fee is payable to the Borough of
Merchantville and is a flat fee to cover direct administrative expenses
and is nonrefundable. The escrow fee shall be placed in an escrow fund
with the Borough Treasurer. Said fund shall be used to pay the fees of
any professional personnel employed to process, review, inspect and
make recommendations on said application, together with any costs or
expense, such as preparation of a transcript of the concerned hearing
or hearings or a duplication of the respective tape recordings.
Application fees and escrow fees are to be made commensurate with or
prior to the filing of the application. In the event that the escrow
deposited by the applicant exceeds the actual costs incurred, the
balance of moneys on deposit with the Borough Treasurer shall be
returned to the applicant. If at any time it becomes evident that the
escrow fund is or will be insufficient to cover the expenses as set forth
above, said funds shall be increased as required by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission by
notification to the applicant. The applicant shall submit a cashier's
check in the amount of such additional charges, payable to the Borough
of Merchantville, to the Zoning Officer who shall then notify the
appropriate board of the availability of such funds. All costs incurred by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic
Preservation Commission in obtaining engineering, stenographic, legal,
planning or other professional services relating to and arising out of the
application review shall be payable by the applicant and shall be
deducted from the applicant's deposit. Any unexpended funds
remaining in this deposit shall be returned to the applicant following
disposition of the application. Escrow deposits shall be administered in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. If the escrow
account is depleted or in arrears, no further action shall be taken on
such application until the applicant has satisfied its obligations to fund
the escrow account. In the event approval has been secured from either
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic
Preservation Commission and it becomes apparent that the account will
be insufficient to cover all professional expenses, the account shall be
funded to cover such expenses, and in the event that the applicant is
§ 94-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-108
1:559
unwilling or unable to meet its obligations hereunder, no further
permits shall be issued in connection with the development. [Amended
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
B. In the event an application involves more than one (1) application, such
as a variance and a site plan, the total fee to be paid shall be the total of
all the fees called for herein.
(1) Fees enumerated. The appropriate fees and escrow requirements
for an occupancy permit, variance, major site plan review, minor
site plan review, fence review, Historic Preservation Commission
review, certification of appropriateness, a certified list of property
owners and/or a zoning permit as required under this chapter are
set forth in Chapter 25, Fees, of the Code of the Borough of
Merchantville. [Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
(2) An application fee for a zoning permit for change of tenancy and/or
use shall not be required if there are other fee payments to be
submitted as required under the provisions of Subsections C(2)
through C(6) of this section, or for which a fee is required under the
provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. [Added
4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
C. Fees enumerated. [Ord. No. 13-06, adopted 4-8-13 established the
fees in Borough Code Chapter 25]
(1) Occupancy permit. An application fee shall be submitted with the
application for each occupancy permit, made payable to the
Borough of Merchantville. This fee shall also apply to an occupancy
permit for a change of tenancy, as defined herein.
(2) Variance.
(a) All applications made to the Merchantville Planning Board for
hearings and relief as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a) and (b)
shall be accompanied by a fee and the posting of an escrow fee.
[Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-01; 5-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-04]
(b) All applications made to the Merchantville Planning Board for
hearings and relief as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) and (d)
shall be accompanied by a fee and the posting of an escrow fee.
[Amended by 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04]
(3) Major Site Plan Review. There shall be a fee for each application for
preliminary or final approval of a major site plan. In addition, an
escrow fee shall accompany each application. [Amended
5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04]
(4) Minor Site Plan Review. There shall be a fee for each application
qualifying as a minor site plan. In addition, an escrow fee shall
accompany each application, but this escrow fee shall be waived for
§ 94-108 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-108
1:560
change of use, a sign application and for exterior changes visible
from a public street, way or place. [Amended 10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-19; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-04]
(5) Fence. A fee shall be submitted with each application for a fence
erected pursuant to Section 94-13. With respect to a fence to be
erected which is not compliant with Section 94-13 of this chapter, a
fee shall be submitted with each application, together with an
escrow fee if required. [Amended 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-24; 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 05-01]
(6) Historic Preservation Commission Review. There shall be an
application fee for each application for new construction, whether
the application is for a Certificate of Appropriateness or for review
of an application for development and/or zoning changes referred
to the Commission by the Planning Board pursuant to Section
94-51.6 of this Zoning Chapter. There shall be an application fee for
each application for alterations, additions or for demolition,
whether the application is for a Certification of Appropriateness or
for review of an application for development and/or zoning changes
referred to the Commission by the Planning Board pursuant to
Section 94-51.6 of this Zoning Chapter. There shall be an
application fee for any other application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness or for review of any other application for
development and/or zoning changes referred to the Commission by
the Planning Board pursuant to Section 94-51.6 of this Zoning
Chapter.
There shall be an escrow fee for each application for demolition,
whether the application is for a Certificate of Appropriateness or
for review of an application for development and/or zoning changes
referred to the Commission by the Planning Board pursuant to
Section 94-51.6 of this Zoning Chapter. These applications and
escrow fees shall be in addition to the fees regularly charged by
the Planning Board for any other approval required for the project.
[Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-19]
(7) A fee shall be submitted with each request for a certified list of
property owners secured from the Borough Clerk in accordance
with the provisions of § 94-92 of this chapter.
(8) Zoning permit. An application fee shall be submitted with the
application for each zoning permit, made payable to the Borough of
Merchantville. This application fee shall only be required if there
are no other fee payments to be submitted as required under the
provisions of Subsections C(2) through (6) of this section, or for
which a fee is required under the provisions of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(9) Satellite Dish Antenna. No satellite earth station antenna, inclusive
of its mount, shall be built, erected or modified unless a
§ 94-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-108
1:561
§ 94-109. (Reserved)
construction permit is issued by the Construction Official. Any
person (which shall include corporations, partnerships,
associations or any other legal entity) applying for such a permit
shall furnish to the Construction Official such plans, drawings and
specifications as he or she may reasonably require as to the
satellite earth station antenna to be constructed, erected or
modified and shall pay a fee equal and equivalent to the sum of
six ($6.00) dollars per $1,000.00 of the value of the cost of said
construction and installation of said satellite antenna commonly
known as a "satellite dish." In no case shall the fee be less than fifty
($50.00) dollars for a satellite dish antenna to be erected pursuant
to Section 94-9. [Added 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-11]
§ 94-108 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-109
1:562
ARTICLE XVIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 94-110. Amendments.
§ 94-111. Repealer.
All sections of any ordinance of the Borough of Merchantville which contain
provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby
to the extent of such inconsistency repealed.
§ 94-112. Filing with Camden County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the Camden County Planning Board as required
by law. Thereafter every ordinance proposing an amendment, change,
supplement, modification or repeal of this chapter shall be filed immediately
upon adoption with the Camden County Planning Board as required by law.
§ 94-113. Protest against proposed changes.
In the event of a protest by owners in or in the vicinity of a proposed
amendment or revision of this chapter, as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-63,
any proposed amendment, change, supplement, modification or repeal of
this chapter shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of twothirds
(2/3) of all the members of the Borough Council.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Merchantville reserves the right
to amend, change, supplement, modify or repeal any portion of this
chapter, including the Zoning Map. No such amendment, change,
supplement, modification or repeal shall be adopted until after a public
hearing is held thereon by the Borough Council, at which parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
B. No amendment, change, supplement, modification or repeal of this
chapter shall become effective unless the ordinance proposing same
shall first have been referred to the Planning Board for approval,
disapproval or suggestions. The Planning Board shall make and
transmit to the Borough Council, within thirty-five (35) days of referral,
a report, including recommendations concerning the proposed
amendment, change, supplement, modification or repeal. The Borough
Council shall review the report, including recommendations concerning
the proposed amendment, change, supplement, modification or repeal,
and may disapprove or change any recommendation only by a vote of a
majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its
minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of
the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day
period provided herein shall relieve the Borough Council from the
requirements of this section.
§ 94-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-114
1:563
§ 94-114. Pending applications.
All applications filed or pending prior to the effective date of this chapter
may be continued.
§ 94-115. Severability.
If the provisions of any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter and, to this end, the provisions of each Article,
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 94-116. Effective date.74
This chapter shall take effect on ____________________.
74.Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted October 24, 1994.
§ 94-114 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § 94-116
1:564
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of
Merchantville adopted since the original adoption of the Code in 1967,
indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to
be non-Code material (NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is
not included in the Code nor on this list is available from the office of the
Borough Clerk. The last legislation reviewed for the republication of the
Code was an ordinance adopted 2-12-1996. A complete listing, including
disposition, of all legislation reviewed in conjunction with the original
publication of the Code is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 438 3-13-1967 Code Adoption Ch. 1
Ord. 439 6-12-1967 Building Code
amendment
Repealed
2-24-1997
Ord. 441 6-12-1967 Electrical Code Repealed
2-24-1997
Ord. 9-14-1967 Plumbing Code Repealed
2-24-1997
Ord. 1-28-1968 Wellwood Park Ch. 53, Art.
I
Ord. 445 7-8-1968 Hawking and
peddling
Repealed by
Ord. No.
563
Ord. 12-12-1968 Retail food
establishment
Ch. 66
Ord. 450 4-14-1969 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 1-26-1970 Handbills and
posters repealer
Repealer
only
Ord. 1-26-1970 Fire prevention
administration
amendment
Ch. 32
Ord. 1-26-1970 Shade Tree
Commission
amendment
Ch. 13, Art.
II
§ 94-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:565
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 1-26-1970 Littering Repealed
7-11-1988
Ord. 4-27-1970 Licensing and sales
of alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. 462 9-28-1970 Garbage and rubbish Superseded
by Ord. No.
621
Ord. 467 6-28-1971 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 468 1-24-1972 Streets and
sidewalks
Ch. 73
Ord. 470 3-13-1972 Excavations Ch. 24
Ord. 471 4-24-1972 Demolition of
buildings
Ch. 20
Ord. 472 5-22-1972 Improvements to
Community Center
NCM
Ord. 473 6-12-1972 Acquisition of capital
improvements
NCM
Ord. 474 11-27-1972 Acquisition of capital
improvements
NCM
Ord. 475 3-12-1973 Salaries NCM
Ord. 476 3-26-1973 Loitering Ch. 43
Ord. 477 6-8-1973 Salaries NCM
Ord. 478 8-13-1973 Improvements to
Community Center
NCM
Ord. 479 9-10-1973 Purchase of
equipment
NCM
Ord. 480 9-10-1973 Acquisition of capital
improvements
NCM
Ord. 481 9-24-1973 Acquisition of capital
improvements
NCM
Ord. 482 11-12-1973 Police Department
amendment
Repealed
4-8-1996
Ord. 483 11-12-1973 Acquisition of capital
improvements
NCM
Ord. 484 11-26-1973 Improvements at
minipark
NCM
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:566
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 485 2-25-1974 Salaries NCM
Ord. 486 3-25-1974 Improvements of
water works
NCM
Ord. 487 3-25-1974 Salaries NCM
Ord. 488 3-25-1974 Salaries NCM
Ord. 489 4-8-1974 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 490 7-8-1974 Zoning Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 498 3-24-1975 Littering amendment Ch. 42
Ord. 500 4-14-1975 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 70, Art.
III
Ord. 502 6-23-1975 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 503 8-11-1975 Brush, grass and
weeds
Repealed by
Ord. No.
345
Ord. 504 8-11-1975 Wellwood Park
amendment
Ch. 53, Art.
I
Ord. 505 8-11-1975 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 506 9-8-1975 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 507 10-14-1975 Consumption of
alcoholic beverages
in public places
Ch. 5, Art. II
Ord. 509 4-26-1976 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 70, Art.
III
Ord. 512 12-13-1976 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 514 12-27-1976 Fire prevention
administration
amendment
Ch. 32
Ord. 515 12-27-1976 Claims procedure Ch. 18
Ord. 516 1-10-1977 Zoning Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 517 2-7-1977 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 70, Art.
III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:567
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 518 2-14-1977 Corporation Counsel
and Borough
Engineer
Ch. 50, Art.
I
Ord. 519 3-28-1977 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 34
Ord. 522 6-13-1977 Curfew Ch. 19
Ord. 530 2-13-1978 Tax abatement for
home improvements
Ch. 77, Art.
I
Ord. 533 4-24-1978 Fees for public
documents
Ch. 25
Ord. 534 5-22-1978 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 538 1-29-1979 Cable television
franchise
Superseded
3-24-1994
Ord. 545 7-9-1979 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 546 7-9-1979 Dogs amendment Ch. 21
Ord. 549 9-10-1979 Permit parking Ch. 55
Ord. 551 11-26-1979 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 556 5-12-1980 Wellwood Park
amendment
Ch. 53, Art.
I
Ord. 557 7-14-1980 Sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 70, Art.
III
Ord. 562 11-10-1980 Licensing of
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 8, Art. I
Ord. 563 12-8-1980 Hawking and
peddling
Repealed by
Ord. No.
445
Ord. 564 3-9-1981 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 569 7-20-1981 Fire prevention Ch. 29
Ord. 571 7-20-1981 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 573 8-10-1981 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 575 8-10-1981 Alarm systems Ch. 4
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:568
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 581 12-14-1981 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 589 7-12-1982 Regulation of the use
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 8, Art. II
Ord. 591 8-9-1982 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 597 11-8-1982 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 599 11-8-1982 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 600 1-24-1983 Curfew amendment Ch. 19
Ord. 606 6-13-1983 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 607 6-13-1983 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 608 8-8-1983 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 617 10-22-1984 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 619 12-10-1984 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 620 1-14-1985 Zoning amendment Superseded
10-24-1994
Ord. 621 2-11-1985 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse
Ch. 34
Ord. 10-14-1985 Filling stations and
inflammable liquids
Ch. 27
Ord. 2-10-1986 Dogs amendment Ch. 21
Ord. 10-13-1986 Abandoned vehicles Ch. 87
Ord. 12-8-1986 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 34
Ord. 7-11-1988 Handbills and
posters repealer
Repealer
only
Ord. 7-11-1988 Littering Ch. 42
Ord. 10-24-1988 Drug-free school
zones
Ch. 21A
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:569
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 1-23-1989 Chief Financial
Officer
Ch. 50, Art.
II
Ord. 2-27-1989 Shade Tree
Commission
amendment
Ch. 13, Art.
II
Ord. 10-23-1989 Subdivision of land Ch. 73A
Ord. 5-21-1990 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 14
Ord. 7-8-1991 Numbering of
property amendment
Ch. 48
Ord. 1-23-1992 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 9-14-1992 Emergency water
regulations
Ch. 22
Ord. 11-23-1992 Licensing and sale of
alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. 1-24-1994 Property
maintenance
Ch. 60B
Ord. 3-24-1994 Television cable
franchise
Ch. 81
Ord. 4-11-1994 Public Defender
services
Ch. 60A
Ord. 10-24-1994 Zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 12-12-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 94
Ord. 12-12-1994 Shoplifting Ch. 94
Ord. 2-27-1995 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 29
Ord. 9-11-1995 Curfew amendment Ch. 19
Ord. 12-11-1995 Sewers Ch. 70
Ord. 2-12-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 94
Ord. 2-12-1996 Redevelopment area NCM
Ord. 3-25-1996 Sewers amendment Ch. 70
Ord. 4-8-1996 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 5, Arts.
I and II
Ord. 4-8-1996 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 54
Ord. 4-8-1996 Police Department Ch. 59
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:570
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 4-8-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86,
Parts 1 and
2
Ord. 4-22-1996 Excavations
amendment
Ch. 24
Ord. 6-10-1996 Returned checks Ch. 66A
Ord. 9-23-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 94
Ord. 12-23-1996 Tax abatement for
home improvements
Ch. 77, Art.
I
Ord. 2-24-1997 Chapters 15, 23, 33,
56A and 66 repealed
Repealer
only
Ord. 2-24-1997 Retail Food
Establishment Code
Ch. 66
Ord. 5-12-1997 Traffic amendment Ch. 86, Part
I
Ord. 5-27-1997 Adoption of Code
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. 5-27-1997 Animals, bicycles,
Board of Assessment,
curfew, littering,
poles and wires,
registration of known
criminals, surface
water drainage,
taxicabs and theaters
amendment
Ch. 9; Ch.
12; Ch. 13,
Art. III; Ch.
19; Ch. 42;
Ch. 57; Ch.
65; Ch. 74;
Ch. 79; Ch.
80
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:571
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 5-27-1997 Alarm systems,
alcoholic beverages,
amusement devices,
animals, bicycles,
brush, grass and
weeds, demolition of
buildings,
excavations, filling
stations and
inflammable liquids,
fire prevention, fires,
garbage, rubbish and
refuse, hawking and
peddling,
launderettes,
littering, loitering,
noises, oil burning
equipment, parks,
peace and good
order, permit
parking, public
garages, street and
sidewalks, swimming
pools and taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 4; Ch. 5;
Ch. 8; Ch. 9;
Ch. 12; Ch.
14; Ch. 20;
Ch. 24; Ch.
27; Ch. 29;
Ch. 30; Ch.
34; Ch. 38;
Ch. 40; Ch.
42; Ch. 43;
Ch. 46; Ch.
51; Ch. 53;
Ch. 54; Ch.
55; Ch. 61;
Ch. 73; Ch.
75; Ch. 79
Ord. 5-27-1997 Noise amendment Ch. 46
Ord. 6-9-1997 Yard sales Ch. 93
Ord. 7-14-1997 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and sales
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. 8-11-1997 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 73A
Ord. 10-15-1997 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Ch. 86
Ord. 11-10-1997 Firemen amendment Ch. 31
Ord. 11-10-1997 Fire prevention
administration
amendment
Ch. 32
Ord. 12-8-1997 Public Defender
services amendment
Ch. 60A
Ord. 12-8-1997 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 2
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:572
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 1-26-1998 Add Historic
Preservation
Commission (new Ch.
39A)
Ch. 39A
Ord. 9-28-1998 Amend
Zoning—satellite dish
antenna
Ch. 94
Ord. 11-9-1998 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 11-9-1998 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 12-14-1998 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 12-14-1998 Add Fire Department Ch. 33
Ord. 12-14-1998 Amend firemen Ch. 31
Ord. 12-14-1998 Amend fire
prevention
Ch. 29
Ord. 12-14-1998 Amend fire
prevention
administration
Ch. 32
Ord. 99-01 1-25-1999 Amend taxation Ch. 77
Ord. 99-02 Tabled
2-8-1999
Add towing —
Ord. 99-03 4-26-1999 1999 Salaries and
wages
NCM
Ord. 99-04 6-14-1999 Bond and note
ordinance
NCM
Ord. 99-05 8-9-1999 Amend Brush, grass,
trees
Ch. 14
Ord. 99-06 8-23-1999 Bond and note
ordinance - Clifton
Court
NCM
Ord. 99-07 11-22-1999 Bond and note
ordinance - East
Chestnut
NCM
Ord. 99-08 12-6-1999 Salary ordinance
amendment
NCM
Ord. 00-01 2-28-2000 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:573
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 00-02 3-13-2000 Bond and note
streets and roads
improvements
NCM
Ord. 00-03 4-10-2000 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 00-04 5-8-2000 Bond and note 2000
capital budget
NCM
Ord. 00-05 5-22-2000 Amend fire
prevention
administration
Ch. 32
Ord. 00-06 8-14-2000 Add towing Ch. 84
Ord. 00-07 9-11-2000 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 00-08 9-25-2000 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 00-09 10-11-2000 Amend excavations Ch. 24
Ord. 00-10 10-11-2000 Amend property
maintenance
Ch. 60B
Ord. 00-11 11-27-2000 Bond and note ISTEA
inspection fees
NCM
Ord. 00-12 11-13-2000 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 00-13 12-26-2000 Registrar fees Ch. 25
Ord. 01-01 1-22-2001 2001 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 01-02 2-26-2001 Amend zoning-signs Ch. 94
Ord. 01-03 2-26-2001 Amend zoningsatellite
dish antenna
Ch. 94
Ord. 01-04 2-26-2001 Add fire insurance
claims
Ch. 28
Ord. 01-05 3-26-2001 Bond and notes 2001
capital program
NCM
Ord. 01-06 3-26-2001 Bond and note
consolidating
ordinance
NCM
Ord. 01-07 4-9-2001 2001 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 01-08 5-29-2001 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:574
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 01-09 6-11-2001 Amend Historic
Preservation
Commission
Ch. 39A
Ord. 01-10 7-9-2001 Guarantee debt of
MPWC
NCM
Ord. 01-11 7-9-2001 Bond and notes
transportation trust
fund discretionary
aid
NCM
Ord. 01-12 9-24-2001 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 01-13 11-5-2001 Sewer line repairs NCM
Ord. 01-14 11-5-2001 2001 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 01-15 11-26-2001 2002 Police salaries
and compensation
NCM
Ord. 02-01 1-14-2002 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 02-02 1-28-2002 Sewer line repairs NCM
Ord. 02-03 1-28-2002 Amend Historic
Preservation
Commission
Ch. 39A
Ord. 02-04 1-28-2002 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 02-05 2-25-2002 Amend Police
Department
Ch. 59
Ord. 02-06 5-28-2002 2002 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 02-07 5-28-2002 Bonds and notes
restoration of streets
and roads
02-08
Ord. 02-08 7-8-2002 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 02-09 8-12-2002 Amend Police
Department
Ch. 59
Ord. 02-10 8-12-2002 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 02-11 9-9-2002 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 02-12 10-15-2002 Amend vehicles and
traffic: skateboarding
Ch. 86
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:575
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 02-13 Void Fire inspection fee
and compensation
schedule
Ord. 02-14 10-15-2002 Amend demolition of
buildings
Ch. 20
Ord. 02-15 12-9-2002 Amend sewers Ch. 70
Ord. 02-16 1-27-2003 Amend Historic
Preservation
Commission (intro
December 2002)
Ch. 39A
Ord. 03-01 3-10-2003 Amend Historic
Preservation
Commission
Ch. 39A
Ord. 03-02 3-10-2003 Amend parks Ch. 53
Ord. 03-03 3-10-2003 Subdivision block 22
lots 16, 18, 36 (part),
38
NCM
Ord. 03-04 4-28-2003 Maple Avenue
redevelopment plan.
Amend zoning
Ch. 94
Ord. 03-05 5-12-2003 Amend swimming
pools
Ch. 75
Ord. 03-06 5-12-2003 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 03-07 5-27-2003 2003 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 03-08 8-11-2003 Guarantee debt of
MPWC
NCM
Ord. 03-09 8-11-2003 Bonds and notes
Euclid Avenue
NCM
Ord. 03-10 8-11-2003 Amend noises Ch. 46
Ord. 03-11 8-11-2003 Amend dogs Ch. 21
Ord. 03-12 10-15-2003 Amend curfew Ch. 19
Ord. 03-13 10-15-2003 Bonds and notes
Maple/Chaple
Avenue
NCM
Ord. 03-14 11-10-2003 2003 Salaries and
compensation
(police)
NCM
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:576
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 03-15 Not
Approved
2004 Salaries and
compensation
(police)
Ord. 03-16 11-24-2003 Amend fees for
public documents
Ch. 25
Ord. 03-17 12-8-2003 Amend fees for
public documents
Ch. 25
Ord. 03-18 12-8-2003 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 03-19 12-22-2003 2004 Salaries and
compensation
(police)
NCM
Ord. 04-01 2-9-2004 Amend zoningstorage
trailers
Ch. 94
Ord. 04-02 2-9-2004 Amend officers and
employees
Ch. 50
Ord. 04-03 2-9-2004 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 04-04 3-8-2004 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 04-05 4-12-2004 Implement
redevelopment plan
19/21 S. Centre
Street
NCM
Ord. 04-06 Void Bonds and notes
redevelopment
projects
Ord. 04-07 4-26-2004 Bonds and notes
redevelopment
projects
NCM
Ord. 04-08 5-10-2004 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 04-09 5-10-2004 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 04-10 6-14-2004 Guarantee debt M/P
Water Commission
NCM
Ord. 04-11 6-14-2004 2004 Salaries and
compensation
NCM
Ord. 04-12 7-12-2004 Bonds and notes
capital improvements
NCM
Ord. 04-13 9-13-2006 Authorizing sale of
property (block 22,
lot 35)
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:577
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 04-14 9-13-2004 Authorizing sale of
property (block 22,
lot 18)
NCM
Ord. 04-15 9-13-2004 Authorizing sale of
property (MPWC)
NCM
Ord. 04-16 9-13-2004 Authorizing
purchase/sale of
property (community
center)
NCM
Ord. 04-17 9-13-2004 Amend fees for
public records
Ch. 25
Ord. 04-18 9-27-2004 Merchantville town
center east
redevelopment plan
NCM
Ord. 04-19 10-13-2004 Amend planning
board; Historic
Preservation
Commission; zoning
update
Ch. 94
Ord. 04-20 10-13-2004 Amend parking fines Ch. 86
Ord. 04-21 11-8-2004 Authorizing purchase
of block 29, lot 12
and 10
NCM
Ord. 04-22 11-22-2004 Salaries and wages
Police Chief
NCM
Ord. 04-23 11-22-2004 Amend fees for
public documents
Ch. 25
Ord. 04-24 11-22-2004 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 04-25 12-13-2004 Salaries and wages
police 2005
NCM
Ord. 04-26 12-27-2004 Salaries and wages
Community Center
NCM
Ord. 04-27 1-10-2005 Amend Ordinance
04-18
Ch. 94
Ord. 05-01 1-24-2005 Amend zoning Ch. 94
Ord. 05-02 3-7-2005 Amend fees (OPRA
requests)
Ch. 24, Art.
III
Ord. 05-03 3-7-2005 Condemnation
authorization 30 and
32 W. Maple Avenue
NCM
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:578
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 05-04 4-11-2005 Bond ordinance
parking meters
NCM
Ord. 05-05 5-9-2005 2005 CAP rate NCM
Ord. 05-06 5-23-2005 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. 05-07 7-11-2005 Bond ordinance
capital improvements
2005
NCM
Ord. 05-08 7-11-2005 Bond ordinance
redevelopment
projects
NCM
Ord. 05-09 10-10-2005 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 05-10 10-24-2005 Amend peace and
good order
Ch. 54
Ord. 05-11 11-14-2005 Approving
acquisition of block
29, lot 4
NCM
Ord. 05-12 11-14-2005 Approving
acquisition of block
29, lot 2, 3, 6, 8, 9
and 14
NCM
Ord. 05-13 11-14-2005 Amend hawking and
peddling
Ch. 38
Ord. 05-14 11-14-2005 Amend property
maintenance
Ch. 60B
Ord. 05-15 11-28-2005 Amend stormwater
management
Ch. 71A
Ord. 05-16 11-28-2005 Amend sewers Ch. 70
Ord. 05-17 12-28-2005 Salaries and wages:
police and public
works
NCM
Ord. 05-18 12-27-2005 Amend dogs Ch. 21
Ord. 05-19 1-9-2006 Approve sale of 19/
21 S. Centre Street
NCM
Ord. 06-01 3-27-2006 Amend vehicles and
traffic
Ch. 86
Ord. 06-02 Not
adopted
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:579
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 06-03 3-27-2006 Authorize medical
payments
NCM
Ord. 06-04 5-8-2006 Amend zoningornamental
fences
Ch. 94
Ord. 06-05 5-8-2006 Establish CAP bank
2006
NCM
Ord. 06-06 5-22-2006 Salaries and wages
2006
NCM
Ord. 06-07 6-12-2006 Capital budget bond
ordinance
NCM
Ord. 06-08 7-10-2006 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
Ord. 06-09 10-23-06 Salaries and wages
(amendment)
NCM
Ord. 06-10 11-13-06 Municipal Housing
Liaison
Ch. 50, Art.
X
5
Ord. 06-11 12-11-06 Sewer service
charges
Ch. 70 5
Ord. 07-01 1-22-07 Adopt state bidding
and quotation
threshold amounts
Ch. 63 5
Ord. 07-02 1-22-07 Deputy Borough
Clerk; Purchasing
Agent
Ch. 50 Art.
VIII, IX
5
Ord. 07-03 2-26-07 Planning Board,
establishment
Ch. 94 5
Ord. 07-04 3-13-07 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 07-05 4-23-07 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 07-06 5-29-07 Capital
improvements
NCM 5
Ord. 07-07 5-29-07 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 07-08 5-29-07 Towing fee schedule Ch. 84 5
Ord. 07-09 6-11-07 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 07-10 6-11-07 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 33A
(superseded
by Ord. No.
07-18. See
Ch. 71A,
Art. X
5
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:580
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 07-11 9-7-07 Stormwater
management
requirements and
control
Ch. 71A,
Art. IX
5
Ord. 07-12 8-13-07 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 07-13 8-13-07 Redevelopment Plan NCM 5
Ord. 07-14 9-10-07 Purchase of property NCM 5
Ord. 07-15 9-10-07 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 07-16 9-24-07 Property
Maintenance Code
Ch. 60B 5
Ord. 07-17 10-15-07 Stop intersections Ch. 86 5
Ord. 07-18 11-19-07 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 71A,
Art. X
5
Ord. 07-19 11-19-07 Domestic animals
prohibited in parks
Ch. 53 5
Ord. 07-20 Defeated 5
Ord. 07-21 12-27-07 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 08-01 4-8-08 Abandoned
properties
Ch. 2 5
Ord. 08-02 4-14-08 Redevelopment Plan NCM 5
Ord. 08-03 4-14-08 Tax abatement
agreement
NCM 5
Ord. 08-04 6-9-08 Night use of park
and community
center
Ch. 53 5
Ord. 08-05 7-14-08 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 08-06 9-8-08 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 08-07 9-8-08 Delete Borough
Administrator
Ch. 50, Art.
III
5
Ord. 08-08 12-8-08 Redevelopment Plan NCM 5
Ord. 08-09 12-8-08 Cable
television—renewal
of consent
Ch. 81 5
Ord. 08-10 12-8-08 Cancel appropriation
balances
NCM 5
Ord. 08-11 12-8-08 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 19A 5
Ord. 08-12 12-22-08 Bond NCM 5
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:581
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 09-01 1-12-09 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 09-02 1-26-09 Demolition of
buildings
Ch. 20 5
Ord. 09-03 1-26-09 Zoning—outside
storage of firewood
Ch. 94 5
Ord. 09-04 1-26-09 Left turn on red
prohibited
Ch. 86 5
Ord.
09-04A
4-13-09 One-way streets Ch. 86 5
Ord. 09-05 2-9-09 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 09-06 4-13-09 Sewer connection fee Ch. 70 5
Ord. 09-07 5-26-09 Payment of bonds NCM 5
Ord. 09-08 5-11-09 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 09-09 5-11-09 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 09-10 5-11-09 Violations—yard
waste collection
program; violations
and penalties;
private storm drain
inlet retrofitting;
refuse containers/
dumpsters
Ch. 71A,
Art. VI, VIII,
XI, XII
5
Ord. 09-11 8-10-09 Zoning—antennas;
fees
Ch. 94 5
Ord. 09-12 Not adopted 5
Ord. 09-13 6-8-09 Property
Maintenance Code
Ch. 60B 5
Ord. 09-14 10-9-09 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 09-15 8-20-09 Cancel appropriation
balances
NCM 5
Ord. 09-16 10-19-09 Payment of
notes—Pennsauken
Water Commission
NCM 5
Ord. 09-17 11-9-09 Refuse containers/
dumpsters; amend
private storm drain
inlet retrofitting
Ch. 71A,
Art. XI, XII
5
Ord. 09-18 12-14-09 Bond NCM 5
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:582
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 09-19 1-11-10 Zoning—outdoor
storage of firewood
Ch. 94 5
Ord. 10-01 2-8-10 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 10-02 3-8-10 Fees (Superseded by
Ord. No. 13-06)
Ch. 25 5
Ord. 10-03 3-8-10 Raffle and bingo
licensing
Ch. 65 5
Ord.
10-04A
Not adopted 5
Ord.
10-04B
6-4-10 Fees Ch. 25 5
Ord. 10-05 5-10-10 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 10-06 5-24-10 Appropriation NCM 5
Ord. 10-07 6-14-10 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 10-08 6-14-10 Payment of water
revenue bonds
NCM 5
Ord. 10-09 7-12-10 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 10-10 8-9-10 Amend towing Ch. 84 5
Ord. 10-11 9-13-10 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 10-12 Not adopted 5
Ord. 10-13 11-8-10 Municipal Court fees Ch. 25 5
Ord. 10-14 11-22-10 Sewer service
charges
Ch. 70 5
Ord. 11-01 4-11-11 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 11-02 5-9-11 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 11-03 5-9-11 Fees for summer
parks and
playground programs
Ch. 25 5
Ord. 11-04 6-13-11 Property
maintenance
Ch. 60B,
Art. I
5
Ord. 11-05 6-13-11 Redevelopment Plan NCM 5
Ord. 11-06 7-11-11 Zoning-amend fences Ch. 94 5
Ord. 11-07 7-11-11 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 11-08 7-11-11 Emergency
appropriation
NCM 5
Ord. 11-09 9-12-11 Private storm drain
inlet retrofitting
Ch. 71A,
Art. XI
5
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:583
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 11-10 9-12-11 Refuse containers/
dumpsters
Ch. 71A,
Art. XII
5
Ord. 11-11 9-12-11 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 11-12 12-12-11 Vital statistic fees Ch. 25 5
Ord. 11-13 12-12-11 Acquisition of
property
NCM 5
Ord. 12-01 3-12-12 Gems, precious
metals and jewelry
Ch. 37 5
Ord. 12-02 3-12-12 Clothing donation
bins
Ch. 20A 5
Ord. 12-03 4-9-12 COLA (CAP) NCM 5
Ord. 12-04 5-12-12 No parking anytime;
time limit parking
Ch. 86 5
Ord. 12-05 6-11-12 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 12-06 6-11-12 Community Center
fees
Ch. 25 5
Ord. 12-07 6-11-12 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 12-08 7-9-12 Pedestrian
crosswalks
Ch. 86 5
Ord. 12-09 7-9-12 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 12-10 7-9-12 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 12-11 Not adopted 5
Ord. 12-12 11-5-12 Rental properties Ch. 66 5
Ord. 12-13 11-5-12 Community Center
fees
Ch. 25 5
Ord. 12-14 12-3-12 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 13-01 2-11-13 Financial agreement
with Citadel
Wellwood Urban
Renewal
NCM 5
Ord. 13-02 3-11-13 Remittance
agreement with
Board of Education
NCM 5
Ord. 13-03 3-11-13 Sewer service
charges
Ch. 70 5
Ord. 13-04 4-8-13 Subdivision fees Ch. 73A 5
Ord. 13-05 4-8-13 Zoning—applications
for approval; fees
Ch. 94 5
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:584
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. 13-06 4-8-13 Fees: Comprehensive
fee chapter amended
and miscellaneous
Code Chapters to
remove fees
Ch. 25 5
Ord. 13-07 4-8-13 One-way streets Ch. 86 5
Ord. 13-08 5-13-13 Distribution of
handbills at private
residences
Ch. 42 5
Ord. 13-09 5-13-13 CAP NCM 5
Ord. 13-10 5-13-13 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 13-11 Not adopted 5
Ord. 13-12 6-24-13 Salaries and wages NCM 5
Ord. 13-13 7-8-13 Maintenance of
vacant property
Ch. 60B,
Art. III
5
Ord. 13-14 7-8-13 Bond NCM 5
Ord. 13-15 7-8-13 Bond NCM 5
2013-16 12-8-13 Easement NCM 6
2013-17 1-13-14 Amends Ch. 9,
Animals, Keeping of
livestock, prohibited,
exceptions, 9-1;
violations and
penalties, 9-2;
violations and
penalties, 9-7, 9-9
Ch. 9 6
2014-01 5-12-14 CAP NCM 6
2014-02 5-12-14 Amends Ch. 29, Fire
Prevention,
29-1—29-14;
supersedes Ch. 32,
Fire Prevention
Administration
Ch. 29, Ch.
32
6
2014-03 6-9-14 Salaries NCM 6
2014-04 7-7-14 Bond NCM 6
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:585
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2014-05 8-11-14 Amends Ch. 60B,
Property
Maintenance, 60B-7,
60B-17, 60B-18,
60B-19, 60B-22,
60B-23
Ch. 60B 6
2014-06 8-11-14 General Penalty, 1-9 Ch. 1 6
2014-07 10-20-14 Amends Ch. 86,
Vehicle and Traffic,
metered parking,
86-33
Ch. 86 6
2015-01 4-13-15 Amends Ch. 54,
Peace and Good
Order, 54-6, indecent
exposure
Ch. 54 6
2015-02 4-13-15 Adds Ch. 83A, Use of
Tobacco Products in
Public Areas
Ch. 83A 6
2015-03 5-11-15 CAP Bank NCM 6
2015-04 5-11-15 Amends Ch. 9,
Animals, repeals Ch.
21, Dogs
Ch. 9, Ch.
21
6
2015-05 6-8-15 Salaries NCM 6
2015-06 6-8-15 Amends Ch. 94,
Zoning, 94-18 Zoning
Map; 94-33, B-1
District, 94-33.2
conditional uses;
94-33.3, prohibited
uses 94-33.4
conditional uses in
Maple Avenue
Redevelopment
District; 94-37, B-2
District, 94-37.1,
conditional uses;
94-37.2, conditional
uses, Maple Avenue
Redevelopment Zone
Ch. 94 6
2015-07 7-13-15 Amends Ch. 25, Fees,
25-14, Municipal fees
Ch. 25 6
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:586
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2015-08 9-14-15 Adds Ch. 38B,
Hazardous substance
cleanup
Ch. 38B 6
2015-09 — Not adopted 6
2016-01 5-9-16 CAP Bank NCM 7
2016-02 5-9-16 Salary NCM 7
2016-03 — Not received 7
2016-04 4-25-16 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2016-05 4-25-16 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2016-06 4-26-16 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2016-07 — Not received 7
2016-08 9-12-16 Adds Ch. 33A Flood
Damage Prevention,
33A-1—33A-5;
repeals
Ch. 71A Flood
Damage Prevention,
71A-1—71A-42
Ch. 33A 7
2016-09 4-25-16 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2016-10 — Not received 7
2016-11 9-12-16 Amends Ch. 66
Rental Properties;
Inspections; Property
and Inspection
Standards,
66-1—66-18
Ch. 66 7
2016-12 9-12-16 Amends Ch. 9
Animals; adds
9-56.1—9-56.6,
Chicken Pilot
Program
Ch. 9 7
2016-13 9-12-16 Amends Ch. 86
Vehicle and Traffic,
86-13.1 Overnight
Parking Exceptions
Ch. 86 7
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:587
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2016-14 9-26-16 Amends Ch. 9
Animals, 9-56.3
Chicken License,
Fees; amends Ch. 25
Fees; 25-14 fee for
chicken license
NCM 7
2016-15 11-14-16 Amends Ch. 9
Animals; 9-16 Dog
and Cat License and
Registration Fees;
amends Ch. 25 Fees,
25-14, 25-15; amends
Ch. 66 Rental
Properties, 66-11,
Fees
Ch. 9, Ch.
25, Ch. 66
7
2016-16 11-14-16 Amends Ch. 70
Sewers; 70-8 Sewer
Service Charges
Ch. 70 7
2016-17 12-12-16 Amends Ch. 60B
Property
Maintenance; adds
Art. IV Registration
of Defaulted
Mortgage Property
60B-24—60B-35
Ch. 60B 7
2017-01 1-23-17 Salary NCM 7
2017-02 2-27-17 Amends Ch. 2
Abandoned
Properties; 2-1—2-12
Ch. 2 7
2017-03 3-27-17 Amends Ch. 25 Fees,
25-14; amends
Zoning Professional
Review Fees; amends
Alcoholic Beverage
License Fees;
Amends Registration
of Defaulted
Mortgage Property,
25-16
Ch. 25 7
2017-04 3-27-17 Adds Ch. 18A Crane
Operation and
Licensing,
18A-1—18A-9
Ch. 18A 7
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:588
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2017-05 5-8-17 CAP Bank NCM 7
2017-06 5-8-17 Salary NCM 7
2017-07 9-11-17 Bond NCM 7
2017-08 11-13-17 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2017-09 — Not received 7
2017-10 — Not received 7
2017-11 11-27-17 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2017-12 11-27-17 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
2017-13 11-27-17 Acquisition of
property
NCM 7
18-01 2-12-2018 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 8
18-02 2-12-2018 Salaries NCM 8
18-03 2-12-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 94 8
18-04 2-26-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 8
18-05 5-14-2018 Salaries NCM 8
18-06 5-14-2018 Stormwater
Management
Amendment
Ch. 71A 8
18-07 6-11-2018 Taxation: Special
Assessment Districts
Ch. 77, Art.
III
8
18-08 7-9-2018 Bond NCM 8
18-09 8-12-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform
Ch. 15 8
18-10 9-24-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 25 8
18-11 9-24-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 94 8
18-12 10-22-2018 Hawking and
Peddling Amendment
Ch. 38 8
18-13 10-22-2018 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 54 8
18-14 10-22-2018 Bond NCM 8
18-15 11-26-2018 Bond NCM 8
19-01 2-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 94 8
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:589
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-02 3-25-2019 Taxation: Tax
Abatement for Home
Improvements
Amendment
Ch. 77, Art.
I
8
19-03 3-25-2019 Purchase of Property NCM 8
19-04 4-8-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 8
19-05 5-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 25 8
19-06 5-13-2019 Salaries NCM 8
19-07 7-8-2019 Animals Amendment Ch. 9 8
19-08 8-12-2019 Bond NCM 8
19-09 9-9-2019 Vehicle and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 86 8
§ DL-1 MERCHANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:590

ZONING
94 Attachment 1
Borough of Merchantville
Schedule of District Regulations
Standards R-1 and R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2
Minimums
Lot area, corner lot (square feet) 13,800 8,750 8,750 NA NA
Lot area, interior lot (square feet) 12,000 7,500 7,500 NA NA
Lot width, corner lot (feet) 92 70 70 NA NA
Lot width, interior lot (feet) 80 60 60 NA NA
Front yard (feet) 30 20 20 0 0
Side yard (feet) 9 8 8 0 0
Side yards, combined (feet) 23 18 18 NA NA
Rear yard (feet) 25 25 25 10 10
Maximums
Building coverage 20% 25% 25% 90% 80%
Total improvement coverage 40% 45% 45% 90% 90%
Principal building height
Feet
Stories
Senior citizen multifamily
building1
 (feet)
35
2.5
NA
35
2.5
NA
35
2.5
NA
40
3
60
35
2.5
NA
Accessory building height
Feet
Stories
15
1.5
15
1.5
15
1.5
20
1.5
20
1.5
The text of Chapter 94 must be read along with this Schedule since it contains additional
regulations which in some cases modify the standards shown above.
Downtown Redevelopment Area. The principal building height in the Downtown
Redevelopment Zone shall be no greater than 48 feet in height, and no greater than three
stories, as set forth in Ordinance No. 08-08. Only Borough Council has jurisdiction to amend
the maximum building height. [Added 5-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
NOTES:
1
[Added 2-12-1996]
94 Attachment 1:1 Supp 9, May 2021