Adopting Ordinance
:1

Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AO:1

Municipal Code
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AO:3

Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [1970 Code § 1-1]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General Ordinances of the
Borough of Moonachie, 1988", and is herein referred to as the "Code".
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1970 Code § 1-2; Ord. #90-4]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of all other
ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
BOROUGH—Shall mean the Borough of Moonachie in the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the governing body of the
Borough, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Bergen.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Borough government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with any
agency or instrumentality of the Borough government assigned to such organizational
unit by the Borough Council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath. In such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent
to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be construed as
if the words "of the Borough of Moonachie" followed it.
ORDINANCE—Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the procedure required
for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall remain in force and effect
pursuant to law.
OWNER — Shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural person, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or unincorporated groups; or
any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives
of any thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under
GENERAL § 1-2
1:1
either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC PLACES
— Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public ground, public square,
public park or other public place within the Borough.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights
thereto and interests therein.
RESOLUTION—Shall mean and include any act or regulation of the Borough Council
required to be reduced to writing, but which may be finally passed at the meeting at
which it is introduced.
SIDEWALK—Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of road, square,
place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or with others.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1970 Code § 1-3; Ord. #90-4]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted,
except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, or a legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing and
established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in any year.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as well as legible
handwriting.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code, identified by Arabic
§ 1-2 MOONACHIE CODE § 1-3
1:2
numbers, and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a Chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an alphabetical
letter and/or Arabic number.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be deemed to
refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or not such designation is
included in the citation.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1970 Code § 1-4]
If any Chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such Chapter, section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is
not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such
determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections
or paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [Ord. #90-4]
For violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of the Borough
of Moonachie unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the
provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be a fine
not exceeding $1,000 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding
90 days; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violations. [Ord. #90-4]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of any provision
of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 1-5.3. Application. [Ord. #90-4]
The maximum penalty stated, in the general penalty clause of this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty, including
a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or a
particular violation.
§ 1-5.4. Minimum Penalty. [Ord. #90-4]
The Mayor and Council may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular Code
provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist
of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding $100.
§ 1-3 GENERAL § 1-5.4
1:3

Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: The form of government in Moonachie is the Borough form which
comprises N.J.S.A. 40:86 through N.J.S.A. 40:94 and N.J.S.A. 40A-60. The
administrative code has been drafted in conformity with the Borough law and
in many instances provisions of the Borough law have been restated in the code.
Other enabling laws pertaining to the administrative chapter are N.J.S.A. 40A:14,
et seq., Police and Fire Departments; N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, et seq., Municipal Court;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, Zoning Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1.4, Planning
Board; N.J.S.A. 44:8-115, et seq., Board of Assistance; N.J.S.A. 26:3-1, et seq.,
Board of Health. Other authority to regulate the internal affairs of the Municipality
is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
§ 2-1. CHAPTER TITLE. [1970 Code § 2-1]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of the
Borough of Moonachie.
§ 2-2. BOROUGH COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. Organization of Borough Council. [Ord. #90-4]
The Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Councilmen elected at large in the
Borough, all of whom shall be elected and take office in the manner provided by law.
The term of office of the Mayor and Councilmen shall commence on January 1 next
following their election.
§ 2-2.2. Vacancies. [Ord. #90-4]
All vacancies shall be filled in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:16. The appointee shall be
of the political party which had nominated the incumbent whose office is vacated.
§ 2-3. MEETINGS. [1970 Code § 2-3]
The Borough Council shall meet for organization within the first seven days of January
following each general election. Thereafter, the Borough Council shall meet regularly
within the Borough at such times and places as provided by resolution. The Mayor shall,
when necessary, call special meetings of the Council. In case of his neglect or refusal,
any four members of the Council may call such meetings at such time and place in the
Borough as they may designate and, in all cases of special meetings, 48 hours' notice
shall be given to all members of the Council or left at their places of residence.
Notice of all meetings shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Law, C. 231, P.L. 1975.
§ 2-4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR. [1970 Code § 2-4]
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Borough Council but shall not vote
except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the
advice and consent of the Council, appoint all officers in the Borough. No appointments
§ 1-5.4 ADMINISTRATION § 2-4
2:1
shall be made except by the vote of a majority of the members of the Council present
at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such
purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same manner for the unexpired
term only. The Mayor shall make such nomination to fill a vacancy within 30 days after
the appointive office becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails to nominate within 30 days or
the Council fails to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then after the expiration
of the 30 days, the Council shall appoint the officer.
§ 2-5. PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. [1970 Code § 2-5]
At the annual meeting the Borough Council, by a majority vote, shall elect from their
number a President of the Council who shall preside at all of its meetings when the
Mayor does not preside. The President of the Council shall hold office for one year and
until the next annual meeting. He shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions
before the Council. If the Council at its annual meeting fails to elect a President, the
Mayor shall appoint the President from the Council and in that case, no confirmation by
the Council shall be necessary. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for a period of
three days or for any reason is unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform
all the duties of the Mayor during his absence or inability. The Mayor, in case of his
intended absence from the Borough for more than three days at any one time, shall notify
the President in writing of his intended absence, whereupon the President shall be and
become acting Mayor from the receipt of notice and continue to act until the Mayor's
return.
§ 2-6. BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-6.1. Creation of Office. [Ord. #86-1, § 1; Ord. #88-14, § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, there is hereby created the position of Borough
Administrator.
§ 2-6.2. Appointment, Term of Office and Compensation. [Ord. #86-1, § 2; New;
Ord. #88-14, § 2]
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the governing body. He shall receive as salary such sum as may be fixed and approved
by the governing body by appropriate salary ordinance. The Administrator shall serve at
the pleasure of the governing body.
§ 2-6.3. Removal. [Ord. #86-1, § 3; Ord. 88-14, § 3]
The Borough Administrator may be removed by a 2/3 vote of the governing body.
The resolution of removal shall become effective three months after its adoption by
the governing body. The governing body may provide that the resolution shall have
immediate effect, provided, however, that the governing body shall cause to be paid to
the Borough Administrator, forthwith, any unpaid balance of his salary already earned
and his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the resolution.
§ 2-4 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-6.4
2:2
§ 2-6.4. Qualifications and Residency. [Ord. #86-1, § 4; Ord. #88-14, § 4]
The Borough Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative
abilities, with special regard to education, training and experience in governmental
affairs. The Borough Administrator need not reside in Moonachie.
§ 2-6.5. Ninety-Day Notice to Borough. [Ord. #88-14, § 5]
The Borough Administrator appointed by the Mayor and Council shall be required to
provide at least 90 days' notice to the governing body of his or her intention to terminate
employment as Borough Administrator in order to effectuate a smooth transition to a
successor Borough Administrator.
§ 2-6.6. Written Contract Requirement. [Ord. #88-14, § 6]
At the option of the Mayor and Council, the Borough Administrator may be required to
execute a form of agreement prepared by the Borough Attorney which said agreement
shall set forth the duties, rights and responsibilities of both the Borough Administrator
and the Borough of Moonachie. Nevertheless, the Borough Administrator shall be
compensated in accordance with the Borough Salary Ordinance and the form of contract
required hereunder shall be at the sole option of the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Moonachie. In no event shall the Borough Administrator be considered a contractual
employee and/or independent contractor but he or she shall be construed as an official of
the Borough in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136.
§ 2-6.7. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. #86-1, § 5; Ord. #88-14, § 7]
The Borough Administrator shall, under the supervision and control of the governing
body, to the extent not prohibited by law, have the following duties and responsibilities:
a. Serve as the principal administrative officer representing the governing body.
b. Supervise the administration of all Borough departments and offices in consultation
with the respective Council committee chairmen.
c. Study the administrative and other operations of the Borough and make
recommendations for plans and programs to meet the needs of the Borough.
d. Receive and reply to inquiries and complaints concerning Borough business, and
provide information and assistance in respect thereto.
e. Attend all meetings of the governing body as required.
f. Establish and maintain sound personnel practices and maintain appropriate records
of all the employees and officials of the Borough.
g. Recommend the nature, location and extent of public improvements and coordinate
the execution of same when authorized by the governing body.
h. Implement and enforce the policies of the governing body with respect to the
compiling and release of public information.
i. Receive from each department, office and Board, their annual budget requests,
§ 2-6.4 ADMINISTRATION § 2-6.7
2:3
§ 2-6.8. Audit. [Ord. #86-1, § 6; Ord. #88-14, § 8]
The Borough Administrator shall consult with the Borough Auditor, so as to keep him
advised of the continuing review and analysis of proposed operations, work, progress
and costs of municipal services.
§ 2-7. BOROUGH CLERK.
§ 2-7.1. Appointment. [1970 Code § 2-6.1]
There shall be a Borough Clerk appointed by the Mayor and Council for a term of three
years. Prior to his appointment the Clerk shall be qualified by training and experience to
perform the duties of his office.
§ 2-7.2. Clerk of Council and Committees. [1970 Code § 2-6.2]
The Borough Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and as secretary of any special
legislative committees of the Council. He shall attend all meetings of the Council and
of such committees when required by the chairman and shall keep the minutes of the
meetings of the Council and of such committees. The minutes of each meeting of the
Council shall be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk.
§ 2-7.3. Ordinances and Resolutions. [1970 Code § 2-6.3]
reviewing and transmitting same, along with comments and recommendations, to
the governing body.
j. Consult with the governing body on preparation of the tentative budget, recording
changes, additions and deletions thereto, and submitting final recommendations in
the form required by law, together with an analysis of the various items of
expenditure and revenue and such explanatory comments as may be required.
k. Negotiate contracts inclusive of employee collective bargaining contracts, for the
Borough as authorized by, and subject to the approval of the governing body.
l. Review, recommend, implement and enforce the financial procedures and policies
of the Borough and its departments after consultation with the appropriate Council
committee chairmen and department heads.
m. Perform such other duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the
governing body.
a. The Clerk shall record all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent character
in books to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he shall also record
and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and
resolution so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall attest
that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed the recorded copy
shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance or resolution. Any omission
by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign or certify as herein required shall not
impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been duly adopted.
b. At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the Borough
§ 2-6.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-7.3
2:4
§ 2-7.4. Custodian of Records. [1970 Code § 2-6.4]
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and documents of the
Borough, except those committed by ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto
by the Mayor and Council. He shall, upon request and upon the payment of the fees
prescribed therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of the Borough, furnish a
certified copy of any such paper in his custody under the corporate seal of the Borough.
§ 2-7.5. Corporate Seal. [1970 Code § 2-6.5]
The Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Borough to be affixed to instruments and
writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Council or when necessary
to exemplify any document on record in his office, or to certify any act or paper which
from the records in his office shall appear to have been a public act of the Borough or
a public document. He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any
other instrument, writing or other paper unless required by law or ordinance.
§ 2-7.6. Insurance; Surety Bonds; Contracts. [1970 Code § 2-6.6]
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Council, shall:
§ 2-7.7. Administrative Rules and Regulations; Filing and Publication. [1970 Code
§ 2-6.7]
No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority of
the Borough, except such as relates to the organization or internal management of the
municipal government or a part thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Borough
Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations
which shall be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions, or true
copies thereof, which then remain in force and effect. He shall also properly index
the record books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions.
a. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by or on
account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which shall be placed in
the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks
insured for the benefit of the Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or
liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment and materials to which the Municipality may be a party.
b. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds running to the
Borough as obligee, or any other form of security given by any contractor,
subdivision developer or other persons on account of work done or to be done in or
for the Borough.
c. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Borough.
d. Report to the Borough Council annually, at such times as the Council may require
on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and contract of
insurance; the nature and terms of outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and
their respective expiration dates.
§ 2-7.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-7.8
2:5
§ 2-7.8. Other Laws and Ordinances. [1970 Code § 2-6.8]
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance
and subject to the supervision and direction of the Borough Council, the Clerk shall:
§ 2-7A. DEPUTY BOROUGH CLERK.
§ 2-7A.1. Appointment; Term of Office; Duties. [Ord. #88-10, § I]
There shall be a Deputy Borough Clerk appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council for a term of one year. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall serve as Deputy
Borough Clerk of the Council. In the absence of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough
Clerk shall attend and keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Council, which minutes
shall be signed by the Deputy Borough Clerk. The minutes shall include all Resolutions
of the Council.
§ 2-7A.2. Ordinances and Resolutions. [Ord. #88-10, S II]
§ 2-7A.3. Custodian of Records. [Ord. #88-10, § III]
In the absence of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall have custody
of and safely keep all records, books and documents of the Borough, except those
committed by ordinance, to any other office, by resolution or by law. In the absence of
the Borough Clerk, on request and on the payment of the fees prescribed therefor, the
Deputy Borough Clerk shall furnish a certified copy of any paper in the Borough Clerk's
custody under the corporate seal of the Borough.
a. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General Election
Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or ordinance.
b. Administer the provisions of Borough ordinances with reference to the licensing of
occupations and activities for which licenses are required by law or ordinance to be
obtained from the Clerk.
c. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the Borough Council.
a. In the absence of the Borough Clerk or at the direction of the Borough Clerk, the
Deputy Borough Clerk shall record all ordinances in books to be provided for that
purpose in the absence of the Borough Clerk. After each ordinance, the Deputy
Borough Clerk shall record and certify the proof of its publication as required by
Law. Each ordinance so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and in the absence
of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk, who shall attest that it was
adopted on a date stated, and when so signed, the recorded copy shall be deemed to
be a public record of the ordinance. Any omission by the Deputy Borough Clerk or
the Mayor to record, sign or certify shall not impair or affect the validity of an
ordinance which has been duly adopted.
b. Periodically, as determined by the Mayor and Council, the Deputy Borough Clerk
shall compile at least two copies of all ordinances that have been adopted since the
previous revision or supplement and forward them to a company selected by the
Mayor and Council to prepare a supplement to the Code.
§ 2-7.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-7A.4
2:6
§ 2-7A.4. Affixing of Corporate Seal. [Ord. #88-10, § IV]
In the absence of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall cause the corporate
seal of the Borough to be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the Mayor and Council or when necessary to exemplify any
document on record in the Borough Clerk's office or to certify any act or paper which
from the records in the Borough Clerk's office shall appear to have been a public act of
the Borough or a public document.
§ 2-7A.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #88-10, § V]
Subject to the supervision of the Mayor and Council and in the absence of the Borough
Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall:
§ 2-7A.6. Compilation of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #88-10, § VI]
In the absence of the Borough Clerk or at the direction of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy
Borough Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all rules and regulations, which
shall be available for public inspection in the Borough Clerk's office during business
hours. No rule or general regulations made by a department, officer, agency or authority
of the Borough, unless it relates to the organization or internal management of the
municipal government or part thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Borough
Clerk.
§ 2-7A.7. Additional Powers and Duties. [Ord. #88-10, § VII]
In addition to other functions, powers and duties prescribed by ordinance and subject
to the supervision and direction of the Mayor and Council, and in the absence of the
Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall:
a. Be the depository for and the custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by or
on account of any officer or employee, except the Borough Clerk's and Deputy
Borough Clerk's own bond, which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer;
all insurance policies on or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the
Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability; and all formal
contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the
Borough may be a party.
b. Be the depository for and the custodian of all performance bonds running to the
Borough as obligee or any other form of security given by a contractor, subdivision
developer or other persons on account of work done or to be done in or for the
Borough.
c. Have custody of all leases and property owned by the Borough.
d. Report to the Mayor and Council annually, at such times as the Mayor and Council
may require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and
contract of insurance, the nature and terms of outstanding leases, the rent reserved
by each and their respective expiration dates.
a. Perform all the functions required of Borough Clerks by the General Election Law
(Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or ordinance.
§ 2-7A.4 ADMINISTRATION § 2-7A.7
2:7
§ 2-8. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
§ 2-8.1. Departments, Boards and Commissions. [1970 Code § 2-7.1; Ord. #90-4]
There shall be the following departments, officers, boards and commissions in the
Borough.
b. Administer the provisions of Borough ordinances with reference to the licensing of
occupations and activities for which licenses are required by law or ordinance to be
obtained from the Borough Clerk, except those issued by the Fire Prevention Board.
c. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to the Borough Clerk and/or Deputy
Borough Clerk by the Mayor and Council.
a. Departments.
1. Department of Finance.
2. Department of Public Works.
3. Police Department.
4. Fire Department.
5. Department of Buildings and Grounds and Inspections.
b. Separate Offices Not Under Departments.
1. Borough Attorney.
2. Borough Prosecutor.
3. Borough Physician.
4. Borough Engineer.
5. Borough Auditor.
c. Boards and Commissions.
1. Municipal Court.
2. Board of Adjustment.
3. Planning Board.
4. Board of Assistance.
5. Board of Health.
6. Emergency Management Council.
7. Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission.
8. Housing Authority.
§ 2-7A.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-8.2
2:8
§ 2-8.2. Powers and Duties of Department Heads. [1970 Code § 2-7.2]
The head of a department, subject to the code and the approval or direction of the Mayor
and Council, shall:
§ 2-9. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-9.1. Director. [1970 Code § 2-8.1]
There shall be a Department of Finance of the Borough which shall have jurisdiction
over all business pertaining to finance. The Collector-Treasurer shall be the Director of
the Department of Finance.
§ 2-9.2. Division of the Treasury. [1970 Code § 2-8.2]
a. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
b. Direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the department and
make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
c. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to departmental
appropriations.
d. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as may be
approved or required by the Mayor and Council.
e. Provide such information and reports on the work of the department as may be
required by the Mayor and Council.
f. Exercise such other or different powers of administrative supervision and direction
as the Mayor and Council may delegate to him.
a. Borough Treasurer. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of
the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Treasurer, who shall serve for a term
of one year.
b. Powers and Duties of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have, perform and exercise
all of the functions, powers and duties as provided by general law and Borough
ordinances. He shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the Borough in accordance with the standards and requirements of
the Division of Local Government in the Department of the Treasury of the State of
New Jersey. He shall have custody of all public moneys of the Borough and shall
make monthly reports to the Mayor and Council of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unexpended appropriations. All moneys received from any
source by or on behalf of the Borough or any department, board, office or agency
thereof, except as otherwise provided by Borough ordinance, shall be paid to the
Treasurer who shall, by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them
in the authorized public depository of the Borough to the credit of the proper
account.
c. Disbursements. Disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall be made by
the Treasurer upon pre-audit and warrant of the Director of the Department of
Finance, approved by the Mayor and Council, except that payments from the
§ 2-8.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-9.2
2:9
§ 2-9A. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-9A.1. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. #89-1, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to create the position of Chief Financial Officer in
accordance with the requirements established under Chapter 110, Laws of N.J. 1988.
§ 2-9A.2. Creation of Position. [Ord. #89-1, § 2]
There is hereby established by the governing body of the Borough of Moonachie the
position of Chief Financial Officer who shall be under the general supervision of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Moonachie. Such officer shall be certified in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-9A.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #89-1, § 3]
The Chief Financial Officer shall have responsibility for the fiscal records of the
Borough of Moonachie as well as:
payroll account shall be made pursuant to paragraph d below. Every warrant shall
be in the form of a warrant-check payable to the order of the person entitled to
receive it, and shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account
or appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each warrant-check shall bear the
signatures of the Mayor or Council President, the Clerk and the Assistant Collector.
d. Payroll Account. There shall be an account to be designated the Borough of
Moonachie Payroll Account and the Borough Clerk, upon receipt of a warrant or an
amount due such payroll account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll
account, charging the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith. Disbursement
from the payroll account may be made by payroll checks signed by the Assistant
Collector and the Clerk upon pre-audit and warrant of the Director of the
Department of Finance and approval by the Mayor and Council of the entire
payroll. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll the Clerk shall, and it shall be
his duty to, make proper correction and appropriate record of such correction.
e. Travel Expenses. Itemized claims supported by receipts, where available, should be
presented in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred by local officials
were authorized to travel by the Borough. Travel expenses shall be reimbursed only
in accordance with the travel regulations of the Borough.
a. Advise and assist the Mayor and Council with respect to the development of fiscal
plans and forecasts for the Borough.
b. Provide financial assistance to all boards, commissions and departments of the
Borough.
c. Conduct continuous studies and collect data to serve as a basis for future financial
recommendations.
d. Prepare any and all Borough financial records necessary for the required year end
financial audit.
§ 2-9.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-9A.3
2:10
§ 2-10. TAX COLLECTOR. [1970 Code § 2-8.3]
The office of Tax Collector is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A.
§ 2-11. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-11.1. Office Established. [Ord. #82-3, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-8A.1]
The office of Tax Assessor is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1981
c. 393.
§ 2-11.2. Deputy Tax Assessors. [Ord. #82-3, § 3; 1970 Code § 2-8A.2]
The office of Deputy Tax Assessor is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of
P.L. 1981 c. 393. There shall be no more than three Deputy Tax Assessors appointed to
serve at any one time.
§ 2-11.3. Duties, Appointments, Qualifications. [Ord. #82-3, § 4; 1970 Code
§ 2-8A.3]
The term, duties, tenure, appointment and qualifications of the Tax Assessor and Deputy
Tax Assessors shall be in accordance with P.L. 1981 c. 393 and such other pertinent
statutes as may apply.
§ 2-11.4. Compensation. [Ord. #82-3, § 5; 1970 Code § 2-8A.4]
The compensation of the Tax Assessor and Deputy Tax Assessors shall be provided for
in the annual salary ordinance.1
§ 2-12. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-12.1. Superintendent of Public Works. [Ord. #222, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. #71-3, § 1;
Ord. #73-3; Ord. #75-7, §§ 1 and 2; Ord. #78-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-9.1]
There shall be a Superintendent of Public Works, a working foreman and such other
employees appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
e. Any and all other functions and duties assigned to such position by State law.
f. Any and all other duties which the Mayor and Council may from time to time
delegate to such position.
a. Any and all employees of the Department of Public Works shall comply with the
regulations of the Department of Civil Service of the State of New Jersey and rules
and regulations promulgated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
b. Qualifications. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be a person qualified by
education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office. The working
foreman shall, in the absence of the Superintendent, be in charge of the Department
of Public Works. He shall, under the direction of the Superintendent, supervise and
1. Editor's Note: A copy of the annual salary ordinance is available for examination in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-9A.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-12.1
2:11
§ 2-12.2. Duties of the Superintendent. [Ord. #222, § 2; Ord. #73-3; Ord. #75-7,
§§ 1 & 2; Ord. #78-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-9.2]
§ 2-12.3. Duties of the Department of Public Works. [Ord. #222, § 2; Ord. #73-3;
Ord. #75-7, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #78-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-9.3]
The Department of Public Works, through the Superintendent, shall take charge and
be responsible for the maintenance of all parks, sewers, cutting of brush, mowing of
grass, removal of snow, maintenance of pipes, valves and pumps in pump stations,
cleaning of ditches, maintenance of all Borough streets and roads, including the street
lighting system, the provision, operation and maintenance of facilities for the collection
and disposal of refuse and garbage at such times and in such manner as authorized by
work with a group of employees engaged in the construction, operation,
maintenance and repair of streets, sewer, water, sanitation and other public works
facilities; may be required to operate, check, service and make minor repairs to
trucks and other maintenance and construction equipment; does related work as
required.
c. Supervision. The Superintendent shall be under the direct supervision of the Mayor
and Council and the Chairman of the Public Works Committee.
a. Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all material and
supplies needed by the Department of Public Works.
b. Submit to the Chairman of the Public Works Committee a monthly report of the
activities of the department.
c. Submit to the Chairman of the Public Works Committee his recommendations for
budget appropriations for the ensuing year.
d. Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher chargeable
against the public works budget.
e. Inspect all sewer lines within the Borough.
f. Receive all complaints from residents and taxpayers of the Borough relating to the
operations under his jurisdiction, investigate same, take appropriate action.
g. Attend all Council meetings and meetings of the Public Works Committee when
directed by the Mayor and Council.
h. Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of any Borough owned equipment.
i. Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books, records, field notes, maps,
surveys and similar records necessary to perform the duties of his office and turn
over all such records to his successor on the termination of his employment by the
Borough.
j. Recommend to the appropriate committee chairman the need for any repair or
replacement to Borough owned equipment, structures, buildings or grounds.
k. Supervise the performance of the work of any personnel assigned to his jurisdiction.
§ 2-12.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-12.3
2:12
resolution of the Council, and the care of other public works in the Borough subject to
the orders and direction of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-12.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #222, § 2; Ord. #73-3; Ord. #75-7, §§ 1 &
2; Ord. #78-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-9.4]
The Mayor and Council shall by resolution make such rules and regulations necessary
for the proper regulation of the Department of Public Works and when same are adopted
by the Mayor and Council they shall be known as the rules and regulations for the
governing of the Department of Public Works and shall be binding on each member of
the Department.
§ 2-12.5. Reimbursement for DPW Services by Private Contractors. [Ord.
#2010-1, § 1]
§ 2-13. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-13.1. Composition. [Ord. #149, § 1; Ord. #70-8, Ord. #81-2, § 2, § 1; 1970 Code
§ 2-10-1; Ord. 85-16, § 1; Ord. #2006-8, § 1; Ord. #2013-9]
The Police Department of the Borough of Moonachie is established and shall consist of
a Chief of Police, one Lieutenant, five Sergeants and such other officers and such other
patrolmen, probationary officers, police matrons, traffic officers, school traffic, officers
and employees, as the Mayor and Council may appoint.
a. DPW Services. Members of the Department of Public Works shall be available for
services when called out for dangerous conditions as a result of the work of private
contractors only at such time as will not interfere with the efficient performance of
regularly scheduled or emergency duties for the Borough and with the approval of
the DPW Superintendent. When the DPW is called out by the Police to provide
barricades, plowing, salting or any other activity directly related to the health, safety
or welfare of the residents of the Borough of Moonachie, this fee shall be applied.
b. Payment. Private contractors shall pay to the Treasurer of the Borough of
Moonachie a certain amount in cash, check or money order as is set forth herein or
as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Borough of Moonachie as
compensation for such services.
1. Rate of Compensation to the Borough:
(a) The rate of compensation to the Borough for DPW wages shall be $90
per hour, including a vehicle, for the total time of their assignment,
including but not limited to any minimum hour call out guaranteed by
contract effective January 1, 2010.
(b) The rate of compensation to the Borough for administrative services (call
out, bill preparation) shall be $25 per hour.
(c) There shall be separate costs and fees charged to private contractors for
any and all equipment, supplies or materials expended by the DPW in
providing their services.
§ 2-12.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-13.1
2:13
There is hereby created with this section a Detective Bureau whose members shall
receive compensation as may be determined by resolution by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-13.2. Appointment. [Ord. #149, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-10.2]
All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the majority of the Council to hold office as provided by law.
§ 2-13.3. Control. [Ord. #149, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-10.3; Ord. #94-4]
The appropriate authority, as defined by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-188, shall be the Mayor and
Council, whose decision upon all matters affecting the Department shall be final. The
Mayor and Council may delegate certain powers to a committee thereof, or to the
Borough Administrator.
§ 2-13.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #149, § 12; 1970 Code § 2-10.4]
The Mayor and Council shall establish by resolution and may amend and repeal by
resolution, such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the government and
efficient working of the entire Department. Such rules and regulations, when adopted
by resolution of the Borough Council, shall be posted by the Chairman of the Police
Committee within five days after the adoption thereof in the room in the Municipal
Building assigned to the Police Department, and a copy thereof delivered to each and
every member of the Department within five days after the adoption of such rules or
regulations or any amendment or repeal thereof.
§ 2-13.5. Qualifications. [Ord. #149, §§ 7 — 9; Ord. #69-1; 1970 Code § 2-10.5]
Each applicant shall comply with all of the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining
thereto. No person shall be given or accept a permanent appointment as a police officer
in the Borough unless such person has first been given a probationary or temporary
appointment to such office for a period of not longer than one year, and has successfully
completed a police training course at a school approved and authorized by the Police
Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New
Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1959. Each candidate for
appointment to the Police Department shall be and is required to submit to such written
and oral examination as may be prescribed by the Civil Service Commission and also
to submit to a physical examination by a licensed practicing physician of the State of
New Jersey designated for such purpose; the character and scope of such examination
to be for the purpose of revealing the extent to which such applicant may be mentally,
physically, and otherwise qualified to perform his appropriate duties in the Department.
Such examinations shall be prepared and conducted at such times and places and by such
persons as the Mayor and Council may designate. Any applicant who shall fail to attain
a grade of 70 in such examination or who shall fail to meet the physical qualifications as
may be set up by the Police Committee or in the opinion of the examining physician be
incapable of performing the duties of a police officer in a safe and efficient manner shall
be ineligible for appointment to the Department.
The aforesaid examinations shall, where more than one candidate applies, be competitive
and appointments shall be made from among those who have successfully passed the
examination.
§ 2-13.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-13.5
2:14
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department as a regular or probationary
member unless he shall at the time of making application be between the age of 21 and
35 years, except as provided by law in the case of veterans.
No person shall be appointed as a member of the Police Department unless a citizen of
the United States and a resident of the Borough for not less than one year previous to
his appointment, unless at the time of appointment there shall be a vacancy in the Police
Department which cannot be filled by a qualified resident, which fact shall be established
by resolution duly adopted by the Council prior to the appointment. In such event, the
residence requirement shall be relaxed to provide that the person to be appointed be a
resident of New Jersey for at least one year and reside within the Boroughs of Little
Ferry, Wood-Ridge, Carlstadt, Hasbrouck Heights, Ridgefield Park or the Township of
South Hackensack for a period of one year.
An applicant before appointment and as a condition of appointment shall agree to
become a resident of the Borough within three years from the date of his appointment.
However, the three-year period may be extended by resolution of the Council for an
additional period which shall not exceed two years.
Upon the expiration of the three-year period, or any extension thereof, if the applicant
shall not have become a resident of the Borough, he shall cease his employment as a
member of the Police Department.
§ 2-13.6. Oath of Allegiance. [Ord. #149, § 11; 1970 Code § 2-10.6]
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the performance of
his duties, take and subscribe an oath to bear true faith and allegiance to the government
established in this State, to support the Constitution of the United States of America and
the State of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform all
the duties of his office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-13.7. Chief of Police. [Ord. #149, §§ 3, 6 & 7; Ord. #70-8; 1970 Code § 2-10.7]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department. In the temporary absence
or disability of the Chief of Police, the Mayor and Council shall appoint on a temporary
basis the member of the Department who will act in his place, and who shall be the
highest ranking officer of the Department, conferring on him the title of "Acting Chief,"
this title to be used only for the duration of the temporary appointment.
The control and discipline of the Police Department of the Borough and of its members
shall be vested in the Chief of Police and he shall have the power to enforce all the
rules and regulations herein provided and any general and special orders or instructions
which he may promulgate; provided such rules, regulations, general or special orders or
instructions do not conflict with the rules and regulations, orders or instructions issued
by resolution of the Mayor and Council or promulgated by the Police Committee. He
shall enforce these rules and regulations, orders or instructions, whether promulgated
by him or by the Police Committee or by the Mayor and Council, and may punish
their violation by reprimand. Should the Chief deem the violation to be of a sufficiently
flagrant nature, he shall report the same to the Police Committee with his
recommendations with reference to the filing of charges.
§ 2-13.5 ADMINISTRATION § 2-13.7
2:15
The Chief of Police, with the assistance of the other members of the Department who
shall be detailed for the purpose, shall keep a complete record as prescribed in the
rules and regulations adopted by the Mayor and Council, and the Chief of Police shall
report in writing to the Chairman of the Police Committee for presentation to the Mayor
and Council at their first regular meeting in each month on all matters of importance
pertaining to the Department and make such recommendations as in his opinion will
increase the efficiency of the Department.
The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Police Committee the purchase of new
equipment or the repair or rearrangement of such old equipment as will increase the
efficiency of the Department. He shall have full charge and control of all the apparatus
and equipment of the Department and its assignment and use, and shall be held
responsible for its care, cleanliness and safekeeping.
§ 2-13.8. Duties of Department. [Ord. #149, § 5; 1970 Code § 2-10.8]
The Police Department, through its Chief, shall:
§ 2-13.9. Hours of Employment. [1970 Code § 2-10.10; Ord. #94-4]
The hours of employment of uniformed members of the Police Department shall be as
prescribed in the Police Collective Bargaining Agreement. In the case of an emergency,
the officer, board or other official having charge or control of the Police Department or
the police system shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such
members during the period of emergency.
a. Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within the Borough,
suppress riots, mobs and insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous
assemblages, and preserve order at all elections and public meetings and
assemblages.
b. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control and restrict
the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the use of the streets by
vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and facilitate the convenience of
motorists and pedestrians, and to make and enforce rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for such purposes.
c. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other
public places of the Borough, inspect and observe all places of business amusement
or assemblage and all places of business requiring any State or municipal license or
permit and report thereon to the appropriate department.
d. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
e. Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the prosecution
and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses, and cooperate fully with the
law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of Federal, State and County
governments.
f. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police efficiency of the
members of the Department.
§ 2-13.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-13.10
2:16
§ 2-13.10. Probationary Appointment. [Ord. #149, § 10; 1970 Code § 2-10.11]
Each person hereafter appointed to the Department shall be known as probationary
patrolman and shall serve as a probationary patrolman for a period of one year from the
date of his appointment. The probationary period shall be divided into two six-month
periods, the first six-month period being known and designated as probationary period
"A", and the second six-month period as probationary period "B".
Each person appointed or promoted to a higher position shall likewise serve a
probationary period in such capacity for a period of one year from the date of his
appointment or promotion. The probationary period shall be divided into two six-month
periods, the first six-month period being known and designated as probationary period
"A", and the second six-month period as probationary period "B".
At the termination of the entire probationary period, and provided that the candidate or
person promoted satisfactorily meets all the requirements of the position to which he has
been appointed or promoted for the probationary period, the appointment or promotion
shall be final on the recommendation of the Police Committee and with the approval of
the majority of the members of the Council present and voting.
Should the candidate not meet the requirements of the position at the end of either
probationary period "A" or "B", his service as such will be terminated on the
recommendation of the Police Committee and with the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 2-13.11. Removal and Suspension. [Ord. #149, §§ 13 & 14; 1970 Code § 2-10.12]
Each regular police officer shall hold office and continue in employment during good
behavior and efficiency and no person shall be removed from office or employment for
any other causes than incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, non-residence, conduct
unbecoming a police officer, disobedience of the rules and regulations established and
hereafter to be established for the Department or absence from duty without just cause
for five days or more.
Any member of the Department may be suspended, removed, fined, or reduced from his
office or employment, for just cause upon due notice and service of written charges and
a hearing before the Mayor and Council of the Borough as provided by law.
§ 2-13.12. Uniforms. [Ord. #149, § 6; 1970 Code § 2-10.13]
All members of the Police Department shall provide and maintain in clean and
serviceable condition such wearing apparel and equipment as shall be prescribed by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 2-13.13. Firearms. [Ord. #149, § 6; 1970 Code § 2-10.14]
All firearms which may be provided by the Borough shall remain the property of the
Borough.
§ 2-13.14. Vacations. [Ord. #158, §§ 1 — 3; 1970 Code § 2-10.15; Ord. #94-4]
Vacations for all members of the Department, including the Chief of Police, shall be as
§ 2-13.10 ADMINISTRATION § 2-13.14
2:17
prescribed in the Police Collective Bargaining Agreement.
§ 2-13.15. Powers Reserved. [Ord. #94-4]
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the appointment by the appropriate authority
of committees or commissions to conduct investigations of the operation of the police
force and the delegation to such committees or commissions of such powers of inquiry
as the governing Mayor and Council deems necessary or to conduct such hearing or
investigation authorized by law. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the appropriate
authority or any executive or administrative officer charged with the general
administrative responsibilities within the municipality from examining at any time the
operations of the Police Department or the performance of any officer or member
thereof. Nothing herein contained shall infringe on or limit the power or duty of the
appropriate authority to act to provide for the health, safety or welfare of the
municipality in an emergency situation through special emergency directives.
§ 2-14. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-14.1. Creation. [Ord. #73-1, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-11.1]
The Fire Department of the Borough is hereby created and established with jurisdictional
boundaries co-extensive with the boundaries of the Borough. The Fire Department shall
be known as the Moonachie Fire Department.
§ 2-14.2. Composition of the Fire Department. [Ord. #20, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-11.2;
Ord. #92-19, § 1]
The Fire Department shall consist of one Chief, at least one but not more than two
Assistant Chiefs, at least one but not more than two Captains, at least one but not more
than two Lieutenants, the members of the Fire Committee of the Borough Council and
the companies.
The companies will consist of two hose companies, one hook and ladder company, one
chemical company and as many additional companies of any class as the Council may
deem necessary.
§ 2-14.3. Election of Officers. [Ord. #152, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-11.3; Ord. #92-19,
§ 1]
a. Election of the Chief. The Chief shall be elected for a term of one year, by ballot,
by the active members of the Fire Department who are in good standing, at an
annual election to be held on the first Thursday of the month of December each
year, and the Chief so elected shall take office on January 1, following the election.
The manner in which the election shall be held is as follows: Each fire company
shall have the right to file with the Borough Clerk, in writing, not more than 30
days, and not less than three days before the election shall take place, the name of
the nominee selected and endorsed by them. The Clerk shall cause the names of all
candidates nominated to be printed on a sufficient number of ballots. At the time of
the election, one of the ballots is to be furnished by the Clerk, on application, to
each member of the Fire Department who shall be entitled to vote.
§ 2-13.14 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-14.3
2:18
§ 2-14.4. Duties of Chief. [Ord. #20, §§ 4 & 5; 1970 Code § 2-11.4]
The Chief shall at all times have sole and absolute command, control and management
of the Fire Department, and all fire companies and fire apparatus. It shall be his duty to
direct the officers and men under his command and to see that fire apparatus is placed
in the most advantageous positions for the extinguishment of the fire. It shall be his
duty every month to examine the condition of the fire companies, fire apparatus, tools
and appliances and fire houses within the Borough, and submit a monthly report to
the Borough Council. He shall acknowledge receipt of all orders and report on their
execution at the first meeting of the Council following their receipt.
§ 2-14.5. Chain of Command. [Ord. #20, §§ 6 & 7; 1970 Code § 2-11.5]
In the absence of the Chief, the First or Second Assistant Chief, respectively, shall
perform all the duties of the Chief. In the absence of the Chief and both Assistant Chiefs,
the Mayor shall perform all the duties of the Chief, and in case of fire the officer in
command of the company which arrives first at the fire shall act as engineer until the
Chief, an Assistant Chief or the Mayor is present.
§ 2-14.6. Removal of Chief. [Ord. #20, § 8; 1970 Code § 2-11.6]
Failure to furnish monthly reports, to report the receipt and execution of orders, or
neglect of performance of duties necessary for the welfare and efficiency of the Fire
Department shall make the Chief liable to removal by order of the Council, after a
hearing. The vacancy created by such removal shall be filled by the Mayor, with the
consent of the Council, by the appointment as Chief of either of the Assistant Chiefs
or the foreman of any fire company who has served three years in the Department and
is in good standing. The appointee shall hold office for the unexpired term only and
shall make all appointments necessary to complete the membership of the Board of Fire
Officers.
§ 2-14.7. Board of Fire Officers. [Ord. #20, § 9; 1970 Code § 2-11.7]
The Board of Fire Officers shall meet once each month. It shall be the duty of the Board
to report its approval of the fitness of all newly-elected members of the Fire Department
b. Election of the Assistant Chief(s), Captain(s), and Lieutenant(s). These officers will
be elected for a term of one year, by ballot, by the active members of the Fire
Department who are in good standing at an annual election to be held at the
Department meeting in the month of December in each year and the officers so
elected shall take office on January 1, following the election.
The manner in which the election shall be held is as follows: Any member of the
Department in good standing shall have the right to nominate a member for office.
The nominations will be in the months of October and November preceding the
election. The Secretary of the Department shall cause the names of all candidates
nominated to be printed on a sufficient number of ballots. At the time of the
election, one of the ballots is to be furnished by the Department Secretary to each
member of the Department who shall be entitled to vote. A member who cannot
attend the meeting must obtain a ballot from the Secretary and return it to the
Secretary of the Department prior to the election.
§ 2-14.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-14.7
2:19
to the Council in writing. It shall report monthly in writing upon the existence of exits
in buildings that might prove dangerous or inadequate for the safe escape of persons
gathered therein in case of fire, and upon the existence in the Borough of any collection
or manufacture of material of inflammable character that might prove dangerous in case
of fire, in accordance with the fire prevention code of the Borough; and upon all other
matters which would tend to improve efficiency of the Department. It shall be the duty of
the Board to adjudicate all minor disputes in or among the various companies that may
be referred to it, but such adjudication shall always be subject to appeal to the Council.
It shall submit an annual written report to the Council on the efficiency and service
performed by the members of the Department, which report shall serve as a basis for
promotion or in determining the right to compensation or the right to participate in the
annual department election. It shall examine and approve the by-laws of the various fire
companies and report their approval to the Council. It shall supervise the maintenance
of accurate records by the secretary of each company concerning attendance, service
and performance of duty of every member of each company, so that the Board's annual
reports are based on accurate and complete information.
§ 2-14.8. Membership of the Board of Fire Officers. [Ord. #73-1, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 2-11.7A; Ord. #92-19, § 1]
The Board of Fire Officers shall consist of the members of the Fire Committee of the
Borough Council, the Fire Chief of the Moonachie Fire Department, his Assistant Chief
or Chiefs, Captain or Captains, Lieutenant or Lieutenants of the Department. There
shall be a Secretary appointed by the Board of Fire Officers from the rank and file
membership of the Moonachie Fire Department for a term of one year. The members of
the Fire Committee of the Borough Council shall have no vote, but may be heard on all
matters considered by the Board of Fire Officers.
§ 2-14.9. Organization of Fire Company. [Ord. #73-1, § 3; 1973 Code § 2-11.8]
The Council may at any time authorize the organization of a fire company of any class
upon the written application of 35 citizens of the Borough. Every company so organized
shall consist of not more than 35 active members, provided however, that nothing herein
shall prevent the Council from consolidating two or more companies in such a manner
and under such terms and conditions as the Council shall decide, and such consolidated
companies shall not consist of more than 35 active members each.
§ 2-14.10. Volunteer Fire Companies. [Ord. #22, §§ 1 — 4; 1970 Code § 2-11.9]
a. Acceptance Authorized. Any volunteer fire company of the Borough, which is fully
equipped for service and owns its fire apparatus, may be accepted as a fire company
of the Borough. The members thereof shall become members of the Fire
Department of the Borough upon written application to the Council for recognition
and admission to the Fire Department.
b. Application. The application shall state, in detail, the name of the fire company, the
date when the company was organized, the roll of the members arranged
alphabetically, together with the street address, age and date of election to
membership of each member and whether he is a citizen of the United States, a list
of officers of the company, a correct description of the apparatus, tools, implements
§ 2-14.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-14.10
2:20
§ 2-14.11. Exempt Firemen. [Ord. #48, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #73-1, § 4; 1970 Code
§ 2-11.10; Ord. #94-12]
and supplies owned or in the possession of the company and their condition, and
a description of all other property of the company. The application shall contain a
statement that each and every member of the company will, upon being admitted
to the Fire Department, agree to abide by and be subject to the rules, regulations
and provisions of this section and shall have attached thereto a copy of the by-laws
adopted by the company. The application shall be signed by every member of the
fire company.
c. Action on the Application. Upon receiving the application, the Council by
resolution may accept the fire company for recognition and admission as a fire
company of the Borough, and thereby constitute the members of the company as
members of the Fire Department of the Borough.
d. Effect of Recognition and Acceptance. Upon the recognition and acceptance of any
fire company by resolution of the Council, each and every member of the company
shall become a member of the Fire Department of the Borough and the company
shall be a regularly recognized company of the Department. The apparatus, tools,
implements and supplies of the fire company shall be subject to the control of the
Council, provided, however, that the turning over of such control shall not be
construed as a conveyance by such fire company of its rights and title to the
property, nor shall such control be construed to imply a right of the Council to order
the removal of the apparatus from the district where it is now located for the
purpose of locating the apparatus at some other fire station in the Borough, and
provided further that nothing herein shall be construed as an obligation on the part
of the Council to make any repairs, pay any sum of money, or incur any liability or
obligation of any kind in connection with the apparatus, tools, implements and
supplies.
a. Qualifications. Any member of any duly accepted fire company of the Borough
who has served seven years as an active member of the company or any other duly
accepted company of the Borough shall be entitled to exemption and to all the
rights, privileges and emolument of an exempt fireman of the Fire Department of
the Borough, provided the seven years service has been in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the company or companies of which he has been a member, and
the rules and regulations prescribed by the Mayor and Council in respect thereto.
The exemption shall be granted by the Mayor and Council irrespective of the fact
that the company or companies to which the member has belonged may not have
been accepted by the Borough for the entire period of seven years, so long as the
company, at the time the exemption is granted, has been duly accepted as a fire
company of the Borough.
b. Issuance of Certificate. Upon the granting by the Mayor and Council of the
exemption, there shall be issued to the exempt fireman a certificate of exemption
signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
c. Retirement. There shall be no mandatory retirement as an active member of the
Moonachie Fire Department.
§ 2-14.10 ADMINISTRATION § 2-14.11
2:21
§ 2-14.12. Membership Qualifications. [Ord. #73-1, § 5; Ord. #74-4, § 1; Ord.
#81-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-11.11; Ord. #92-19, § 1]
To become a member of the Moonachie Fire Department or any unit thereof, a candidate
shall be over 18 years of age, a citizen of the United States and a resident of the Borough
for more than six months. His election shall be approved by the Board of Fire Officers
and the Borough Council. The requirements herein may be waived by the enactment of
an appropriate resolution by the Mayor and Council upon good cause being shown.
An applicant for membership in the Moonachie Fire Department must agree to any and
all reasonable Police and motor vehicle reviews of the said applicant's history on such
forms as shall be promulgated by the appropriate authorities.
§ 2-14.13. Medical and Dental Certificates Required. [Ord. #77, § 3; 1970 Code
§ 2-11.12; Ord. #92-19, § 1]
An applicant for membership in the Moonachie Fire Department must present a
certificate from a licensed practicing physician indicating that the applicant is in good
physical and mental condition and must also present a certificate from a practicing dental
surgeon to the effect that careful examination has been made of the applicant's mouth,
gums and teeth and that they are free from disease.
§ 2-14.14. Approval of Election; Certificate. [Ord. #77, § 3; 1970 Code § 2-11.13]
Upon the election of a member by any fire company organized or recognized under this
section, the secretary of the company shall present the name of the elected member to
the Board of Fire Officers at the first meeting of the Board following the election, and if
the election is approved by the Board, the secretary of the Board shall forward the name
of the member to the Council at the first meeting following approval by the Board, and
if the name of the member so elected is approved by the Council, it shall be entered by
the Clerk in a book to be kept for that purpose and to be known as the Register of the
Fire Department, which book shall contain a full and correct copy of this section as well
as the names of all of the members of the Fire Department, the date of their admission
and their place of residence. Upon approval by the Council, a certificate shall be issued
to the member, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk, certifying that the person
therein named is a duly qualified fireman of the company named of the Borough.
§ 2-14.15. Attendance at Fires and Drills. [Ord. #77, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-11.14;
Ord. #94-12]
Every active member of the Moonachie Fire Department shall, in each and every year,
perform at least 60% of duty, and every active life member shall perform at least 40% of
When any member of the Moonachie Fire Department shall have served as an
active member in any fire company for not less than 20 years, said member
may, on application therefor, become and continue to be an inactive member. The
company limitation of 35 refers to active members and there can be as many
inactive members as shall be entitled to such status as herein provided. Inactive
members shall receive an annual clothing allowance of $250. No such member shall
be required to perform any firematic duties. No such member shall vote for any
officers or hold any office in the Moonachie Fire Department.
§ 2-14.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-14.15
2:22
duty, such being composed of answering fire alarms, actual attendance and duty at fires,
drills and special duties as set by the Chief. The number of drills shall not exceed 20 in
any year.
§ 2-14.16. Leave of Absence. [Ord. #20, § 13; 1970 Code § 2-11.15]
In case any member of the Fire Department shall move from the Borough and not return
within three months, he shall cease to be a member and shall forfeit all rights as a
member, provided that the Council at any regular meeting, upon written application, may
grant to any member of the Fire Department a leave of absence for such period or periods
during any year as it may deem appropriate; and provided also that the total grant or
leave of absence to any member shall not exceed three months in any year, except by
special permission of the Council. All furlough time granted shall be served to complete
the seven years service required by the statutes of the State of New Jersey to entitle any
fireman to a certificate as an exempt fireman.
§ 2-14.17. Government of Fire Company. [Ord. #20, § 14; 1970 Code § 2-11.16]
The government and management of every fire company shall be according to the
constitution, by-laws and rules which may be adopted by the company, and approved
by the Board of Fire Officers, provided the same shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this section and such rules and regulations for the organization and
efficiency of the Fire Department which may be adopted by the Council.
§ 2-14.18. Use of Equipment. [Ord. #20, § 15; 1970 Code § 2-11.17]
No fire engine, hook and ladder truck, hose cart, fire carriage or chemical wagon shall
at any time during the existence of any fire in the Borough, or alarm of fire, be taken
out of any fire house unless at least one member of the company is present and consents
thereto.
§ 2-14.19. Removal of Equipment from Borough. [Ord. #20, § 16; 1970 Code
§ 2-11.18]
No fire company admitted or organized under this section may take the apparatus in its
charge to attend fires outside of the Borough upon a call for their services, without orders
of the Chief or an Assistant Chief, or the Mayor, provided at least two firemen belonging
to the company shall be present and consent thereto.
§ 2-14.20. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #20, § 1970 Code § 2-11.19]
The officers and members of the Fire Department shall at all times be subject to and
under the control of such rules and regulations as the Council may adopt.
§ 2-14.21. Compensation. [Ord. #20, §§ 18 — 20; 1970 Code § 2-11-20; Ord.
#94-12]
a. Established. Every active member of the Moonachie Fire Department who shall
perform at least 60% of fire duty, and every active life member who shall perform
at least 40% of duty, to include what is set forth in subsection 2-14.15, shall be paid
a clothing allowance as determined by the Board of Fire Officers in the manner
§ 2-14.15 ADMINISTRATION § 2-14.21
2:23
§ 2-14A. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP) — FIRE
DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-14A.1. Length of Service Awards Program Created. [Ord. #00-6, § 1]
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in accordance
with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of the Moonachie Fire
Department for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the Borough
of Moonachie.
§ 2-14A.2. Administration of Plan; Contributions to Plan. [Ord. #00-6, § 2]
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income account
for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below; that such contributions
shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Borough of
Moonachie pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.388; and that such plan shall be administered in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code,
and this section.2
hereinafter provided. Any member who is prevented from such performance of duty
by sickness or absence from the Borough, shall be paid a clothing allowance as
determined by the Board of Fire Officers, in a manner hereinafter provided. All
such amounts are subject to approval and appropriation of monies by the Mayor and
Council.
b. Certified Report Required. On or before November 1, in each year, the Board of
Fire Officers shall submit to the Council a report in writing, stating the percentage
of service rendered by each fireman during the year ending on October 1 last past,
the names of those who were prevented from active duty by reason of illness or
actual or necessary absence from the Borough, the duration of the illness or cause
of such absence, that the board has investigated such illness and the cause of such
absence, that after investigation it finds such illness or absence to have been for
reasonable and proper cause, and that the fireman is or is not entitled to be paid the
yearly compensation, and the amount due each member. The report shall be
certified under the hands of the members of the Board of Fire Officers, or a majority
of them, and sworn to by the Chief of the Department (or Assistant Chief in case of
the absence of the Chief) and thereupon the Council at a subsequent regular meeting
shall cause warrants to be issued for the payment of the amount due to each fireman,
in accordance with the report. Any fireman feeling himself aggrieved by the report
may appeal to the Council and the appeal shall be heard by the Council after giving
the Board of Fire Officers and the appealing member at least three days' notice of
the time and place of the hearing.
c. Prorata Share. Any member of the Department serving less than one year shall be
paid a prorata share of the compensation for the period of his service. A new
member shall be paid from the time of his admission, and a returning member shall
be paid for his service up to the time of his resignation or the severance of his
relation with the Fire Department, provided he should have performed 60% of the
fire duty during the time he is connected with the Department.
§ 2-14.21 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-14A.3
2:24
§ 2-14A.3. Criteria for Contributions. [Ord. #00-6, § 3; Ord. #2002-4, § 1; Ord.
#2006-5, § 1]
N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.9, allows the maximum contribution of the sponsoring agency may
be increased from the amount previously approved by referendum by the voters of the
Borough of Moonachie. The amount of $1,150 may be increased by Cost of Living
Adjustment for each year beginning with 2007 prospectively subject to Mayor and
Council approval.
§ 2-14A.4. Cost of Program. [Ord. #00-6, § 4]
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
For regular annual service: $28,750 per year.
§ 2-14A.5. Point Schedule for Volunteer Service. [Ord. #00-6, § 5]
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer services
provided to the Moonachie Fire Department in accordance with the schedule set forth
hereinabove in subsection 2-14A.3.
§ 2-14B. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM — VOLUNTEER
FIRST AID AND RESCUE SQUAD.3
§ 2-14B.1. Program Created. [Ord. #2006-6, § 1]
A Length of Service Award Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in accordance with
Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of the volunteer First Aid and
Rescue Squad for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the residents of Borough
of Moonachie.
§ 2-14B.2. Administration of Program; Contributions. [Ord. #2006-6, § 2]
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income account
for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below; that such contributions
shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Borough of
Moonachie pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code,
and this section.
§ 2-14B.3. Criteria for Contributions. [Ord. #2006-6, § 3]
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contribution to each eligible member that meets the
criteria as follows:
LOSAP POINT SCHEDULE
General Provisions:
2. The LOSAP Point Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
3. Editor's Note: Approved at the election of November 5, 2006.
§ 2-14A.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-14B.3
2:25
a. Earning 100 points will award an eligible year of service.
b. Member is vested after five qualifying years.
c. A minimum four points per calendar year each must be earned from fundraising and
recruitment. The remaining points must be earned in a minimum of three other
categories as listed below.
Categories:
1. Training Courses — 20 point maximum.
One point per training hour attended (No points accrue for traveling hours or
overnight stay hours)
This includes, but is not limited to, Squad-sanctioned activities, such as:
(a) Gold Cross CEU's
(b) In house training
(c) Hands on practice
(d) Training located off squad premises
(e) Video, computer, or other technical training
2. Drills - 10 point maximum
One point per drill minimum of two hour drill; any drill over two hours, add
one point per additional hour attended. This includes, but is not limited to
Squad-sanctioned activities, such as:
(a) County drills.
(b) Rescue drills.
(c) Driver Training courses.
(d) Airport drills.
3. Duty Period — 20 point maximum.
(a) One point per six hour duty period, as defined in squad by-laws.
(b) Two points per 12 hours duty period, regardless of number of calls
answered.
(c) Members with 30 years of service, or those disabled, shall be exempt
from this category, but shall remain eligible for LOSAP, provided that the
required points are earned in another category.
Duty Period Requirement.
One point per duty period. One point per second call answered outside of
duty period. Two points awarded for a full 2nd rig duty period, regardless
§ 2-14B.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-14B.3
2:26
§ 2-14B.4. Annual Contributions. [Ord. #2006-6, § 4]
The annual contribution for each year of current, and future service to eligible active
volunteers of the Moonachie First Aid and Rescue Squad shall be $1,150, with the
annual COLA increase beginning 2007. While the maximum amount is set by statute,
it is subject to periodic increases that are tied to the consumer price index (CPI). The
permitted maximum amount may be issued annually, subject to Mayor and Council
approval according to the emergency services volunteer length of service award program
number of calls answered. Maximum 20 points per year.
Members are required to be available for their duty period as defined in
the Moonachie First Aid and Rescue Squad by-laws.
Members shall not receive credit for any duty period that someone else
covers on their behalf.
Members must complete all tasks required in the squad by-laws while on
duty to receive credit.
Members must be willing, ready, and able to perform duty period.
Members with 30 years of service, or those disabled, shall be exempt
from this requirement, but shall remain eligible for LOSAP benefits,
provided that the required points are earned in other categories.
4. Elected and appointed positions - 20 points maximum
(a) Five points awarded for every three full months served.
5. Attendance at meetings — 20 points maximum.
(a) One point per squad sanctioned meeting attended.
6. Fundraising and Recruitment — maximum 20 points, one point per hour.
(a) Minimum four points must be earned in fundraising.
(b) Minimum four points must be earned in recruitment.
7. Miscellaneous squad sanctioned activities — 20 points maximum.
(a) One point per hour, up to eight points per activity per day.
8. Service time, not continuous riding time:
(a) One point awarded per year of service, includes all past years served.
Maximum 30 points.
9. Actual Calls answered — 30 points maximum
(a) Ten points for 200 + calls.
(b) 20 points for 400 + calls.
(c) 30 points for 600 + calls.
§ 2-14B.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-14B.4
2:27
act. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185(f) and N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.9).
This program shall not provide for contributions for prior years service.
§ 2-14B.5. Cost of Program. [Ord. #2006-6, § 5]
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 2-14B.6. Manner of Accruing Points. [Ord. #2006-6, § 6]
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer service
provided to the volunteer First Aid and Rescue Squad in accordance with the schedule
set forth hereinabove in subsection 2-14B.3.
§ 2-15. DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS AND
INSPECTIONS.
§ 2-15.1. Division of Buildings and Grounds. [1970 Code § 2-12.1]
Within the Department of Buildings and Grounds and Inspections, the working foreman
shall supervise the maintenance of all Borough recreation areas, buildings and grounds,
and all Borough-owned property, including streets, lawns and shrubs.
§ 2-15.2. Division of Inspections. [1970 Code § 2-12.2; Ord. #90-4]
Within the Department of Buildings and Grounds and Inspections, there shall be a
Division of Inspections, the head of which shall be the Construction Official. The
Construction Official shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council, to serve for a term of one year. Prior to his appointment he shall be qualified
by training and experience in the duties of Construction Official.
§ 2-15.3. Duties of Construction Official. [1970 Code § 2-12.3; Ord. #90-4]
The Construction Official shall serve as the Zoning Officer and shall issue Certificates
of Occupancy. The Construction Official shall:
§ 2-16. FIRE PROTECTION, FIRST AID AND RESCUE SQUAD SERVICES.
a. For regular annual service: $46,000 per year.
a. Enforce the building code and have all the powers, functions and duties prescribed
by general law and ordinance for Construction Official.
b. Keep a record of his proceedings, a permit book and complaint book, all of which
shall be subject to inspection. He shall report regularly to the Mayor and Council,
at their direction, the number of permits issued, the estimated cost of such work and
the fees received and paid by him to the Treasurer.
c. Work such hours and be present daily at the Municipal Building at such times as
designated by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-14B.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-16.1
2:28
§ 2-16.1. Support of Mayor and Council. [Ord. #2011-5]
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Moonachie is the Governing Body which
supports and promotes the organizations within the Borough that provides fire
protection, first aid and rescue squad services to the taxpayers and residents of the
Borough of Moonachie.
§ 2-16.2. Safety. [Ord. #2011-5]
There is a legal and moral responsibility to provide fire protection, first aid and rescue
squad services in a safe and effective manner for the benefit of both volunteers and
residents.
§ 2-16.3. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #2011-5]
a. There exists a pressing need to promulgate rules, regulations, procedures and
policies to effectively and safely provide these emergency services, and therefore:
1. No one under the age of 21 is permitted to drive any emergency vehicle of the
Fire Department, First Aid and Rescue Squad.
2. All drivers must successfully attend and pass a CEVO (defensive driving)
course by January 1, 2012 before they can operate an emergency vehicle.
3. Emergency vehicles are not permitted to be used for non-emergency calls
without an officer's permission except for fuel or maintenance.
4. All personnel shall wear seatbelts at all time unless patient care is
compromised or otherwise necessary or patient care.
5. All emergency vehicles shall come to a complete stop at all traffic lights, stop
signs, and railroad crossings without exception.
6. The operator and officer shall be responsible for obeying all traffic laws and
the safety consideration of all passengers including maintain posted speed
limits and rights-of-way.
7. Lights and sirens shall not be permitted unless engaged in an emergency call
or response and in that event both must be used simultaneously.
8. All emergency vehicles shall maintain communications with the police
dispatcher in order to provide and share location and logistical information.
9. At no time shall any driver operate any emergency vehicle under the influence
of alcohol or drugs.
10. The Organization's Policies and Procedures shall be updated and codified and
brought to the current standards and reviewed on a regular basis. From the
Policies and Procedures Manual, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will
be derived and distributed to the members to ensure consistent adherence.
11. The Borough's Policies and Procedures Manual shall be adopted in its entirety
and adhered to the extent applicable as volunteer emergency service
organizations.
§ 2-16.1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-17
2:29
§ 2-17. through § 2-18. (RESERVED)
§ 2-19. BOROUGH ATTORNEY.
§ 2-19.1. Appointment. [1970 Code § 2-13.1]
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council for a term of one year. He shall be an attorney-at-law of New Jersey but need
not be a resident of the Borough. In lieu of appointing an individual attorney, Council
may appoint a firm of attorneys, all members of which shall be attorneys-at-law of New
Jersey. The attorney shall not receive a fixed salary but shall be paid such retainer as
may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council, plus such fees and charges as shall
be deemed reasonable.
§ 2-19.2. Powers and Duties. [1970 Code § 2-13.2]
The attorney shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided for the
office of Borough Attorney by general law or ordinances of the Borough. He shall
represent the Borough in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which it or any
of its officers or agencies may be a party or have an interest. He shall give all legal
counsel and advice where required by the Mayor and Council, or any member thereof,
and shall in general serve as the legal advisor to the Mayor and Council on all matters
of Borough business. In furtherance of such general powers and duties, but without
limitation thereto, the Borough Attorney shall:
§ 2-20. BOROUGH PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-20.1. Position Established. [Ord. #79-16, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-26.1]
There is hereby established the position of Prosecutor in the Borough.
a. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents, contracts, deeds,
ordinances and resolutions made, executed or adopted by or on behalf of the
Borough.
b. With the approval of the Mayor and Council, conduct appeals from orders,
decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the Borough as he may in his
discretion determine to be necessary or desirable or as directed by the Mayor and
Council.
c. Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any agreement,
compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the Borough is involved.
d. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him by the Mayor
and Council, or any member thereof, with respect to their official powers and
duties, and perform such duties as may be necessary to provide legal counsel to the
Mayor and Council in the administration of municipal affairs.
e. Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and technical and
professional assistants as the Council may authorize for special or regular
employment in or for the Borough.
§ 2-17 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-20.2
2:30
§ 2-20.2. Appointment; Duties. [Ord. #79-16, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-26.2]
The Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council and shall prosecute
offenses in the Municipal Court. He shall perform other duties assigned to him by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 2-20.3. Compensation. [Ord. #79-16, § 3; 1970 Code § 2-26.3]
The Prosecutor shall be paid for his services by vouchers submitted and approved by the
Mayor.
§ 2-21. BOROUGH ENGINEER.
§ 2-21.1. Appointment; Term. [1970 Code § 2-14.1]
There shall be a Borough Engineer who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council
for a term of one year. In lieu of appointing an individual, the Mayor and Council may
appoint a firm of engineers, each member of which shall be a licensed civil engineer of
the State of New Jersey. The Borough Engineer shall receive such compensation as may
be agreed upon and determined by the Council. He shall be a duly licensed civil engineer
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-21.2. Duties. [1970 Code § 2-14.2]
The Borough Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by general law and
ordinance, and in addition shall:
§ 2-22. BOROUGH PHYSICIAN.
§ 2-22.1. Establishment. [Ord. #190, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-15.1]
The position of Borough Physician is hereby established.
a. Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, designs and specifications for public works
and improvements undertaken by the Borough, either on force account or by public
contract.
b. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control records with
respect to public works and facilities owned or operated by the Borough.
c. Operate, maintain and repair the Borough storm sewer system.
d. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other Borough
departments as needed.
e. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the
administration of engineering duties of the Borough Engineer shall be and remain
the property of the Borough. Upon the termination of his service with the Borough,
the Borough Engineer shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such property.
§ 2-20.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-22.2
2:31
§ 2-22.2. Appointment. [1970 Code § 2-15.2]
The Borough Physician shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council for a term of one year. He shall be a licensed physician of the State of New
Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough.
§ 2-22.3. Power and Duties. [Ord. #190, §§ 2 — 4; 1970 Code § 2-15.3]
The Borough Physician shall examine persons charged with drunken driving. The
Borough Physician shall examine or cause to be examined any employee of the Borough
who reports sickness or disability which may incapacitate such employee for
employment with the Borough. The Borough Physician shall perform such other duties
and shall keep such records as prescribed by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-22.4. Fees. [Ord. #190, § 5; 1970 Code § 2-15.4]
The Borough Physician shall receive such fees for services as shall be designated by
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-23. through § 2-26. (RESERVED)
§ 2-27. MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-27.1. Fee for Application for Representation. [Ord. #98-5, § 1]
A person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender or Court approved
counsel shall be required to pay an application fee of not more than $200 but only in an
amount necessary to pay the costs of Municipal Public Defender services. In accordance
with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court, the Municipal Court may waive
any required application fee, in whole or in part, only if the Court determines, in its
discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal
Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific period of time not
to exceed four months.
§ 2-27.2. Use of Funds. [Ord. #98-5, § 2]
Funds collected pursuant to subsection 2-27.1 of this section shall be deposited in a
dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality. Such
fund shall be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a
Municipal Public Defender including, when required, expert and lay investigation and
testimony.
§ 2-28. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-28.1. Established; Powers. [Ord. #112, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-16.1]
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Borough pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
264 of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented, to be known as the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Moonachie, Bergen County. The Municipal Court
shall have a seal bearing the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held
§ 2-22.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-28.1
2:32
in the Borough Hall or such other place as the Council shall designate and shall exercise
all of the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred upon municipal courts
by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented, or any other law.
§ 2-28.2. Municipal Judge; Powers and Duties. [Ord. #112, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 2-16.2]
There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. The Municipal Judge shall serve for a term of
three years from the date of appointment and until a successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications, and shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and jurisdiction conferred by Chapter 264
of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented, or by general law or
ordinance.
§ 2-28.3. Municipal Court Clerk. [1970 Code § 2-16.3]
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council and who shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him
by law, the rules applicable to municipal courts, and by the Municipal Judge. His duties
shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 2-29. LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD.
§ 2-29.1. Local Assistance Boards; Membership; Appointment; Compensation.
[Ord. #90-7, § 1]
There shall be a local assistance board composed of five persons. One of the five persons
shall be a woman and all of said members shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the
approval of the Governing Body and shall serve without compensation but shall be
a. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to the operation
of the court.
b. Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving complaints and
dispensing information relating to court matters.
c. Maintaining the financial records of the court.
d. Attending court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the docket;
arranging trial calendars; signing court documents; preparing and issuing warrants
and commitments.
e. Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency and equity;
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
f. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if there is a
basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue summonses requiring court
appearances in this regard; maintaining and classifying records and files.
§ 2-28.1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-29.1
2:33
allowed their necessary and actual expenses.
§ 2-29.2. Terms of Members of Local Assistance Boards; Vacancies. [Ord. #90-7,
§ 1]
The term of one member shall be for one year and such member only may be appointed
from among the membership of the Governing Body of the Municipality and the terms
of the other members thereof shall be as follows:
§ 2-29.3. Organization of Local Assistance Boards; Director of Welfare;
Employees. [Ord. #90-7, § 1]
§ 2-29.4. Duties of Director of Welfare. [Ord. #90-7, § 1]
The Director of Welfare shall perform the following duties:
a. The terms of the remaining members shall be for four years each, one term expiring
each year.
b. The term of each member of a local assistance board shall begin on the first day of
January, and each member shall continue in office until his successor shall be
appointed and shall qualify.
c. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms only.
a. The Local Assistance Board shall organize and select a chairman and a secretary
and shall appoint a director of welfare who shall be the first Executive and
Administrative Officer of the Board. The Director shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date of his appointment and shall be paid such salary as may be
fixed by such board subject to approval by the Governing Body. Nothing herein
shall be construed to make the overseer of the poor of a municipality ineligible for
appointment also as director of welfare by such local assistance board.
b. In case of vacancy in the Office of Director of Welfare, one temporary or acting
director may be appointed to serve for not more than 90 days.
c. Other employees, including assistants, clerks, investigators and nurses, in such
number as may be necessary to properly administer public assistance, shall be
appointed in the same manner as other employees.
d. No employees of the Welfare Department whose compensation is paid from funds
received or appropriated for public assistance or the administration thereof in any
manner shall hold any office in any political party.
a. Supervise by periodic investigation every person receiving public assistance, such
investigation to be made by visitation at least once a month.
b. Reconsider from month to month the amount and nature of public assistance given
and alter, amend or suspend the same when the circumstances so require.
c. Devise ways and means for bringing persons unable to maintain themselves to selfsupport
or to the support of any other person or agency able and willing so to do.
§ 2-29.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-29.4
2:34
§ 2-30. BOARD OF HEALTH.4
§ 2-30.1. Established. [Ord. #11, §§ 1 — 3; 1970 Code § 2-20.1]
There shall be a Board of Health in the Borough consisting of five members appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Members shall be appointed
for a term of three years, except that of the members first appointed, one shall hold office
for one year, two for two years and two for three years. Appointments to fill vacancies
shall be made in the same manner as original appointments and all such appointments
shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-30.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #11, §§ 4 — 6; 1970 Code § 2-20.2]
The Board of Health shall have the power and authority to adopt ordinances relating to
the protection of the health of Borough residents, shall employ necessary personnel and
fix their salaries, and shall have under its jurisdiction the Bureau of Vital Statistics, the
Health Officer and such other employees as are necessary to carry out its duties. The
Board of Health shall have all of the jurisdiction conferred upon boards of health by Title
26 of the Revised Statutes.
§ 2-31. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL. [1970 Code § 2-21]
There shall be an Emergency Management Council pursuant to Chapter 438 of the
1956 Laws of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41 and a Director thereof. The Police
Department and all departments of the Borough government shall cooperate with and
assist the Council as required.
§ 2-32. HACKENSACK MEADOWLANDS DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-32.1. Findings of Fact. [1970 Code § 2-22.1]
The Council finds that there has existed for not less than 10 years in the Borough
unimproved vacant land, commonly called "meadowlands", which by reason of its
topography and the nature of its soil, is not likely to be developed through the
instrumentality of private capital, and thus produces insufficient income to enable the
owners thereof to pay reasonable taxes to be assessed thereon and is not productive for
either residential, commercial or manufacturing use. These areas should be developed
for the improvement of the Borough, and it is in the public interest that work on
projects for such purposes be commenced as soon as possible. The conditions described
d. Keep full and complete records of such investigation, supervision, assistance and
rehabilitation, and of all certifications of persons for employment or benefits and
cancellations thereof, in such manner and form as required by the Commissioner.
e. Bring about appropriate action for commitment to any State or County institution
when the best interests of the needy persons would be so served.
f. Act in accordance with the dictates of N.J.S.A. 44:8-119 through 127 and any other
applicable Governmental mandates.
4. Editor's Note: For appointment of alternate members see Appendix A at the rear of the Code.
§ 2-29.4 ADMINISTRATION § 2-32.1
2:35
herein have existed in other municipalities on the account of the presence therein
of meadowlands. Development of the meadowlands within the Borough can be best
facilitated in connection with a comprehensive development plan embracing some or all
of the municipalities containing meadowlands.
§ 2-32.2. Creation. [1970 Code § 2-22.2; Ord. #90-4]
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 306 of New Jersey Sessions Laws of 1949,
N.J.S.A. 40:55C1 et seq., which authorizes the creation of the Hackensack Meadowlands
Development Commission, the Borough and the other municipalities passing similar
ordinances do agree that there shall be created and they do hereby create a public
body corporate and politic to be known as the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission.
§ 2-32.3. Municipal Instrumentality. [1970 Code § 2-22.3]
The Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission shall constitute an
instrumentality of the Borough and of any other Municipality creating by a similar
ordinance the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission.
§ 2-32.4. Cooperation with Department of Conservation and Economic
Development. [1970 Code § 2-22.4]
The Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission shall cooperate with the
Department of Conservation and Economic Development of the State of New Jersey, a
public body as contemplated in Chapter 306 of the New Jersey Sessions Laws of 1949.
§ 2-32.5. Appointment of Members. [1970 Code § 2-22.5]
There shall be two members of the authority appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council, to serve for three-year terms as the Borough representatives
on the authority.
§ 2-33. HOUSING AUTHORITY OF BERGEN COUNTY.
§ 2-33.1. Borough Participation. [Ord. #76-8, § 1; 1970 Code § 2-27.1]
The Borough desires to participate in the area of operations of the Housing Authority of
Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and
Council for the purpose of alleviating the shortage of safe and sanitary housing for lowincome
senior citizens.
§ 2-33.2. Borough Inclusion in Area of Operation. [Ord. #76-8, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 2-27.2]
The Borough does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of operation of the Housing
Authority of Bergen County.
§ 2-33.3. Clerk File Certified Copy. [Ord. #76-8, § 3; 1970 Code § 2-27.3]
The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this section with
§ 2-32.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-33.3
2:36
the Commissioner of the State Department of Conservation and Economic Development
and with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 2-34. through § 2-38. (RESERVED)
§ 2-39. INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS.
§ 2-39.1. Community Development Block Grant Program. [Ord. #75-1; Ord.
#75-3; Ord. #76-6; Ord. #77-6; Ord. #78-6; Ord. #79-15; Ord. #80-9; Ord. #81-11;
Ord. #84-10; Ord. #87-24; 1970 Code § 2-23; Ord. #90-16; Ord. #93-4]
§ 2-39.2. Police Services.
a. Findings. Certain Federal funds are potentially available to the County of Bergen
under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended
and commonly known as the Community Development Block Grant.
It is necessary to supersede an existing interlocal services cooperative agreement
for the County and its people to benefit from this program.
An agreement has been proposed under which the Municipality of the Borough of
Moonachie and the County of Bergen in cooperation with other municipalities will
modify an interlocal services program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.
It is in the best interest of the Municipality to enter into such an agreement.
b. Authorization and Participation. The Mayor and Council of the Borough ordain that
the agreement entitled "Three Year" Cooperative Agreement: "An Agreement
Superseding the Cooperative Agreement dated May 1975 and amendments thereto
for the Purpose of Inserting a Description of Activities for the Twentieth Year (July
1, 1994 - June 30, 1997) Urban County Community Development Block Grant
Program", to clarify the planning and implementation procedures, and to enable the
Municipality to make a three year irrevocable commitment to participate in the
Community Development Program for the Program Years 1994, 1995 and 1996
(July 1, 1994 - June 30, 1997) be executed by the Mayor and Municipal Clerk in
accordance with the provisions of law.
a. Preamble. The Borough of Moonachie seeks to continue and enhance the provision
of cost effective police services. The Boroughs of Teterboro and the Borough of
Little Ferry have indicated their desire to enter into an Interlocal Services
Agreement for the provision of police services to the Borough of Teterboro,
substantially upon the terms and conditions of the attached agreement.
N.J.S.A. 40:81-1 et seq., as amended, the Interlocal Services Act, specifically
authorizes two or more municipalities to enter in a contract for the joint provision
of police and other municipal services.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Moonachie have determined that the
execution of the attached Interlocal Services Agreement is in the best interest of
the Borough of Moonachie and is likely to enhance the provision of cost effective
police services.
§ 2-33.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-39.2
2:37
§ 2-39.3. Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Coordinators. [Ord.
#96-9, §§ I — III]
b. Title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the "Interlocal Service
Ordinance for Police Services" of the Borough of Moonachie.
c. Authorization to Enter Agreement. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the
Borough of Moonachie is authorized to enter into an agreement with one or more
other municipalities for the provision of police services.
d. Execution of Agreement. The Mayor of the Borough of Moonachie is authorized to
execute an agreement with the Borough of Teterboro or additionally with the
Borough of Little Ferry for the provision of police services to the Borough of
Teterboro, substantially upon the terms and conditions set forth in the attached
agreement, subject to such amendments as shall be approved by the respective
Borough's Attorney.
a. Preamble. The Borough of Teterboro is in need of the services of a Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator under the statutes
made and provided.
The Borough of Moonachie and the Borough of Little Ferry have indicated their
desire to enter into an Interlocal Services Agreement for the provision of such
services, substantially upon the terms and conditions of the attached agreement.5
N.J.S.A. 40:8a-1 et seq. as amended, the Interlocal Services Act, specifically
authorizes two or more municipalities to enter into contracts for the joint provision
of municipal services.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Moonachie have determined that the
execution of the attached Interlocal Services Agreement6 is in the best interests of
the Borough of Teterboro and is intended to fulfill the lawful responsibilities of
Teterboro with respect to the provision of Emergency Management Coordinator
services under applicable law.
b. Title. The subsection shall be known and may be cited as "The Interlocal Service
Ordinance for Emergency Management Coordinator Services and for Deputy
Coordinator between the Borough of Teterboro, the Borough of Moonachie and
Borough of Little Ferry".
c. Authorization to Enter Agreement. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, et seq. the
Borough of Moonachie is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Boroughs
of Teterboro and/or the Borough of Little Ferry for the provision of such
Emergency Management Coordinator Services.
d. Execution of Agreement. The Mayor of the Borough of Moonachie is hereby
authorized to execute an agreement with the Borough of Teterboro and/or
additionally the Borough of Little Ferry for the provision of such services to the
Borough of Teterboro, substantially upon the terms and conditions set forth in the
5. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
6. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-39.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-39.3
2:38
§ 2-40. CONTRACT WITH BERGEN COUNTY NARCOTICS TASK FORCE.
§ 2-40.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. #74-5, § 3; 1970 Code § 2-24.1]
This section is authorized by Chapter 208 of the Laws of 1973, which act is known as
the "Interlocal Services Act".
§ 2-40.2. Authorization of Contract Execution. [Ord. #74-5, § 1; 1970 Code
§ 2-24.2]
The Borough of Moonachie shall enter into a contract with the Bergen County Narcotics
Task Force, and the Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to execute such
contract on behalf of the Borough.
§ 2-40.3. Public Record. [Ord. #74-5, § 2; 1970 Code § 2-24.3]
A copy of such contract shall be attached by reference to this section as if fully
reproduced herein, and the Borough Clerk shall give public notice that the contract is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and may be reviewed by any citizen during the
regular business hours.
§ 2-41. SEWAGE CONTRACT AUTHORIZATIONS.
§ 2-41.1. Contract Between the Borough of Moonachie and Bergen County Sewer
Authority. [Ord. #219, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #75-6; 1970 Code § 2-25.1]
attached agreement, subject to such amendments as shall be approved by the
attorneys for the respective Boroughs.7
a. Findings. The Borough has ascertained and does hereby determine that it is situate
within the sewer district of Bergen County Sewer Authority or is discharging
sewage directly or indirectly into a river, or its tributaries, in the State of New Jersey
and can advantageously use the facilities of the proposed district sewer system of
such authority, and that it will be economical and in other respects advantageous to
it to have sewage and other wastes treated and disposed of by the authority on and
pursuant to the terms of the contract authorized by this subsection.
b. Authorization to Execute. The Borough shall enter into a contract with Bergen
County Sewer Authority providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal of
sewage and other wastes and the cost and expense of such treatment and disposal,
on the terms and conditions and substantially in the form set forth in Ord. #219 and
as amended by Ord. #75-6, and incorporated into and made a part of this section as
if fully reproduced herein. The Mayor shall be and he hereby is authorized and
directed on behalf of the Borough to execute such contract, under the corporate seal
of the Borough, which shall be affixed and attested by the Borough Clerk, and to
deliver the same.
c. Form; Term; Conditions of Contract. Such contract shall be in substantially the
form recited in Ord. #219, § 3, and as amended by Ord. #75-6, and the terms and
7. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 2-39.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.1
2:39
§ 2-41.2. Contract Between the Borough of Moonachie and the Township of South
Hackensack. [Ord. #256, §§ 1 & 2; 1970 Code § 2-27.2]
§ 2-42. COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENT.
§ 2-42.1. Title. [Ord. #80-10; 1970 Code § 2-28.1; Ord. #91-7, § 1; Ord. #94-2]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing Ordinance of
the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 2-42.2. Authorization. [Ord. #80-10; 1970 Code § 2-28.2; Ord. #91-7, § 2; Ord.
#94-2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor is hereby authorized to
enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the lead agency.
§ 2-42.3. Contracting Unit. [Ord. #80-10; 1970 Code § 2-28.3; Ord. #91-7, § 3;
Ord. #94-2]
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Borough of Moonachie shall
be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the revised statutes of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 2-43. REGIONALIZED SERVICES AND COOPERATIVE PRICING
AGREEMENT.
§ 2-43.1. Title. [Ord. #92-2]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Regionalized Services and
Cooperative Pricing Ordinance of the Borough of Moonachie.
conditions thereof are hereby approved and specifically agreed to.
a. Findings. R.S. 40:63-2 provides that the governing bodies of two or more
municipalities may contract to receive and care for or dispose of municipal sewage.
The Borough of Moonachie and the Township of South Hackensack deem it
advisable that they should enter into an agreement in relation to the disposal of a
portion of the sewage of the Township of South Hackensack.
b. Authorization to Execute. The proper officers of the Borough are hereby authorized
and directed to enter into a contract with the Township of South Hackensack, which
contract shall embrace substantially the terms as set forth in Ord. #256 and
incorporated by reference into this section as if fully recited herein.
c. Time Effective. This subsection shall take effect if and when the Township of South
Hackensack shall duly adopt an ordinance substantially embracing the same terms
and provisions.
§ 2-41.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 2-43.2
2:40
§ 2-43.2. Authority. [Ord. #92-2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:11-15(5), the
Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into a regionalized services and cooperative pricing
agreement with the lead agency.
§ 2-43.3. Contracting Unit. [Ord. #92-2]
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Mayor and Council shall be
responsible for complying with the provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 2-43.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-43.3
2:41

Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: The general power to adopt local police ordinances of all kinds is
contained in R.S. 40:48-1, 2.
§ 3-1. LITTER.8
§ 3-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #165, § 1; Ord. #168, § 3; 1970 Code § 4-3.1]
As used in this section:
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
beaches or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — Shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, on or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn on a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-1.2. Litter in Public Places. [Ord. #165, § 1; Ord. #168, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-3.2]
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or upon any occupied, open or
vacant property, whether owned by such person or not, or in or on any public place, or
any pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the Borough, except in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection. Persons placing litter in
public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such manner as to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements in or on any public place, or
on private property.
§ 3-1.3. Sweeping Litter into Gutters Prohibited. [1970 Code § 4-3.3]
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business, shall sweep
into or deposit in any gutter or other public place within the Borough the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
8. Editor's Note: For regulations on littering in public parks and lands, see subsection 9-1.5 of Chapter 9, Recreational
Facilities.
§ 2-43.3 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-1.3
3:1
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises
free of litter.
§ 3-1.4. Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles. [1970 Code § 4-3.4]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter in or on
any public place within the Borough or on private property.
§ 3-1.5. Truck Loads Causing Litter. [1970 Code § 4-3.5]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough unless it
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its load, contents or litter from being blown or
deposited in or on any public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in or on any
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 3-1.6. Transportation from Outside Borough. [Ord. #168, §§ 1 & 2; 1970 Code
§ 4-3.6]
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from outside the
Borough into the Borough for the purpose of dumping or disposing thereof. No truck
or other vehicle containing litter which has been transported into the Borough shall be
parked or allowed to remain standing on any street or public property in the Borough for
a period in excess of two hours.
§ 3-1.7. Handbills. [1970 Code § 4-3.7]
No person shall cast or place, or cause to be cast or placed, any advertisement, handbill,
circular or paper on any public street, on sidewalks, into any vestibules or yards, upon
porches of any dwelling house or other buildings, or into any vehicle while on the
public highways or on private property within the Borough, except that this subsection
shall not apply to newspapers and addressed envelopes delivered to subscribers and
addresses. Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Borough, provided they are securely placed at each dwelling so as not to be blown away
by the wind.
§ 3-1.8. Dumping. [Ord. #86-11, § 1]
No person, firm or corporation shall, within the limits of the Borough, throw, dump,
cast, discard or deposit paper, paper products, bottles, tin cans, containers, junk, garbage,
discarded furniture, tires, drums, debris or any other waste matter whatsoever alongside
of any street, right of way or road or within any property.
§ 3-1.9. Penalties. [Ord. #86-11, § 2]
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 per
event or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both per event, in the discretion of the
Municipal Judge.
Nothing in this section is intended to apply to a person, firm or corporation legally
§ 3-1.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-1.9
3:2
putting out garbage or trash for garbage collection.
§ 3-1.10. Open Fires. [Ord. #2004-1, §§ 2 — 7]
a. The term "person" used herein refers to individuals, partnerships, firms, businesses,
corporations, organizations, schools, churches, and institutions.
b. It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn or allow to be burned,
any material of any kind exuding smoke which may endanger the safety or health
of the public, or disturb the comfort or repose of any person residing in the vicinity
of the fire, or which causes excessive or noxious odors, or when such fire emits
sparks, embers, or smoke upon adjacent, or nearby premises.
c. The burning of any material outside of a structure shall not be permitted as follows:
1. Materials and Refuse Prohibited. The following types of open fires which are
prohibited include but are not limited to: leaves or grass, garbage or other
organic refuse, building demolition or construction material, automobiles or
parts thereof, highly flammable, toxic or explosive materials, electrical wiring,
all rubber, plastic and paper products.
2. Burning on Public Land. No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or
authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street,
alley, road or other public ground, without obtaining a permit from the
Moonachie Fire Department.
3. Burning on Private Land. No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire on
any private land.
4. Prohibition of Fires. The Chief or designee of the Moonachie Fire Department
may prohibit any and all open fires when circumstances make such fires
hazardous or when such fires are prohibited by the New Jersey Department of
Natural Resources.
5. Water Availability. No burning shall be done unless an adequate water supply
is available at the burning site to control the fire.
6. Burning Location. No burning shall be done within 75 feet of any structure or
property line.
7. Wind Conditions. No burning shall be done at any time or place when wind
conditions may create a nuisance to anyone or the property of anyone in the
vicinity.
d. All burning permits shall be issued by the Moonachie Fire Department and a record
of such permit shall be maintained by the Department. Any permit issued by the
Department may be revoked by the Department for any reason including but not
limited to any violation of this subsection, adverse weather or other hazardous
conditions concerning the site, adverse advisories from the New Jersey Department
of Natural Resources, or a valid complaint from any person residing in the vicinity
of the fire that such fire is disturbing to such person or interfering with such person's
peace, comfort and enjoyment of his own premises.
§ 3-1.9 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-1.10
3:3
§ 3-1.11. Improper Waste Disposal. [Ord. #2005-11]
e. Enforcement. The local enforcing agency established by subsection 3-13.8 of this
section shall be under the direct supervision and control of Chief of the Moonachie
Police Department or any other official of the Borough.
f. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not
more than $1,000 per event or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Or both per
event, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
a. Purpose. To prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than storm
water to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Borough
of Moonachie, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Moonachie or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying storm water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORM WATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
storm water to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough
of Moonachie is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than storm water in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
2. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or basement
sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground waters).
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges
and diverted stream flows.
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool discharges.
§ 3-1.10 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-1.11
3:4
§ 3-1.12. Containerized Yard Waste. [Ord. #2005-11]
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
8. Flows from firefighting activities.
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their
intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to
rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials must be
removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent practicable
using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered
materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(c) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to engines
or other enclosed machinery.
a. Purpose. For the proper handling of yard waste in the Borough of Moonachie, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
b. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have
the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include
the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with storm water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal roadway, and
includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and
other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or
contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless the yard
waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not containerized, is placed
in the street, the party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
§ 3-1.11 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-1.12
3:5
§ 3-1.13. Yard Waste Collection Program. [Ord. #2005-11]
§ 3-2. NOISE.9
§ 3-2.1. Noise Prohibited. [Ord. #246, § 2; 1970 Code § 4-2.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued
any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
limits of the Borough.
§ 3-2.2. Definition of Noise. [Ord. #246, §§ 3 — 14; 1970 Code § 4-2.2]
The following acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
subsection.
d. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by Moonachie
Police Department and/or other designated Moonachie Borough Official.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Moonachie, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Yard Waste Collection. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste
that is not containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed
closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the
curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of
this subsection. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for
placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said
party shall be deemed in violation of this subsection.
c. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the Moonachie
Police Department and/or other Municipal Officials of the Borough of Moonachie.
d. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
a. Radios; Televisions; Phonographs. The playing, using, operating or permitting to
be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, television, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine
or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any
9. Editor's Note: See standards for noise measurement in Chapter 22, Zoning, subsection 22-5.11.
§ 3-1.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-2.2
3:6
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
b. Loudspeakers; Amplifiers for Advertising. The playing, using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for
the purpose of commercial advertising.
c. Yelling; Shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public
streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time
or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office, dwelling, hotel, motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the
vicinity.
d. Animals; Birds. The keeping of any animals or birds which, by causing frequent or
long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity, but nothing herein contained is intended to apply to a dog pound or kennel
existing in accordance with Chapter 8 of this Code.
e. Horns. The sounding of any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle,
bus or other vehicle, except when required by law, or when necessary to give timely
warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a warning of impending danger to
persons driving other vehicles, or to persons on the street. No person shall sound
any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle
which shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
f. Steam Whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger,
or as a signal or warning in connection with civil defense, fire or ambulance calls.
g. Bells. The sounding of any bell or gong, or the blowing of any whistle attached to
a building or locomotive, except as a warning to prevent injury to life or property.
h. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises.
i. Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle
so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
j. Loading; Unloading; Opening Boxes. The creation of loud and excessive noise in
connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
k. Construction or Repair. Excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration
work in connection with any building, structure or other improvement other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; except
§ 3-2.2 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-2.2
3:7
that with regard to construction, repair or alteration work by a homeowner on his
own dwelling or property, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
seven days a week. In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health
or safety, the Construction Official may grant a permit for excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work for a period not to exceed three days during
which the emergency continues, and the permit may be renewed for an additional
period of three days where the emergency continues. If the Construction Official
shall determine that public health or safety will not be impaired by the excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration work of any building, structure, or
other improvement between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall
further determine that substantial loss or inconvenience would result to any party
in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the
work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
l. Schools; Courts; Churches; Hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any
street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same
are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the
working of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed on the street indicating that it is
a school, hospital or court street.
m. Drums. The use of any drums or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by the creation of noise.
n. Hawkers; Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
o. Metal Rails, Pillars and Columns; Transportation Thereof. The transportation of
rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and
other public places, on carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner, so as to
cause loud noises or disturb the peace and quiet.
p. Pile Drivers; Hammers. The operation, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, of any pile driver, steam shovel,
bulldozer or other earth moving machinery, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or
electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual
noise.
q. Blowers. The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal
combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of
operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled, or
the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noises.
r. Devices for Scaring Birds and Animals. Devices for the purpose of scaring birds
and animals, except between sunrise and sunset.
The above enumeration is intended only to give typical illustrations of prohibited
noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
§ 3-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-2.3
3:8
§ 3-2.3. Exceptions. [Ord. #246, §§ 15 — 16; 1970 Code § 4-2.3]
Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to:
§ 3-2.4. Sound Trucks. [Ord. #246, § 5; 1970 Code § 4-2.4]
Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following regulations upon the
issuance of a permit by the Council for each occasion and each location:
§ 3-3. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 3-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #69-13; 1970 Code § 4-7.1]
As used in this section:
PROPERTY—Shall mean any real property within the Borough which is not a street or
highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — Shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Shall mean a machine propelled by other than human power, designed to
a. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches engaged in church
activities.
b. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties, drills or
public demonstrations.
c. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under the permission or
authority of municipal officials.
d. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open air.
e. Any public utility as defined in Title 48 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or
to any employees of such public utility when such public utility or its employees
shall be engaged in performing work to prevent threatened interruption of its
services, or to terminate the interruption of its service rendered to its customers.
a. Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the Borough before 9:00
a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
b. Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the Borough before 9:00
a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
c. Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme righthand side of the road and shall
proceed at a speed of not less than 10 miles per hour.
d. Stationary sound trucks are prohibited in all residential zones in the Borough, but
may be operated in commercial zones during the hours referred to above.
e. As used in this subsection "residential zones" shall mean the zones so described on
the Zoning Map of the Borough, and "commercial zones" shall mean and include
all parts of the Borough other than residential zones.
§ 3-2.3 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-3.1
3:9
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport persons
or property or pull machinery, and shall include without limitation, automobile, truck,
trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 3-3.2. Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. #69-13; 1970 Code § 4-7.2]
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Borough or leave any vehicle at any
place within the Borough for such time and under such circumstances as to cause it to
reasonably appear to have been abandoned.
§ 3-3.3. Leaving of Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicles on Street Prohibited. [Ord.
#69-13; 1970 Code § 4-7.3]
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle
on any street or highway within the Borough.
§ 3-3.4. Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles. [Ord. #69-13; 1970 Code
§ 4-7.4]
No person in charge or control of any property within the Borough, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles to remain on the property longer than 48 hours.
No person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the Borough for a longer
time than 48 hours, except that this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle in any
enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the Borough.
§ 3-3.5. Impounding and Disposition of Vehicles. [Ord. #69-13; 1970 Code § 4-7.5;
Ord. #93-15]
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by him is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed, any vehicle left at any place within the
Borough, which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or lost, stolen or
unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in
accordance with applicable statutes, i.e., N.J.S.A. 39:10A, et seq. The Chief of Police or
any member of the Police Department acting for him shall notify the registered and legal
owner in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known address of
the owner, of the removal of such vehicle and the reason for the same and the location
of the vehicle. Such vehicle shall be retained and impounded until the owner or his duly
authorized agent shall have paid the cost of such taking and removal, together with a
garage charge of $10 for each and every day such vehicle is retained and impounded.
§ 3-4. MOTORIZED BICYCLES, MINIBIKES AND OTHER TYPES OF
MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 3-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #79-2, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-12.1]
As used in this section:
§ 3-3.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-4.1
3:10
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized means of conveyance of persons or
property including but not limited to those vehicles covered by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.,
go-carts, motor bikes, minibikes, motor scooters, trail bikes, and other similar devices,
regardless of the number of wheels thereon.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Shall mean a pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than 50 cc of that
motor at no more than 1.5 brake horsepower and such bicycle is capable of a maximum
speed of no more than 25 m.p.h. on a flat surface.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean parks, playgrounds, and any open area of public resort
or other lands owned either by the Borough or the Board of Education of the Borough.
§ 3-4.2. Areas Where Operation Unlawful. [Ord. #79-2, § 2; 1970 Code § 4-12.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or a motorized bicycle in or
upon any public place in the Borough and on property designated subject to this section
by the owner thereof as follows:
Lot Block
4 2
1 3
3A 3
9 3
10 3
2 4
3 4
6 31
2A 37
2 38
8 39
8C 39
4 40
2 41
11 57
15 57
1 59
3 59
2 60
6 60
7 60
8 60
§ 3-4.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-4.2
3:11
Lot Block
4 61
7 61
8 62
10 62
4 63
5 63
1 64
3 64
4 38
5A 38
6 38
7 38
4C 39
4 & 6C 39
5 39
6 39
6A 39
7 39
4 64
5 64
6 64
2 67
3 67
4 67
5 67
6 67
9 67
1 68
4 69
4 70
5B 70
8 70
11 70
2 71
§ 3-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-4.2
3:12
Lot Block
3 71
2 72
1 76
2 62
The prohibition shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles owned or operated
by the Borough, its agents, servants or employees in the course of Borough business
and shall further not apply to any motor vehicle licensed pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., in or upon any public parking place or driveway used in
connection with any such public place.
§ 3-4.3. Operation Upon Public Roads. [Ord. #79-2, § 3; 1970 Code § 4-12.3]
It is not intended hereby to establish any regulation or prohibition pertaining to the
operation of motor vehicles or motorized bicycles in or upon any of the public roads,
streets, or highways of the Borough which operation is regulated by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et
seq.10
§ 3-5. PARKING VEHICLES ON POSTED LANDS.
§ 3-5.1. Parking Prohibited: Notice Posted. [Ord. #76-7, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-13.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on lands
of another, whether publicly or privately owned in the Borough after notice has been
posted as hereinafter provided by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting
such parking. Nothing herein contained shall apply to any lands lying within the bounds
of any public street or highway.
§ 3-5.2. Signs Required. [Ord. #76-7, § 2; 1970 Code § 4-13.2]
Suitable signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches, bearing the words "NO PARKING"
together with such parking, if any, and conspicuously displayed shall be posted on
such lands by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this section is
effective. Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs when posted shall constitute
a violation of this section.
§ 3-5.3. Violation; Penalty. [Ord. #76-7, § 3; 1970 Code § 4-13.3]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $25 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom such person shall be convicted.
§ 3-6. ALARM SYSTEMS.
10. Editor's Note: For regulation of traffic upon streets, see Chapter 7, Traffic.
§ 3-4.2 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-6.1
3:13
§ 3-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #76-2, § 1; Ord. #82-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-14.1]
As used in this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean the combination of sensory apparatus and related
hardware which, when activated by the appropriate stimulus produces a signal making
known the existence of an emergency situation and requiring immediate investigation
and response by law enforcement agencies.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of
such alarm system or his family, employees or agents. False alarm shall not include
alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other acts of God.
POLICE CHIEF — Shall mean the Moonachie Chief of Police.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Moonachie Police Department.
§ 3-6.2. Maximum False Alarms Allowed, Penalty. [Ord. #76-2, § 2; Ord. #82-4,
§ 1; 1970 Code § 4-14.2; Ord. #87-7, §§ 1 & 2]
§ 3-6.3. Notice to Owner/Lessee. [Ord. #76-2, § 3; Ord. #77-5, § 1; Ord. #82-4, § 1;
1970 Code § 4-14.3]
The Police Department shall cause a summons to be served to the owner, operator, lessee
or person or firm in charge of the alarm system within 30 days of the third and each
additional false alarm.
§ 3-6.4. Police Report. [Ord. #76-2, § 4; Ord. #82-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-14.4]
Police officers responding to all false alarms shall file a written report indicating all
pertinent information pertaining thereto and a finding as to whether such false alarm was
caused by human carelessness, mechanical failure or by any other cause.
§ 3-6.5. Police Department Determination. [Ord. #76-2, § 5; Ord. #82-4, § 1; 1970
a. In the case of a false alarm any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately,
by the swiftest means available, notify the Police Department of such false alarm.
b. The owner, operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of any alarm system which
generates a false alarm shall be notified in writing by the Police Chief or his duly
designated agent of the false alarm. Such written notice shall be sent by registered
mail to the owner, operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of such alarm system.
c. After an owner, operator, lessee or person or firm receives two written notices of
false alarms being generated by his alarm system during any calendar month, a
complaint shall be issued for a violation of this section and, upon conviction or plea
of guilty, he shall be punished by the imposition of a penalty in the amount of $100
for each subsequent false alarm generated by his alarm system during that calendar
month.
d. Any penalty imposed by this section may be paid in the Violations Bureau of the
Municipal Court and all penalties shall be payable to the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 3-6.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-6.5
3:14
Code § 4-14.5]
If a determination is made by the Police Department that the false alarm was caused by
malfunction or mechanical failure of the equipment as opposed to human carelessness or
other cause, written notice of such determination shall be hand delivered to the owner,
operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of the alarm system within 30 days thereof,
who shall cause the same to be repaired promptly thereafter.
§ 3-6.6. Right to Require Disconnection of System. [Ord. #76-2, § 6; Ord. #82-4,
§ 1; 1970 Code § 4-14.6]
In addition to the penalty payable under subsection 3-6.2, if three or more false alarms
are caused by malfunction or mechanical failure of the alarm system, the Borough shall
have the right to require the owner, operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of such
alarm system to disconnect the same until such time as it has been repaired, and the
Borough shall not be responsible during the period the same is disconnected for any
losses incurred by the owner, operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of such alarm
system.
§ 3-6.7. Evidence Regarding False Alarms. [Ord. #76-2, § 7; Ord. #82-4, § 1; 1970
Code § 4-14.7]
Any owner, operator, lessee or person or firm in charge of such alarm system may
present evidence that a false alarm was in fact not caused by human carelessness or
negligence or mechanical failure or malfunction, and the Police Chief may act upon
such evidence and determine that such was not in fact a false alarm but was caused by
hurricane, tornado or other violent act of God.
§ 3-7. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-7.1. Prohibitions. [Ord. #74-7, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-9.1]
No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon:
a. A public street, sidewalk, public parking place, park, playground or recreational
area, or any other public or quasi-public place.
b. A public conveyance.
c. A private motor vehicle while it is in motion or parked in any public street, public
parking lot, or public or quasi-public place.
d. Any private property, not his own without the express permission of the owner or
other person having authority to grant such permission.
A person who shall discard alcoholic beverage containers upon any public street,
lane, sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi-public place or upon private
property not his own without the express permission of the owner shall be deemed
a disorderly person.
§ 3-6.5 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-7.2
3:15
§ 3-7.2. Exception. [Ord. #74-7, §§ 2 & 3; 1970 Code § 4-9.2]
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection 3-7.1, the Mayor and Council
may, by further ordinance or resolution, permit the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in a designated park, playground or recreational area, or other public
place at a designated time or times in connection with any purpose or events which have
been authorized by the Mayor and Council.
Application for a permit to consume alcoholic beverages in a public park, playground,
recreational area or other public place shall be made to the Police Department.
§ 3-7A. PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION; VIOLATIONS AND
PENALTIES. [Ord. #2008-6]
§ 3-8. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-8.1. Determination of Mayor and Council. [Ord. #86-16, § 1]
The Mayor and Council have determined that the smoking of tobacco in any form is
harmful to the public health and welfare and constitutes a fire hazard and nuisance in
public buildings and meeting rooms in the Borough on requiring the provision thereof.
§ 3-8.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. #86-16, § 2]
No person shall smoke or carry lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or use any match, spark,
flame or fire producing device for the purpose of igniting any cigar, cigarette or pipe,
provided a "Smoking Prohibited by Law" sign has been posted conspicuously therein, in
any of the following places:
§ 3-8.3. Smoking Restrictions in Recreational Areas. [Ord. #2004-14, § 1]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate and/or defecate in any public place or
park in the Borough of Moonachie.
b. Any person who shall violate this section shall be fined not less than $200, may be
imprisoned in the County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. For a second
offense $300 and may be imprisoned for 90 days and may be required to perform a
minimum of 10 hours of community service.
a. During and within the confines of any public meeting required by law to be given
public notice and held in any meeting room in the Municipal Building throughout
the Borough.
b. Any room, chamber, or enclosed place of meeting or public assembly throughout
the Borough wherein public business is being conducted and which is open to
members of the general public either as participants or spectators.
a. Prohibition Applicable to Ballfield and Certain Parks. The Borough of Moonachie,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:48-2, deems it in the public interest to
prohibit smoking, defined as the burning of lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any
other matter or substance which contains tobacco, including smokeless and
chewing tobacco in the following areas of the Borough:
§ 3-7.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-8.3
3:16
§ 3-8.4. Posting of Signs. [Ord. #86-16, § 3; Ord. #2004-14, § 2]
Notice of the prohibitions contained in this section shall be conspicuously posted by
signs stating "No Smoking Permitted Beyond This Point" and shall reference the
applicable Code provision.
§ 3-8.5. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #86-16, § 3; Ord. #2004-14, § 3]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof for a first offense, be punishable by a fine of not more than $25; for
a second offense within the same calendar year, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500, or by community service of not more than two days; for a third offense
within the same calendar year, be punishable by a fine of not less than $100, or by
community service of not less than five days or any combination of fine, imprisonment
and community service as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 3-8.6. Enforcement. [Ord. #2004-14, § 3]
The provision of this section shall be enforced by the Borough of Moonachie.
The Chief of Police is hereby directed to have proper signs calling attention to the
provisions of this subsection erected or placed upon said street or park entrance.
§ 3-9. (RESERVED)11
§ 3-10. BICYCLES.
§ 3-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. #126; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.1]
The intent of this section is to encourage the safe and proper operation of bicycles on the
streets of the Borough, particularly by children; to further the programs established by
police, schools and civic groups to train children in the safe operation of bicycles, and to
provide a means of identifying the owners of bicycles and violators of this section and
other statutes and ordinances governing the operation of bicycles.
§ 3-10.2. Definition. [1970 Code § 5-12.2]
As used in this section:
BICYCLE — Shall mean a two-wheeled vehicle propelled or intended to be propelled
by the physical efforts of the person riding it.
§ 3-10.3. Registration Required. [Ord. #126, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.3]
No person residing within the Borough shall use or operate a bicycle within its limits
1. All municipal baseball, soccer and softball fields located on Redneck Avenue.
2. The municipal parks located at Joseph Street, East Joseph Street, Concord
Street and all baseball fields.
11. Editor's Note: Section 3-9, Curfew for Minors was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2015-11.
§ 3-8.3 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-10.3
3:17
unless it has been registered and bears a registration tag.
§ 3-10.4. Application Information. [Ord. #126, § 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-12.4]
Application for the registration of a bicycle shall be made to the Police Department on a
form approved by the Chief of Police, and shall contain the following information:
§ 3-10.5. License Fee. [Ord. #126, § 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.5; Ord.
#89-14]
The license fee for a bicycle shall be paid at the time a registration card and tag are
applied for:
1990 1991 1992
$0.50 $0.75 $1
§ 3-10.6. Inspection of Bicycle. [Ord. #126, § 4; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.6]
Before a registration card and tag are issued, the bicycle shall be inspected by a member
of the Police Department designated by the Police Chief. No registration shall be issued
for a bicycle which is in a state of disrepair or which has any mechanical defect, or which
would for any other reason be unsafe to operate. No registration shall be issued to any
person who has not shown his ability to ride the bicycle safely.
§ 3-10.7. Registration Card and Tag. [Ord. #126, §§ 4 & 6; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-12.7]
Registration of a bicycle shall be evidenced by a registration card signed by the owner of
the bicycle and by the Chief of Police, or some police officer designated by him, and by a
metal tag. The registration card shall contain an assigned number, the name and address
of the owner of the bicycle for which it is issued, and identification of the bicycle by
make, model, color and serial number, if any. The metal tag shall contain the registration
number. At the time of registration the Police Department shall give to each owner a
printed copy of safety rules and regulations for the use of a bicycle and particularly those
provided for in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes.
§ 3-10.8. Term of Registration; Renewal. [Ord. #126, § 8; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-12.8]
Registration shall be good for a period of one year except that all registrations shall
expire on June 30 following issuance of the registration. For renewal of the registration,
the bicycle shall again be inspected by a person designated by the Chief of Police.
a. The name and address of the bicycle owner.
b. A description of the bicycle, including the name of the manufacturer and the serial
number, if any.
c. Any other appropriate information which the Chief of Police may require.
§ 3-10.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-10.9
3:18
§ 3-10.9. Display of Registration Card and Tag. [Ord. #126, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970
Code § 5-12.9]
Any person riding a registered bicycle shall keep the registration card in his possession
and shall display it on the request of any police officer or other official who may properly
request to see it. The metal tag shall be securely fastened to the bicycle for which it is
issued in such a manner that it can be seen clearly from a distance of 10 feet.
§ 3-10.10. Transferability. [Ord. #126, § 7; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.10]
No registration number shall be transferred from one person to another or from one
bicycle to another unless reissued by the Police Department.
§ 3-10.11. Report Required. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.11]
Any person transferring possession of a bicycle to another within the Borough, whether
by sale, gift or otherwise, shall report that fact to the Police Department within three
business days after actual transfer.
§ 3-10.12. Information. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.12]
The report of transfer shall be made on forms furnished by the Police Department, and
shall contain the following information:
§ 3-10.13. Surrender of Registration. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.13]
When any bicycle which has previously been registered is transferred to another person,
the person transferring it shall remove the metal registration tag from the bicycle and
return it and the registration card to the Police Department within three days of the actual
transfer.
§ 3-10.14. Regulations. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.14]
a. The name and address of the person transferring the bicycle.
b. The name, address and age of the person to whom the bicycle was transferred.
c. A description of the bicycle, including its make, model, color and serial number, if
any.
d. If the bicycle was previously registered, its registration number.
a. In General. All persons operating bicycles in the Borough shall conform to all
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances of the Borough,
particularly those dealing with the regulation of traffic. Bicycle operators shall obey
the same rules as drivers of motor vehicles unless inapplicable or inappropriate.
b. Single File. When two or more bicycles are being operated together, the operators
shall ride in single file only.
c. Passengers. No person shall ride on any part of a bicycle not intended for use by a
rider, nor shall more than one person ride on a bicycle unless it is designed to
accommodate more than one rider or operator.
§ 3-10.9 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-10.14
3:19
§ 3-10.15. Inspection of Bicycles. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.15]
Any police officer may inspect a bicycle at any time if he has reason to believe that it
has not been validly registered, does not have its registration tag properly attached, or is
not in a safe operating condition.
§ 3-10.16. Impounding of Unsafe Bicycles. [Ord. #126, § 5; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-12.16]
If a police officer determines that a bicycle is in so defective or unsafe a condition as to
constitute a danger to the safety of the person operating it or to others, he may impound
the bicycle immediately. A bicycle that has been impounded shall not be released until
the owner has given satisfactory proof that the defects that led to the impounding will
be corrected prior to the bicycle again being operated in the Borough and it shall not be
returned except upon the payment of $1.
§ 3-10.17. Violations in General. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.17]
Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this section who:
§ 3-10.18. Exceptions. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.18]
Where the alleged violation consists of the failure of any person to have in his possession
a registration card, no person shall be convicted of a violation of this section if he
produces a valid previously issued registration card within 48 hours of the time of the
alleged offense.
§ 3-10.19. Duties of Parents and Guardians. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.19]
Any parent or guardian having custody of a minor child who knowingly permits that
child to possess or operate a bicycle in violation of any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a violation.
§ 3-10.20. Penalties. [Ord. #126, § 9; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-12.20]
In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed by law for a violation of this
section, the Police Chief, upon receiving information that any person under the age of
16 years has been accused of violating any provision of this section shall require that
person to appear before him or his representative for a hearing. The accused person shall
be notified of the time and place of the hearing, of the time and place of the alleged
offense and of the general nature of the acts constituting the alleged offense. Notice shall
be served on the accused person not less than five days before the date of the hearing and
d. Unsafe Bicycle. No person shall operate a bicycle within the Borough while that
bicycle is in a defective, unsafe or dangerous condition.
a. Fails to register a bicycle owned by him.
b. Fails to report the transfer of possession of a bicycle.
c. Knowingly operates or permits the operation of a bicycle owned by him which is
unregistered or which is in a defective or unsafe condition.
§ 3-10.14 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-10.20
3:20
shall be in writing, but no special form shall be required. At the hearing the accused shall
enjoy the same rights as a person charged before the Judge of the Municipal Court with a
violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey or of the provisions of this Code dealing
with the regulation of motor vehicle traffic. If the Police Chief is satisfied by clear and
convincing evidence that the accused is guilty as charged, he may prohibit the accused
from operating a bicycle for whatever period he deems just. Where the offender has been
guilty of a flagrant or repeated violation of this section, he may permanently prohibit the
offender from operating a bicycle within the Borough.
§ 3-11. FIREARMS.
§ 3-11.1. Use. [Ord. #171, § 2; 1970 Code § 4-4.1]
No person shall discharge within the Borough any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver, firearm
or bow and arrow in a careless, negligent or reckless manner, so as to endanger the life,
welfare or property of others.
§ 3-11.2. Hunting. [Ord. #240, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-4.2]
No person shall at any time hunt, take, kill or pursue, or attempt to hunt, take, kill or
pursue, with a gun, firearm, bow and arrow or other dangerous weapon of any kind or
character, any wild birds, animals or fowl of any kind within the Borough.
§ 3-12. TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS.
§ 3-12.1. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
The Mayor and Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur
when traffic must be moved through or around road or street construction, maintenance
operations, and utility work, above or below ground which require blocking the roadway
and obstructing the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed
to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and maintenance
zones and to provide safety for the work forces performing these operations.
The Borough of Moonachie, in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, does hereby
adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter referred to as
M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates
whenever construction, maintenance operations, or utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions
of M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 3-12.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or public utility wishing to conduct
work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Traffic Bureau of the Moonachie
Police Department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting in order to submit
plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of construction work. Any
§ 3-10.20 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-12.2
3:21
person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such
work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic Bureau of the Moonachie Police
Department is in violation of this section.
Public utilities conducting routine maintenance work expected to require less than one
day need not comply with the pre-construction meeting requirements.
§ 3-12.3. Hazardous Conditions. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
Prior to the start of any work, the person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Traffic
Bureau of the Moonachie Police Department with at least two emergency contact phone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency
contact person does not respond to the call from the Police Department to correct a
hazardous condition, the Borough may respond to correct such hazardous condition.
The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Borough shall be charged to the
person, contractor, or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 3-12.4. Hours. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on any roadway
in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be
adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of
the Traffic Bureau of the Moonachie Police Department. If it is determined by the officer
in charge of the Police Traffic Bureau that the construction or maintenance operations
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or
health hazard the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 3-12.5. Road Closings and Detours. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the
Moonachie Police Department Traffic Bureau.
§ 3-12.6. Traffic Directors. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites when determined
by the Moonachie Police Department Traffic Bureau that same is necessary to provide
for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 3-12.7. Stop Work. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
The Traffic Bureau of the Moonachie Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to
abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
§ 3-12.8. Emergency Repair Work. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
In the case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance operations or
emergency utility work must be performed that will obstruct, interfere or detour traffic or
any roadway in the Borough, the person, contractor or utility performing such operation
§ 3-12.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-12.8
3:22
shall notify the Moonachie Police Department of such emergency operation. The person,
contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency, location and hours of
operation.
All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be performed with full
regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to an absolute minimum. During such
emergency repair work the person, contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions
of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing such emergency repair work.
§ 3-12.9. Site Preparation. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area
until all construction, signs, lights, devices, and pavement markings are installed.
§ 3-12.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #92-16, § 1]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be assessed a penalty in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1
of this Code.
§ 3-12.11. Reimbursement for Police Services by Private Contractors. [Ord.
#99-2; Ord. #00-11; Ord. #2002-7, § 1; Ord. #2004-3, § 1; Ord. #2007-9, § 1; Ord.
#2009-13, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-10; Ord. #2013-3; Ord. #2013-4; Ord. No. 2016-4]
a. Police Services. Members of the Police Department shall be available for service as
traffic directors or security personnel for private contractors only at such time as
will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or
emergency duties for the Borough and with the approval of the Chief of Police. The
applications for such services shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police. The
application by the private contractor shall set forth all relevant and pertinent
information concerning the type of work to be engaged in, the name and address of
the prospective private contractors and subcontractors and the estimated duration of
such requested service. The application for such services shall be reviewed by the
Chief of Police to determine if there is any reasonable probability that such outside
employment will interfere with a policeman's performance or status with the
Borough through a conflict of interest or if there is any reasonable probability that
the particular service requested would reflect unfavorably upon the policemen
involved or upon the Police Department. Request for Traffic Safety Officers should
be made 24 hours prior to scheduled start time except for emergency.
b. Payment. Private contractors shall pay to the Treasurer of the Borough of
Moonachie a certain amount in cash, check or money order as is set forth herein or
as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council as
compensation for such services.
1. Rate of Compensation to the Borough:
(a) The rate of compensation to the Borough for police officer wages shall be
$125 per hour effective July 1, 2013.
(b) The rate of compensation for administrative and equipment services shall
be $25 per hour effective July 1, 2013.
§ 3-12.8 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-12.11
3:23
§ 3-13. TOWING REGULATIONS.
§ 3-13.1. Scope of Work. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
Towing services to be rendered by an independent contractor shall include but not
be limited to the removal, and where needed, subsequent storage of motor vehicles
classified on the attached Established Tow Rates Fee Schedule that are:
(c) A contract for such services shall be entered between the private
contractors and the Police Department prior to beginning of work.
(d) Work scheduled between one and four hours shall equal a minimum of
four hours rate of pay. Work between four and eight hours shall equal a
minimum of eight hours rate of pay. Any services provided after eight
hours shall be compensated at the hourly rate.
(e) Notice of cancellations made before four hours of the scheduled start time
will incur no charge to the private contractors. Notice of cancellation
made with less than four hours start time will incur a four hours charge
per police officer. The fees for police vehicles will not be assessed in the
event of a cancellation.
c. Payment for Private Vehicles. Private contractors shall pay to the Treasurer of the
Borough of Moonachie a certain amount in cash, check or money order as is set
forth herein or as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council as compensation for such services.
1. Rate of Compensation to the Borough:
(a) The rate of compensation to the Borough for Police Vehicle for an eight
hour shift or less should be $100 per eight-hour day or less, effective
August 1, 2013.
d. An escrow for the estimated cost of police services shall be submitted to the
Treasurer of the Borough of Moonachie in accordance with the police services
anticipated as identified in the application before any work on the proposed project
shall begin.
e. In the event that the compensation for police service exceeds the escrow mentioned
above, then the Police Chief shall prepare and submit an invoice to the Chief
Financial Officer who in turn shall submit same to the private contractor,
accounting for the total cost for such off-duty work supplied which amount shall be
paid in full within 15 days of receipt by the private contractor.
a. Abandoned;
b. Damaged;
c. Disabled;
d. In violation of provisions of N.J.S.A. Title 39, Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations;
§ 3-12.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-13.1
3:24
§ 3-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean the removal and transportation of a vehicle
from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a parking area, or from a storage
facility, and other services normally incidental thereto.
DEBRIS — Shall mean fragmentation at the scene of a towing assignment; the removal
of which will require no additional personnel nor specialized equipment and is exclusive
of vehicle contents and/or cargo both of which will be classified as "spillage." Examples
of debris will include but not be limited to: broken glass, vehicle parts and dirt.
EXTRA TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean and include recovery of a vehicle from a
position:
INSIDE STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a permanent structure, utilized as a
vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors and protected from the elements,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and/or removal of vehicles. Each
opening must be secured by a locking device.
MINOR SPILLAGE — Shall mean that which is able to be removed without the need
for additional personnel and/or specialized equipment.
OUTSIDE STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a vehicle storage facility that is not
indoors and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six feet
high.
SPILLAGE — Shall mean the release of vehicle cargo and/or contents at the scene of a
towing assignment; the removal of which may require the use of extra personnel and/or
specialized equipment and is exclusive of fragmentation previously defined as debris.
§ 3-13.3. List of Towers. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
As soon as reasonably possible in 1997 and then in subsequent years, between the 1st
and 30th of November of each year, the Chief of Police of the Borough of Moonachie,
who shall be the administrator of this Chapter and who is hereby authorized to adopt
such rules for its administration and enforcement as he deems necessary, shall solicit
and receive applications from persons, firms or corporations regularly engaged in the
business of towing and storage of motor vehicles who or which prove to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Chief to qualify in accordance with the terms contained hereafter.
The said Chief of Police shall review all such applications as soon as possible this year
and by the 15th day of December of each following year, and he shall compile a list
e. To be impounded;
f. To be removed for any other reason at the direction of the Moonachie Police
Department.
1. Either partially or completely overturned;
2. Beyond the right-of-way or berm;
Impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way; and those towing situations
where there exists a spillage of vehicle contents or cargo onto the travel portion of
the roadway resulting in a protracted clean up operation utilizing either additional
manpower or specialized equipment.
3.
§ 3-13.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-13.3
3:25
in alphabetical order of all those persons, firms or corporations who or which qualify
hereunder as approved towers for the following calendar year, and he shall place that list
on file for inspection by the public in the office of the Borough Clerk. Any person, firm
or corporation aggrieved by the action of the Chief may appeal his decision to the Mayor
and Council at its next public meeting following receipt of notice of such action.
§ 3-13.4. Procedure. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
The Chief of Police shall establish a procedure by which, when the services of an
approved tower are required, only such approved tower as appearing on the list compiled
as aforesaid and then in effect, shall be engaged in alphabetical order on a rotating basis,
each such tower to serve exclusively for a seven day period beginning at 12:01 a.m.
on the first day of that period. A record or log shall be kept by the Police Department
indicating among other things the date and time on and at which said services were
requested, the location and nature of the call, the response to such request and any
complaints received in regard to the services rendered by the approved tower.
§ 3-13.5. Qualifications and Conditions. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
In order to qualify as an approved tower, the person, firm or corporation applying to the
Chief as aforesaid must present proof of its ability on its own, and not in conjunction
with, in partnership with, in a joint venture with or in any such similar association with
another person, firm or corporation, to comply with, and to continue hereafter during the
term of its approval to comply with, the following terms and conditions of its approval.
a. Office; Length of Service; Reputation.
1. An approved tower must have its own principal place of business and general
business offices for all business conducted on behalf of the Borough as
provided hereunder within the Borough of Moonachie or within the border of
any contiguous municipality. That office must be regularly manned every
weekday, except holidays, for at least six hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., must include the permanent storage of all of its records in respect to its
towing business for the Borough, and must thereupon have a means by which
its equipment can be directly summoned from the place where such equipment
is stored. It must be the only place to which a person is required to report to
retrieve a vehicle and to conduct all of his or her business in relation thereto.
If the storage place where the vehicle being retrieved is located pursuant to
3-13.3f is not within 660 feet (1/8 mile) of the said office, or if the person
retrieving the same is handicapped, or if the vehicle has a handicapped plate
or certificate, then the automobile, if drivable, and if the person retrieving it
requires, he or she shall be driven to the automobile, in either case without
charge; when under these same circumstances except that the vehicle is not
drivable, the person retrieving it shall be driven to it without charge or, if he or
she requires, may have it towed to said office but only upon the payment of a
reasonable charge in accordance with law for such towing and only upon his
or her agreement to immediately remove that vehicle. Any office rented solely
for the purpose of satisfying the requirement that it be located within the
Borough of Moonachie or a contiguous municipality but not otherwise fully
qualifying will not be approved.
§ 3-13.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-13.5
3:26
2. An approved tower must itself, exclusive of any association with another, have
been engaged in the business of towing and storing motor vehicles within this
Borough or a contiguous municipality for a minimum of two years and must
be of known good reputation in the field for a period of five years.
b. An approved tower must be available to provide service 24 hours per day, seven
days per week.
c. The maximum response time from the issuance of a telephone notice at any time of
the day or night until appearance on the scene at which the services are hereunder
required shall be 15 minutes.
d. An approved tower must follow the lawful direction of the officers of the Police
Department when acting hereunder.
e. An approved tower must store all towed vehicles in a safe manner so as to prevent
any damage to such vehicles.
f. The place to be provided for storage of vehicles towed pursuant hereto shall
accommodate at least 25 motor vehicles, shall be located either within the Borough
or within one mile of the Borough limits or of a contiguous municipality, shall be
enclosed by a fence of at least five feet in height which shall have gates that are
locked when the storage area is not attended and shall be lighted at night. Such
premises must be maintained in a manner to ensure an efficient operation and the
safety of the vehicles towed and stored. The premises shall be subject to inspection
at any reasonable time by the Police Chief of the Borough of Moonachie to
determine that it satisfies these requirements. At no time shall there be permitted
the parking or storage of vehicles other than upon the approved storage facility. An
approved tower must submit proof of its ownership of or tenancy to the storage
facility.
g. Wrecked vehicles shall not be stacked on top of one another, and only one level of
storage shall be maintained.
h. An approved tower shall provide that persons retrieving vehicles shall be able to
transact all business, including the pickup of the vehicles and payment of fees, at
the same location; stored vehicles must be available for retrieval daily between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and legal holidays.
i. The equipment which an approved tower must generally have available shall
include at least the following:
1. Two small wreckers, one having dolly wheels.
2. One heavy-duty wrecker.
3. One flat bed.
j. The wrecker and/or tow trucks qualifying hereunder shall have a passenger seat to
transport the driver of the vehicles to be towed, if necessary, at no additional cost to
the vehicle owner.
k. Description of Equipment.
§ 3-13.5 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-13.5
3:27
1. All tow trucks used in the performance of Borough towing assignments must
meet the standards required by N.J.S.A. Title 39, Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations, and shall be subject to spot inspections before award and during
the course of the contract by the Borough of Moonachie Police Department.
The vendor represents that its trucks are in sound mechanical condition,
properly equipped, and suitable for their intended use.
2. A description of the equipment which shall be employed must be furnished to
and approved by the Chief of Police, together with the following:
(a) A true copy of the valid New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles
registration certificate for each vehicle.
(b) Proof of insurance for all equipment.
(c) Proof of New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles permits for emergency
lights in use on each motor vehicle.
(d) Proof of inspection from the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles on
all gasoline powered motor vehicles and also all diesel powered motor
vehicles under 10,000 pounds.
(e) The name of the towing business appearing on all motor vehicles.
3. In the event that any of the foregoing should change, the Chief of Police must
be notified of such change within 24 hours thereof and must approve the same.
4. All of the equipment required hereunder to be generally available to the tower
must be either owned by the tower or leased to the tower by a firm in the
regular principal business of leasing such equipment to the subject tower and
others but not leased to the tower by another towing firm not also fully
qualified hereunder; equipment leased or otherwise made available to the
tower through a partnership, joint venture or other association with a tower not
otherwise fully qualified hereunder shall not qualify.
l. The Chief of Police must be provided with a list of the names and addresses of all
employees who will be driving any of the subject towing equipment or handling
any of the towed vehicles; they must have valid New Jersey driver's licenses for
such purpose. If any such employee had been found to have been convicted of a
crime, the approved tower shall be automatically disqualified.
m. An approved tower must furnish the Borough with proof of insurance covering it
and the Borough and its employees and agents against any and all liability for
personal injuries and property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 combined
single limit; garage keepers liability insurance in an amount not less than $250,000
per location; garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single
limit; loss by fire or theft in the amount of $250,000 on each motor vehicle and its
contents during towage and any and all periods of storage; and workmen's
compensation as required by law. All policies must be endorsed to show the
Borough of Moonachie as an additional insured, and there must be provision made
that the Borough be notified of any cancellations or amendments of coverage.
n. An approved tower must agree in writing that the services which it renders shall be
§ 3-13.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-13.5
3:28
§ 3-13.6. Towing Service Receipt Forms. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
The towing contractor will provide a receipt form with the following information
contained therein:
rendered to the owner or operator of the subject motor vehicle and not to the
Borough, it being specifically understood that the tower is not acting as an agent or
employee of the Borough, that the tower accepts full responsibility for the services
rendered and any damage that may result and that the tower holds the Borough
harmless from any liability which may be claimed against it.
o. Upon notice to the approved tower that a motor vehicle has been impounded for a
violation of law or ordinance or for the purpose of police investigation or upon other
such notice from the Police Department, the approved tower shall not release such
vehicle until it has received authorization from the Police Department to do so.
p. An approved tower shall be required to clean the area of the automobile accident to
which it has been summoned of all debris that resulted from such accident as soon
as reasonably possible thereafter.
q. An approved tower must comply with all laws, ordinances and regulations
pertaining to the operation of its entire business, whether related to the towing and
storage referred to herein or otherwise, and it must supply proof of the existence of
any necessary licenses therefor.
r. A thorough record shall be made of any towing, storage and disposition of any
vehicle towed and of any cleaning of the area of an automobile accident as referred
to herein. Such records must be in the form and include all of the information as
may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police. Such records must be kept upon
the tower's business premises and be available for inspection by the appropriate
officers of the Borough at any reasonable time. True copies of such records shall be
provided to the Chief of Police at least monthly.
a. Date and time of towing service.
b. Location of towing service.
c. Reason for towing service.
d. Destination of towed vehicle.
e. Registration plate number and state.
f. (VIN#) vehicle identification number.
g. Make, model and color of vehicle.
h. Name, address and telephone number of customer.
i. Cost of the towing fee.
j. Cost of the storage fee and breakdown of charges.
k. Extra fees with detailed explanation.
§ 3-13.5 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-13.6
3:29
§ 3-13.7. Charges. [Ord. #97-6, § 1; Ord. #2011-5; Ord. #2018-7; amended
9-24-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-4]
An approved tower may charge the owner or operator of a vehicle towed or stored in
accordance herewith as follows:
l. Release date and time.
a. The sum per motor vehicle to be charged for the respective services shall depend
on equipment reasonably required to be used and shall not exceed the following:
1. Service charges:
(a) Roadside service for passenger cars, tire change, jump start: $125 per
hour + parts.
(b) Roadside service for trucks (medium/heavy): $175 per hour + parts.
2. Towing charges:
(a) Motorcycles or motor scooters: $150.
(b) Light duty (up to 10,000 lbs.) hook up: $150.
(c) Medium duty (10,001-16,000 lbs.): $250 per hour.
(d) Heavy duty (16,001 and above): $500 per hour.
(e) Decoupling fee (if tow is not performed): 1/2 of basic charge.
3. Recovery/winching (in addition to towing-per truck including driver):
(a) Light/medium duty (10,000-16,000 lbs.): $175 per 1/2 hour.
(b) Heavy duty (16,001 and above): $600 per hour.
(c) Rotator/crane recovery unit: $1,200 per hour.
(d) Tractor with landoll trailer or detach trailer: $450 per hour.
(e) Tractor/transport hauler only: $250 per hour.
(f) Refrigerator trailer w/tractor: $450 per hour.
(g) Box trailer w/tractor: $400 per hour.
(h) Air cushion unit: $1,000 per hour.
(i) Light tower: $250 per hour.
(j) Pallet jack: $200.
(k) Rollers: $200.
(l) Any other specialized equipment: $250 per hour.
(m) Loader/backhoe/telescopic handler/bulldozer/bobcat: $300 per hour each.
§ 3-13.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-13.7
3:30
(n) Forklift: $300 per hour.
(o) Dump truck/dump trailer w/tractor: $350 per hour.
(p) Roll-off with container: $350 per hour + disposal.
(q) Recovery supervisor vehicle: $150 per hour.
(r) Scene safety equipment, communications, traffic management, etc: $250
per hour each.
(s) Recovery support vehicle/trailer, add'l recovery equipment: $350 per
hour.
4. Storage of vehicles per calendar day (inside rates 2X outside rate):
(a) Cars/light trucks-10 feet by 20 feet space: $45 per day.
(b) Trucks (duel wheels) single axle: $90 per day.
(c) Tractor/dump truck/tractor and trailer combo/trailers: $125 per unit per
day.
(d) Buses: $150 per day.
(e) Roll-off: $125 per day each.
(f) Cargo/accident debris/load storage/vehicle components: $45 per space
used per day.
(g) Rental of any tow company supplied trailer post incident: $500 per day.
5. Mileage fees:
There shall be no mileage fees for medium duty and heavy duty vehicles
charges to an owner or driver for any mileage with the borders of the Borough
of Moonachie or for any mileage fees within the borders of the Borough to the
tow operator's facility. Mileage fees are permitted for light duty vehicles at the
rate of $6 per loaded miles within the Borough or to the tow operator's facility.
Alternate destination tows will be negotiated between the towing company and
the owner or driver.
Fees for towing vehicles into or out of the Borough of Moonachie must be
agreed upon by the owner of any such vehicle, in writing, prior to the vehicle
being towed. The owner or operator of a vehicle shall have the right to select a
tower of his or her choice, including towers with a place of business outside of
the Borough, provided that such disabled vehicle is not then interfering with
the vehicular or pedestrian flow of traffic and that the location of such vehicles
does not present a danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
6. Additional services:
(a) Accident minor clean-up and disposal of debris: $75 per hour (one hour
minimum) plus absorbent material used.
§ 3-13.7 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-13.7
3:31
§ 3-13.8. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #97-6, § 1; Ord. #2015-5]
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Moonachie be and is hereby authorized to
formulate, implement rules and regulations as may be necessary for the enforcement of
this Chapter.
Notwithstanding the authorization of the Chief of Police, no ineligible period shall
exceed one calendar year for a first violation of this Chapter and three years for a second
violation with permanent ineligibility for any third violation.
In addition, any decision of ineligibility determination by the Chief of Police may be
overridden by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council after careful consideration of
the circumstances while not adversely affecting the applicant's right of appeal.
§ 3-13.9. Fees. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
The fee for a license pursuant to this Chapter is $500.
§ 3-13.10. Conformance with Charges and Fee Schedules. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
There shall be no additional charges including but not limited to waiting time and
cleanup costs. All towing service charges must be in full conformance with the fee
schedule provided herein. Charges imposed without the specified receipt or for amounts
other than provided in the fee schedule will be cause for immediate termination.
(b) Recovery supervisor and/or Level III Specialist: $225 per hour.
(c) Certified towing operator: $125 per hour per man.
(d) Manual laborers: $100 per hour per man.
(e) Fuel/hazmat/spills clean-up and disposal: Time and material.
(f) Hazmat and trash recovery: Surcharged 10%.
(g) Subcontractor markup: 10%.
(h) Administrative charge (only after 3rd visit to vehicle): Cars only $50.
(i) Administrative charge (medium/heavy trucks): $200.
(j) After our release: $75.
(k) Notification documentation fee: $50.
(l) Tarping/wrapping vehicles: $90/car and $250/truck.
(m) Go Jacks/skates: $40.
(n) All official towers shall be obligated to tow and to make roadside service
repairs to vehicles including all equipment owned by the Borough of
Moonachie in the event that they become disabled, without any charge to
the Borough.
b. Anything not covered on this rate list: The usual and customary fee should apply.
§ 3-13.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-13.11
3:32
§ 3-13.11. Credit Card Payment. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
Vendors shall make provision for and permit payment of towing related charges by
major credit card and/or auto club membership such as AAA and MCA without
minimum charge or service fee.
§ 3-13.12. Repealer. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
Any ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
§ 3-13.13. Severability. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
If any section, clause, sentence or other part of this section or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance shall for any reason be adjudged by a Court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder of this section.
§ 3-13.14. Effective Date. [Ord. #97-6, § 1]
This section shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 3-14. TOBACCO PRODUCTS; USE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS.
§ 3-14.1. Definitions. [Ord. #97-10, § 1]
NON-PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place that is not a public place including but
not limited to one's house, auto (moving or stationary) or place of employment.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any building or enclosed structure open to the public,
and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located within the Borough
of Moonachie which is open to the public.
TOBACCO — Shall mean any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of
smoking, chewing, inhaling, and other personal use, including cigars, chewing tobacco,
pipe tobacco, snuff, and cigarettes in any form.
§ 3-14.2. Possession and/or Use by Minors Prohibited. [Ord. #97-10, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to smoke or use a tobacco
product in or on any public place or non-public place, or to possess in open view, an
opened pack, opened carton, or other opened container holding a tobacco product in any
public place or non-public place.
This section shall not apply to a minor smoking or using tobacco in a non-public place
which constitutes the residence of the minor and his or her parent or parents or guardian.
§ 3-14.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #97-10, § 3]
A violation by a minor of this section shall be enforced as follows:
a. First Offense.
§ 3-13.11 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-14.3
3:33
1. A verbal warning will be given to the offender by the officer observing the
violation. The officer will take the offender's name, age, address, telephone
number, and name and address of parents or guardians. The information will
be placed on a "Juvenile Record Card" maintained at the Department of Police,
which said Card shall also contain the date and place of the offense.
b. Second Offense.
1. A verbal warning will be given to the offender by the officer observing the
violation. The officer will take the offender's name, age, address, telephone
number, name and address of parents or guardians. The information will be
placed on a "Juvenile Record Card" maintained at the Department of Police,
which said Card shall also contain the date and place of the offense.
2. Unless there are other violations outstanding, or the offender is uncooperative,
he or she will not be taken to Police headquarters for a first violation. The
information from the Juvenile Record Card will be transmitted to the Juvenile
Unit where it will be filed and the parent or guardian of the child should be
advised of the incident and the information contained on the Card.
c. Third Offense. The officer observing the violation will take the offender's name,
age, address, telephone number, parents or guardian's name and address (the
information will be placed on a "Juvenile Record Card"). The Card will also contain
the date and place of the offense. The Juvenile Unit will arrange a "station house
adjustment" with the offender and the offender's parents or guardians. The station
house adjustment will involve discussion of the fourth phase of enforcement, and
anti-tobacco use literature will be provided. Unless there are extenuating
circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender into custody.
The Juvenile Unit will take appropriate action, which will be a referral to a two
hour education program currently conducted by the Valley Hospital Community
Education Department. In the event that such program is not available, the Bureau
will assign attendance at a similar education program. Attendance at this program
is required, both by the offender and a minimum of one parent or guardian. Unless
there are extenuating circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender
into custody.
d. Fourth Offense. The officer observing the violation will take the offender's name,
age, address, telephone number, parents or guardian's name and address (the
information will be placed on a "Juvenile Record Card"). The Card will also contain
the date and place of the offense. The Juvenile Unit will arrange a "station house
adjustment" with the offender and the offender's parents or guardians. The station
house adjustment will involve discussion of the fifth phase of enforcement, and
anti-tobacco use literature will be provided.
The Juvenile Unit will take appropriate action, which will be referral to a six
hour education program currently conducted by The Valley Hospital Community
Education Department. In the event that such program is not available, the Bureau
will assign attendance at a similar education program. Attendance at this program
is required, both by the offender and a minimum of one parent or guardian. Unless
there are extenuating circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender
into custody.
§ 3-14.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-14.3
3:34
§ 3-15. PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL.
§ 3-15.1. Definitions. [Ord. #99-15, § I]
For the purpose of this section, "obscene material" means any description, narrative
account, display or depiction of sexual activity of anatomical area contained in, or
consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live
performance or film which by means of posing, composition, format, or animated
sensual details which:
§ 3-15.2. Prohibitions and Restrictions. [Ord. #99-15, § II]
The Juvenile Unit will assign 10 hours of community service to the offender.
e. Fifth Offense. The officer observing the violation will take the offender's name,
age, address, telephone number, parents or guardian's name and address (the
information will be placed on a "Juvenile Record Card"). The Card will also contain
the date and place of the offense. The Juvenile Unit will arrange a "station house
adjustment" with the offender and the offender's parents or guardians. The station
house adjustment will involve discussion of the sixth phase of enforcement, and
anti-tobacco use literature will be provided.
The Juvenile Unit will take appropriate action, which will be a referral to another
six hour education program currently conducted by The Valley Hospital
Community Education Department which fee shall be payable by the parents or
guardian of the perpetrator. In the event that such program is not available, the
Bureau will assign attendance at a similar education program. Attendance at this
program is required, both by the offender and a minimum of one parent or guardian.
Unless there are extenuating circumstances, the officer does not have to take the
offender into custody.
The Juvenile Unit will assign 20 hours of community service to the offender.
a. Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals.
b. Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value when taken as a whole.
c. Is part of a work, which to the average person applying contemporary community
standards, has a dominant theme, taken as a whole, which appeals to the prurient
interest.
a. No person who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession, or similar business
with unimpeded access for persons under 18 years of age or who is in business of
making sales of periodicals or other publications at retail containing pictures,
drawings, or photographs, shall display or permit to be displayed at his business
premises any obscene material at a height of less than five feet and without a blinder
or other covering placed or printed on the material displayed. The public display of
the obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer
knowingly made or permitted this display.
§ 3-14.3 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-15.2
3:35
§ 3-15.3. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. #99-15 § III]
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be charged with a petty
disorderly offense.
b. No person under the age of 18 shall be sold, shown, or rented any such x-rated or
sexually explicit books, magazines, films and videos.
c. No employee under the age of 18 shall be permitted to handle transactions in which
x-rated or sexually explicit books, magazines, films and videos are displayed,
shown, sold or rented to any person.
d. It shall be unlawful to sell or rent or display for sale or rent any films and videos
which are x-rated or which are sexually explicit, unless the following requirements
are met:
1. Such films and videos and/or the display covers containing pictures or
descriptions of said films and videos shall be segregated in a separate room,
surrounded by solid walls. The doors of said room shall be of a solid, nontransparent
material and shall have posted thereon the following words in clear
block letters of not less than two inches each:
ADULT ONLY
NO ONE ADMITTED
UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE
2. The said door shall be kept closed except when used for ingress and egress.
The door shall be clearly visible to the store cashier at all times. The walls of
the room shall extend from the floor to a height of not less than eight feet
unless the ceiling shall be less than nine feet, in which case the walls shall
extend from the floor to a distance of not less than one foot from the ceiling.
e. The operator of said business shall be responsible for prohibiting minors from
entering said room and that said room is adequately secured from casual
observation by minors and the general public.
f. The provisions of this section shall apply irrespective of the total volume of
percentage of the business at the premises which such sales or rental or videos shall
constitute.
§ 3-15.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 3-15.3
3:36
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
Editor's Note: The general power to license and to prescribe license fees is
contained in R.S. 40:52-1.2. Licensing is also a part of the general police power
granted by R.S. 40:72-3 and R.S. 40:48-2.
For licensing of retail food establishments see Appendix B.
§ 4-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.1]
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of procedures for administering
the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued by the Borough, except
alcoholic beverage licenses and dog licenses.
§ 4-1.2. Applications. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.2]
All applications for licenses shall be made to the Borough Clerk on forms provided by
him, and shall contain the following information:
a. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
b. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address and
description of the premises.
c. If a vehicle is to be used, its description including the license number.
d. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the employer,
together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
e. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed activity
will be conducted.
f. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or services to be
sold or supplied.
g. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or the
violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic offenses and, if so, the date
and place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty
imposed.
h. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant so that an investigator may properly evaluate his character and
responsibility.
i. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the Chief of Police determines that
fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint records shall be
immediately processed for classification and identification.
j. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the information
§ 3-15.3 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-1.2
4:1
§ 4-1.3. Investigation of Applicants. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.3]
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police officer designated by
him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation of the applicant's business
responsibility, moral character and ability to properly conduct the licensed activity as he
considers necessary for the protection of the public. He shall communicate his findings
in writing to the Borough Clerk within a reasonable time after the application has
been filed. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability or business
responsibility is unsatisfactory, or the products, services or activity are not free from
fraud, he shall disapprove the application and the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license
and so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the Clerk shall issue the license immediately,
provided the required license fees have been paid and except in cases where approval of
the Mayor and Council is required. In the case of an application for a solicitor's, peddler's
or canvasser's license, the license may be issued immediately subject to investigation.
§ 4-1.4. Contents of License. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.4]
Licenses shall be in a form which the Mayor and Council shall prescribe by resolution,
and shall contain the following information:
§ 4-1.5. License Record. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.5]
The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this Chapter. The
record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the Mayor and Council and shall
contain the same information as is required by subsection 4-1.4 to be contained in the
license. It shall also indicate the amount of the license fee and the date upon which
payment was received, the date of issuance, whether the license is new or is a renewal,
and any other information which the Mayor and Council may require by resolution.
§ 4-1.6. Display of License. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.6]
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle, the license
required by this subsection supplied in detail as to each partner. Applications
of corporations shall have attached individual statements containing all of the
information required by this subsection relating to each employee or agent who
shall engage in the licensed activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed activity.
c. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is carried on
at a fixed location.
d. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and license
number of the vehicle.
e. The expiration date of the license.
f. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Council may require by
resolution.
§ 4-1.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-1.6
4:2
shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle. In all other cases the
licensee shall have the license in his possession at all times and shall display it upon the
request of any police officer or any person with whom he is doing business.
§ 4-1.7. Transferability. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.7]
Each license shall apply only to the person to whom it was issued and shall not be
transferable to another person. Licenses may be transferred from place to place in cases
where the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, but only with the approval
of the Mayor and Council by resolution.
§ 4-1.8. Expiration Date; Renewal; Proration of Fees. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-1.8]
§ 4-1.9. Revocation of License; Causes. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.9]
Any license or permit issued by the Borough may be revoked by the Mayor and Council
after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
§ 4-1.10. Notice of Hearing. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.10]
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing
by the Borough Clerk and shall specifically set forth the grounds on which the proposed
revocation is based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a
copy to the licensee at his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested,
at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
a. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on December
31, of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for renewal of licenses shall
be made not later than December 1 of the year of issue.
b. When an application for a license is made during the course of any calendar year,
the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any period of time greater than 1/2 a
month shall be considered a full month for this purpose.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the licensed activity.
c. A violation of any provision of this Code.
d. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a misdemeanor
or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
e. Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or his agents or
employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach of the
peace or a menace to public health, safety or general welfare.
f. Whenever a license has been issued immediately on application, pending the results
of investigation, such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the
investigation is such as would have resulted in denial of the license.
§ 4-1.6 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-1.11
4:3
§ 4-1.11. Hearing; Determination. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.11]
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be represented
by an attorney, to present witnesses on his own behalf, to cross-examine opposing
witnesses and to have a permanent record made of the proceedings at his own expense.
The Mayor and Council shall revoke or suspend the license if they are satisfied by a
preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 4-1.12. Reinstatement of Revoked Licenses. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.12]
The Mayor and Council may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied if after hearing they are satisfied by clear and convincing evidence
that the acts which led to the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no
person whose license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him, directly
or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
§ 4-1.13. Establishing Character of Business; Filing of Bond. [Ord. #82-1; 1970
Code § 5-1.13]
The Borough Clerk shall establish the character of any new business application by
eliciting a declaration of intention of all new businessmen as to whether they intend
to remain within the Borough temporarily or longer than a period of one year, and by
requiring the filing of a bond in an amount equal to 25% of the value of the applicant's
stock, but in no event shall the bond be less than $1,000 in amount.
The bond shall be declared forfeited upon conclusive proof of falsification in the
application for license, willful violation of an ordinance, State or Federal law, or removal
from the Borough within a year after opening the business premises without payment
of the license fee or fees required of itinerant and transient vendors as established in
subsection 4-2.4 of this Chapter. The bond of every merchant continuously conducting a
vending business for more than one year shall be surrendered, and no further bond shall
be required of him under this Chapter.
§ 4-1.14. Power to Make Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.14]
The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this Chapter or for the purpose of administering the provision
of this Chapter or making them more effective. No regulation shall be inconsistent
with, alter or amend any provision of this Chapter and no regulation shall impose any
requirement which is in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or
by implication imposed by any provision of this Chapter.
§ 4-1.15. Exemptions. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-1.15]
Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to or require the payment of a fee by any charitable
or religious society or social organization where the proceeds from conducting such
business or purpose shall be applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to
the charitable or religious objects of such society or for the benefit of such social
organization for which the charitable or religious society or social organization exists;
provided, however, that the license for such business or purpose shall be granted solely
by express resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 4-1.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-1.16
4:4
§ 4-1.16. Games of Chance Permitted. [Ord. No. 2003-13; Ord. No. 2016-3]
Games of chance, commonly known as "Bingo" and "Raffles" as provided by the Laws
of the State of New Jersey of 1954, Chapter 5:8-58, may be conducted in the Borough
of Moonachie on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday,
provided that the applicant for the license to conduct such game, otherwise qualifies
under the provisions of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the rules and
regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission, and, specifically,
provided that the organization conducting games is a charitable, religious or other
organization qualifying under the provisions of the Statute.
The Borough Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the "issuing authority" to
approve the granting of bingo and raffle license in accordance with the Bingo Licensing
Law and Raffles Licensing Law, as administered by the Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission.
§ 4-2. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.12
§ 4-2.1. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. #95-17]
It has been determined by the Mayor and Council that the unregulated and uncontrolled
operations of transient merchants, peddlers and hawkers within the Borough of
Moonachie present a serious health and safety hazard affecting the public welfare.
§ 4-2.2. Classification of Type of Business; Standards. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.1]
For the purpose of licensing and regulations under this Code, it shall be in the discretion
of the Borough Clerk to determine whether a merchant shall be classified as a transient
merchant or transient merchant peddler, or permanent merchant or peddler. The Clerk
shall consider as prima facie proof of the permanency of a merchant's peddler business
the presentation of a tax bill for real property in the name and address of the applicant, if
the address is the same as the address for which the application is made.
§ 4-2.3. Application and Licensing Procedure. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.2]
Peddlers, dealers or their agents selling and/or delivering any item not specifically set
forth herein pursuant to any State license shall pay to the Borough of Moonachie the sum
of $200 for each vehicle. Such other items shall include, but are not limited to, coffee,
tea or other hot beverages; sandwiches, hot dogs, hamburgers or the like; and/or sodas
and other cold drinks; and/or other breakfast and luncheon-type food. Said license fee
shall be due and payable to the Borough of Moonachie, State of New Jersey at Borough's
office with the application. The license shall take effect immediately upon the issuing of
same by the Borough Clerk after satisfactory acceptance of the application by the Mayor
and Council and shall expire on the 31st day of December of that year. Said license may
be renewed on or before the first day of January of each year thereafter upon the payment
of the license fee herein mentioned and satisfactory acceptance of the yearly application.
§ 4-2.4. Duration. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.3]
12. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 7, 46, 82-1 and prior code §§ 5-2.1 — 5-2.4.
§ 4-1.16 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-2.4
4:5
§ 4-2.5. Restrictions on Location. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.4]
No licensee under this section shall offer for sale any merchandise, food, beverage or
other goods at any of the following locations within the Borough of Moonachie at any
time:
§ 4-2.6. Restrictions on Peddlers. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.5]
The license to peddle, sell and deliver goods, wares, merchandise, and food products
as stated herein does not authorize service upon the highways or approaches thereto
to occupants of vehicular traffic stopped or standing for the particular purpose of
purchasing products from the licensee. All such peddling is hereby prohibited.
§ 4-2.7. Display of Certificate. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.6]
All persons owning such vehicle licensed as aforesaid shall be assigned and furnished
with a certificate by the Clerk of the Borough of Moonachie for such vehicle, which
certificate shall be securely fastened by nails, screws or rivets in plain view on such
vehicle, shall at no time be removed therefrom or be attached to any other vehicle, after
having once been fastened thereto without the written permission from the Clerk of the
Borough of Moonachie.
a. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in subsection 4-2.2 to the contrary, a
transient merchant, peddler or hawker must be "mobile" or "transient" by definition.
If said merchant, peddler or hawker does not move his location the distance of 250
feet at least once every two hours, not to return to the prior location for a period of
at least one hour he will be presumed not to be mobile for the purposes of this
section, and therefore be subject to the provisions of Section 4-5.
b. The transient merchant, peddler or hawker shall not service any one location for
more than four hours in total during any twenty-four-hour period in order to be
presumed as itinerant for purposes of this section. No peddler, transient merchant
or hawker shall have any exclusive right to any location or remain at any fixed
location for a period in excess of 120 minutes at any one time. Peddlers shall service
only the personnel or pedestrian traffic which are employed or otherwise engaged
by the actual premises or site being visited and serviced at the time by the peddler,
transient merchant or hawker.
a. On any streets located in any residential zone within the Borough of Moonachie.
Mobile ice cream vendors shall be excluded from this restriction.
b. Within 250 feet of the nearest restaurant or food service establishment.
c. On any right-of-way, easement or property owned, or leased by the Borough of
Moonachie or the County of Bergen.
a. The Borough Clerk shall issue to the person, firm or corporation, on applying and
paying for such license, a certificate showing the payment of such license fee, and
in such certificate, it shall state that such license shall expire on the 31st day of
December following such issuance and payment and that it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons, firm or corporations or their agents or representatives to
manage or conduct any business or use any vehicle required to be licensed or to aid
§ 4-2.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-2.7
4:6
§ 4-2.8. Additional Application Information. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.7]
The applicant shall disclose the name or names and residences of the owners or persons
in whose interest such business is conducted; and the average quantity, kind, and value
of the stock of goods, wares, merchandise, food products, intended to be sold or exposed
in the Borough. The applicant shall also give the names and street addresses of persons,
or corporations which supply the products to be offered for sale. The application shall
also contain the applicant's N.J. State Sales Tax Identification Number and proof that the
applicant has complied with the minimum prepaid provisions of said Sales Tax Law.
Where said license involves the operation of a motor vehicle, the following information
shall be supplied:
§ 4-2.9. Exclusive Nature of License. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.8]
No person, firm, corporation or corporations, agents or representatives or other persons
shall transact any business under the license granted under this section, except the
business for which the license is specifically granted.
§ 4-2.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.9]
Any person or persons, firms or corporations or their agents or representatives who
violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
one or more of the following:
or assist as an employee, clerk or otherwise in carrying on such business or use any
vehicle unless such license fee has been paid and such certificate obtained for such
vehicle is in full force and effect.
b. Each licensee shall annually submit the route of its vehicle or vehicles at the time
of the renewal of its license. Any deviation from the route set forth therein shall
constitute a violation of this section. Said route shall be subject to approval annually
by the Mayor and Council.
c. Every licensee hereunder shall provide to the Borough Clerk proof of acquisition of
all other necessary licenses and approvals from any other applicable governmental
entity.
d. All food service vehicles shall be inspected by the Board of Health Inspector twice
during the license period (January and July), at which time a satisfactory
determination shall be required by the inspector in order for the license to remain
valid and in full force and effect.
a. The names, addresses and driver's license numbers of all persons using said vehicle.
b. All convictions for motor vehicle violations for period of five years antedating the
date of the application indicating the pertinent details.
c. All convictions for criminal offenses.
a. A fine not exceeding $1,000;
b. Imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days;
§ 4-2.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-2.10
4:7
§ 4-2.11. Enforcement. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.10]
The Police Department is authorized and directed to enforce this section along with
other Borough Officials designated by the Mayor and Council including but not limited
to the Borough Construction Official, Health Officer or Recycling Coordinator and to
enforce all necessary and lawful regulations as may best protect the residents and those
employed within the Borough.
§ 4-2.12. Exceptions. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.11]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 4-2.13. Insurance. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.12]
In addition to the requirements of Section 4-2 et seq. applicants shall maintain and
produce proof of insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of $100,000 per person
and $300,000 per occurrence for general liability purposes including product's liability;
and $50,000 for property damage. The Borough of Moonachie shall be named as an
additional insured on all such insurance policies. The insurance coverages shall not be
terminated or cancelled prior to the expiration date thereon unless 30 days advance
written notice is provided to the Borough of Moonachie by the insurer. In the event that
such insurance coverage is terminated or cancelled, then said license shall be void and
invalid until proof of coverage is provided by the applicant.
§ 4-2.14. Bond. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.13; Ord. #96-2, § 1]
Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a cash bond or a surety bond
issued by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey in the
amount of $1,000. The surety bond shall be in favor of the Borough and shall assure
the payment by the applicant of all taxes that may be due from the applicant to the
State of New Jersey or any political subdivision of the state; the payment of any fines
that may be assessed against the applicant or its agents or employees for violation of
the provisions of this section; the satisfaction of all judgments that may be rendered
c. A period of community service not exceeding 90 days, for each offense.
Any repetition of any act herein prohibited on any one day following such arrest or
conviction shall be deemed a new offense.
In addition to the above, failure to comply with the terms and provisions of
this section may subject the licensee to the suspension and revocation of license
provisions of subsection 4-1.9 et seq.
a. Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample catalogue or brochure for future
delivery.
b. Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any civic, fraternal,
educational or religious organization.
c. Garage sales held on the premises devoted to residential use.
d. Any athletic activity authorized by permit issued by the Borough.
§ 4-2.10 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-2.14
4:8
against the applicant or its agents or employees in any cause of action commenced by the
purchaser of goods, wares, merchandise or services within one year from the date of the
sale by such transient merchant; and/or the satisfaction of any judgment on file arising
out of litigation initiated by the New Jersey Attorney General, the Division of Consumer
Affairs, the New Jersey Office of Consumer Protection, the Bergen County Office of
Consumer Affairs or any individual pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.
The bond shall be maintained so long as the transient merchant conducts business in
the Borough of Moonachie and for a period of one year after the termination of such
business and shall be released only when the transient merchant furnishes satisfactory
proof to the Borough Clerk that it has satisfied all claims of purchasers of goods, wares,
merchandise or services from such merchant and that all state and local sales taxes and
fees have been paid.
§ 4-2.15. Other Restrictions. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.14]
§ 4-2.16. Severability. [Ord. #95-17, § 4-2.15]
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause or provisions as adjudged and the remainder of this section shall be
deemed to be valid and effective.
All ordinance or parts of ordinance inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Nothing herein can be construed to allow the violation of any parking or zoning or any
other rules, regulations or ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 4-3. PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.
§ 4-3.1. Definition. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.1]
As used in this section:
PEDDLER — Shall mean and include any person, whether a resident of the Borough
or not, travelling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, food, ice cream,
fruit ices, soda water, garden farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the
same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. The word "peddler"
shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
a. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, no more than two
licensees under this section can operate at any given intersection at the same time.
b. No person regulated hereunder shall set up, maintain or permit the use of any table,
crate, sign, carton, rack or other device to increase the selling or display capacity of
the vending unit. No person regulated hereunder shall stack or place the items
offered for sale upon any sidewalk, street or upon the ground. All materials, signs
and/or other items offered for sale shall be located solely on or within the vending
unit.
§ 4-2.14 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-3.2
4:9
§ 4-3.2. Licenses Required. [Ord. #7, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler within the
Borough without first obtaining a license.
§ 4-3.3. Fees. [Ord. #46, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.3; Ord. #89-14; Ord.
#92-20; Ord. #95-17]
The fee for a peddler's license shall be $200 and no portion of the fee shall be prorated
for any part of the year.
§ 4-3.4. Noises and Speaking Devices. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.4]
After 9:00 p.m., no peddler, or any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry-out, blow a
horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaker, radio or sound
amplifying system, on any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the
Borough or on any private premises in the Borough where sound of sufficient volume
is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to
any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
§ 4-3.5. Use of Streets. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.5]
No peddler shall have an exclusive right to any location, nor shall be permitted to operate
in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public.
For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith,
shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
§ 4-3.6. Time Restrictions. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.6; Ord. #90-4]
No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk or peddle in the Borough any of the items listed
in subsection 4-3.1 after 9:00 p.m. from the month of May through October and 6:00
p.m. from November through April.
§ 4-3.7. Duty of Police to Enforce. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-3.7]
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough to require any person seen
peddling who is not known by such officer to be licensed, to produce his peddler's
license and to enforce the provisions of this section against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 4-4. SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
§ 4-4.1. Definition. [Ord. #62-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.1]
As used in this section:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR—Shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the
Borough or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal
§ 4-3.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-4.1
4:10
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself or
for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad
boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the
Borough for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
§ 4-4.2. License Required. [Ord. #62-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.2]
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in business within the
Borough without first obtaining a license.
§ 4-4.3. Application. [Ord. #69-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.3]
Applications for license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, and which in addition to
the requirements in subsection 4-1.2, shall contain the following information:
§ 4-4.4. Fees. [Ord. #69-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.4; Ord. #89-14; Ord.
#92-20]
The fee for a solicitor's or canvasser's license shall be as follows:
1993 1994 1995
$36 $39 $43
§ 4-4.5. Badges. [Ord. #69-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.5]
The Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his license a badge on
which shall be printed the words "Licensed Solicitor", the period for which the license
is issued and the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a
distance of 10 feet. Such badge, during the time the licensee is engaged in soliciting,
shall be worn conspicuously on the front of his outer garment.
§ 4-4.6. Time Restrictions. [Ord. #69-12; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-4.6; Ord.
#90-4]
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted later than 9:00 p.m. from the
month of May to October and 6:00 p.m. from November through April.
a. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the
sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are
located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
b. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and
the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
At the time of filing the application, a fee of $10 shall be paid to the Clerk to cover
the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein.
§ 4-4.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-4.7
4:11
§ 4-4.7. Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing Prohibited by Children. [Ord. #98-1,
§ 1]
a. Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing by Children; Exceptions. No child under the
age of 18 years shall go door to door within the Borough of Moonachie for the
purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing, as those terms are used and defined
in this Chapter, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or an adult supervisor
21 years of age or older.
b. Prohibition to Knowingly Suffer or Permit. No parent, guardian or other person
having legal charge over a child under 18 years of age shall knowingly suffer or
permit such child to go door to door within the Borough of Moonachie for the
purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing, as those terms are used and defined
in this Chapter, except as provided in paragraph a above.
c. Inducement Prohibited. No person, organization, corporation or other legal entity
shall induce a child under the age of 18 years to go door to door within the Borough
of Moonachie for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing, as those terms
are used and defined in this Chapter.
1. By distributing to such children goods or merchandise to be sold door to door,
or
2. By requesting such children, either in writing or orally, to go door to door for
the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing, or
3. By offering such children prizes or awards for such door to door peddling,
soliciting or canvassing unless prior thereto each such child is personally
served with a copy of this subsection and without first obtaining a signed
written statement from the parent, guardian or legal representative of each
such child acknowledging receipt of such subsection, that they have read and
understand said subsection and giving their permission for their child or ward
to go door to door for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing. Said
written and signed statements shall be filed with the Borough Clerk for a
period of not less than six months following the conclusion of the door to door
peddling, soliciting or canvassing for which the signed statements were
obtained by the person, organization, corporation, or other legal entity
responsible for inducing a child under the age of 18 years to go door to door
peddling, soliciting or canvassing prior to the commencement of such door to
door peddling, soliciting or canvassing by such children.
d. Exceptions. Nothing contained herein is intended nor shall it be construed to
prohibit children below the age of 18 years from going door to door within the
Borough of Moonachie (a) for the purpose of soliciting treats on Halloween,
commonly known as Trick or Treating, and (b) for the purpose of distributing
leaflets, flyers, pamphlets, newspapers, periodicals, or other written material, not
involving personal contact with the intended recipient.
e. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor exceeding $1,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 4-4.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-5
4:12
§ 4-5. PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT AND RESTAURANTS.
§ 4-5.1. License Required; Exceptions. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-5.1; Ord.
#89-14; Ord. #92-20; Ord. #94-1; Ord. #2005-15, § 1]
a. Any person or persons, corporation or corporations desiring to operate and open
any public place of amusement, dance hall, moving picture show, other than drivein
movie, traveling or other show, street exhibition, circus, carnival, bowling alley
within the limits of the Borough shall be required to take out a license therefor
before operating or opening any such show or place of amusement, and if any such
show or place of amusement shall be open or in operation at the time of the passage
of this section without a license or permit having been granted therefor by the
Borough Council or its agents duly authorized, the proprietors thereof or person or
corporation operating the same shall take out such license within 10 days after the
final passage of this section; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
apply to shows, entertainments or exhibitions for charity or instruction.
b. No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall conduct or maintain a
restaurant or place of supplying meals or eatables to be eaten or consumed on the
premises or conduct or maintain a refreshment stand without having first taken out
a license for same, and if any restaurant or refreshment stand shall be open, or place
of supplying meals or eatables as aforesaid, at the time of the passage of this
section, then such license shall be taken out within 10 days after the final passage
of this section.
c. Stores and Food Markets or Establishments.
1. No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall conduct or maintain a
store or retail or wholesale outlet for the sale of meats, groceries, provisions or
any food products, including but not limited to meat markets, bakeries,
delicatessens, food markets, whether or not they manufacture and make their
own products, caterers and confectionery stores which shall be deemed to
include any stores for the sale of candy, ice cream, soda and related products,
without first having obtained a license for the same, and if any such
establishment shall be open at the time of passage of this section, then such
license shall be taken out within 10 days after the final passage of this section.
All licenses shall be issued by the Borough Council upon application for the
same, signed by the applicant and stating where the store or establishment is
to be conducted, including the street and number where the store or
establishment is located or to be conducted. All licenses shall be subject to
compliance with the regulatory provisions of the Code of the Borough.
2. The license fee for the establishments described in subparagraph c, 1 above
shall be as follows:
(a) Wholesale/Supermarkets: $475
(b) Mini-Marts/Convenience Stores: $125
(c) Delicatessen: $125
(d) Mobile Vendors: $200
§ 4-5 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-5.1
4:13
§ 4-5.2. Investigation. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-5.2]
§ 4-5.3. Fees. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-5.3; Ord. #90-4]
(e) Bakery/Retail: $150
d. The license fee for restaurants, which shall include luncheonettes, diners, taverns,
pizza kitchens, and all similar establishments which provide for the serving of food
to the public, shall be as follows:
1. Restaurants
Capacity:
1-50 $125
51-100 $225
101-150 $325
151-200 $425
201+ $525
2. Cafeteria's in Commercial Establishments:] $125.
e. All licenses shall expire on December 31 in each year. Any license so granted shall
be revocable at any time by a majority vote of the Borough Council upon complaint
being made and a hearing had thereon.
f. The annual fee for licenses for restaurants which provide entertainment on a regular
basis shall be as follows:
1993 1994 1995
$260 $270 $280
g. Hours and Operations Restricted. All minimarts/convenience stores located in the
Borough of Moonachie and within 200 feet of a residential zone, shall be closed
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. prevailing time on every day of
the year.
a. In addition to the requirements contained in Section 4-1, each application for a
license under this section shall be investigated by the Borough Health Officer, who
shall report his findings in writing to the Mayor and Council within a reasonable
time. No license shall be issued unless the Health Officer reports that the applicant
conforms to all provisions of the Retail Food Establishment Code.
b. Suspension or Revocation. In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in
subsection 4-1.9, any license issued under this section to a retail food establishment
as defined in the Retail Establishment Code of New Jersey, 1965, may be
suspended or revoked for failure to comply with any provisions of the code.
a. The fee for licenses required in connection with businesses or places of amusements
described in subsection 4-5.1a shall be as follows:
§ 4-5.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-5.3
4:14
§ 4-5.4. Refreshment Stand Requirement; License Fee. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-5.4]
No license for a refreshment stand shall be granted unless such stand shall be erected a
sufficient distance back from the street line to permit automobiles to drive entirely off the
street when stopping to patronize the stand. The license fee for each refreshment stand
shall be $35 per year, which fee is imposed for the purpose of revenue.
§ 4-6. AUCTIONEERS.
§ 4-6.1. License Required; Fee. [Ord. #7, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #46, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970
Code § 5-6.1]
Every general auctioneer shall obtain a license by filing an application as provided by
this Chapter. The fee for the license shall be $50 per year.
§ 4-6.2. Records Required. [R.S. 45:17-1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-6.2]
Pursuant to State law, every licensed general auctioneer, on the receipt or acceptance by
him of any personal property for the purpose of sale at auction and before offering the
same or any part thereof for sale at auction, shall write or cause to be written in a book
to be kept by him for that purpose, the name and address of the person who employed
him to sell such property, the name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf
or account the property is to be sold, the name and address of the person from whom the
auctioneer received or accepted the property, the name and address of the owner of the
property immediately prior to its receipt or acceptance, the location with street number,
if any, in which the property is to be kept until sold or offered for sale at auction, the
place and street number, if any, in which the property is to be sold or offered for sale at
auction, a description of the property, the quantity thereof, distinctive markings thereon,
if any, and the terms and conditions upon which the auctioneer receives or accepts the
property for sale at auction.
As used herein, the words "personal property" and "property" shall mean any goods,
wares, works of art, commodity, compound or thing, chattels, merchandise or personal
property which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to the sale of real property at auction.
§ 4-6.3. Inspection of Records. [R.S. 45:17-1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-6.3]
Such books and entries therein shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of
the Mayor and the Chief of Police, the County Prosecutor, and any other person who
shall be authorized in writing for that purpose by any or either of them, and who shall
exhibit such written authorization to the auctioneer.
1. For bowling alleys, the greater of $75 or $15 per lane.
2. For circuses and carnivals the fee for a license shall be as set forth in Section
4-7 of this Chapter.
3. For all other business or place of amusement or entertainment or activities set
forth in subsection 4-1.1a of this Chapter the fee shall be $200.
§ 4-5.3 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-6.4
4:15
§ 4-6.4. Violations. [R.S. 45:17-1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-6.4]
As provided by State law, any person who violates the requirements of subsections 4-6.2
and 4-6.3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 4-6.5. Bond Required. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-6.5]
Every general auctioneer shall, before any license is issued to him, enter into a bond
with sureties sufficient to be approved by the Borough Attorney in the sum of $1,000
and conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances of the Borough during the
continuance of his license.
§ 4-7. CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS.
§ 4-7.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #7, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-7.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or exhibit any circus or carnival, or similar
public exhibition, in the Borough without having first obtained a permit from the Clerk,
who shall only issue a permit after the same has been approved by the Council.
§ 4-7.2. Fee. [Ord. #46; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-7.2]
The fee for a permit shall be $250. All permits for a circus or carnival shall be valid for
a period of seven days from the date of issuance and may be renewed for one additional
period of seven days upon the payment of an additional $250.
§ 4-8. MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 4-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #87, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.1; Ord. #90-4]
As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean any person who supplies any mechanical amusement
device to another for use in his place of business, whether under lease or any similar
arrangement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Shall mean any
machine which may be operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether
the machine is coin operated or not, and whether or not it registers scores or tallies.
Examples of mechanical amusement devices are pinball machines, bowling machines,
mechanical grab machines, skee-ball machines, pokerino machines and similar devices.
This enumeration is intended to be typical and shall not be construed as exclusive. Juke
boxes shall not be considered mechanical amusement devices for the purposes of this
section.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person in whose place of business any mechanical
amusement device is placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 4-8.2. License Required. [Ord. #87, § 2; Ord. #81-7, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-8.2]
No person shall distribute or operate a mechanical or electronic amusement device
§ 4-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-8.2
4:16
within the Borough without having first obtained a license and paid the required fee. An
operator who uses machines owned by him in his place of business shall not be required
to possess a distributor's license.
§ 4-8.3. Applications for Licenses. [Ord. #87, § 4; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.3]
Applicants for distributor's or operator's licenses which are associations shall supply the
information required by subsection 4-1.2 for all members of the association. Applicants
which are corporations shall supply the information required by subsection 4-1.2 for all
officers and directors and for all stockholders of the corporation who own more than
10% of its issued and outstanding capital stock. Corporations shall also supply the name
and address of their registered agent. Applicants for licenses under this section shall not
be required by supply the physical description and photographs required by subsection
(4-1.2) but shall be required to supply a description of the machine or device sought to
be licensed.
§ 4-8.4. License Fee. [Ord. #87, § 4; Ord. #81-7, § 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-8.4]
The following schedule of annual fees is hereby adopted as a part of this section:
§ 4-8.5. Transferability. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.5]
A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving notice to the Clerk
together with a description of the new machine. A license may be transferred from one
place to another by giving notice to the Clerk and supplying the required information as
to the new premises.
§ 4-8.6. Location. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.6; Ord. #90-4]
No mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be located in any premises within
500 feet of a church or other religious institution or a public or private school. The
distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the church or school to the
nearest entrance of the premises on which the mechanical amusement device is located
or is sought to be located along the route that a pedestrian would normally walk.
§ 4-8.7. Regulations. [Ord. #81-7, §§ 3 & 4; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.7]
The following regulations shall apply to all mechanical and electronic amusement
devices:
a. Application fee: $25.
b. Distributor's license: $200.
c. Operator's license: $50 (per machine).
d. Transfer fee: $25.
All licenses issued hereunder are to be for the term of one year.
a. The premises shall be arranged so as to permit a clear view of the interior from the
§ 4-8.2 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-8.7
4:17
§ 4-8.8. Gambling Devices. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-8.8; Ord. #90-4]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize gambling devices of any kind,
including devices that dispense any kind of payoff or reward, or devices that have been
judicially determined to be gambling devices or declared to be gambling devices under
any law of the State of New Jersey. If the Chief of Police has reason to believe any
mechanical or electronic amusement device is used as a gambling device, he shall cause
that machine to be seized and impounded. If after hearing it is determined that the
machine was in fact being used as a gambling device, it shall be destroyed and the
license of the operator or distributor shall be revoked. Revocation of license and seizure
of machine are in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of
this section.
§ 4-9. TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES.
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [1970 Code § 7-1]
As used in this section:
CRUISING — Shall mean driving an empty taxicab along a public street at a slow rate
of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
OPERATION — Of a taxicab consists of transporting in a taxicab one or more persons
for hire. Accepting a passenger to be transported for hire from a point of departure within
the Borough to a destination within or without the Borough shall be considered operation
of a taxicab within the Borough. The operation of a taxicab by anyone other than the
owner shall be deemed operation by the owner as well as by the person actually driving
the taxi. The transportation of any person other than the owner or driver in any motor
vehicle bearing a sign using the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab" or "hack" shall be prima
facie evidence of operation.
OWNER—Shall mean any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered with
the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or who appears in the division's records to
exterior at all times.
b. No operator shall knowingly permit any person convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude to be associated with him in the ownership or management of the
business or to be in his employ or to loiter on the premises.
c. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards, whether in cash
or otherwise, as an inducement to use mechanical amusement devices.
d. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years who is
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian to remain on the premises after 10:00 p.m.
e. No operator shall permit any activity on the premises which is illegal or immoral or
which creates an undue amount of noise or a danger of a breach of the peace.
f. The maximum number of machines for each licensed premises shall be three.
g. No licensee shall permit any person under 16 years of age to play or operate any of
the machines licensed by this section without their parents' consent.
§ 4-8.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.1
4:18
be a conditional vendee or lessee or has any other proprietary interest in a taxicab.
TAXICAB OR TAXI — Shall mean a motor vehicle used to transport passengers for
hire which does not operate over a fixed route and is not hired by the day or hour.
§ 4-9.2. License Required. [Ord. #53, § 1; 1970 Code § 7-2]
No person shall operate a taxicab within the Borough unless both the owner and the
driver of the taxicab are licensed under this section.
§ 4-9.3. Types of Licenses. [1970 Code § 7-3]
§ 4-9.4. Licensing of Taxicab Owners. [Ord. #53, §§ 1 — 5 & 8; 1970 Code § 7-4;
Ord. #89-14; Ord. #92-20]
a. Driver's License. The holder of a taxicab driver's license shall be entitled to operate
within the Borough any taxicab whose owner has been licensed under this section.
b. Owner's License. The holder of a taxicab owner's license shall be entitled to operate
a taxicab owned by him within the Borough provided that the person driving the
cab holds a valid taxicab driver's license.
a. Application Information. Application for a taxicab owner's license shall be made to
the Chief of Police upon forms provided by him and shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, its
name, the address of its principal place of business, and the name and address
of its registered agent.
2. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of violating
any criminal or quasicriminal statute, including traffic laws and municipal
ordinances. If the applicant has been convicted, a statement as to the date and
place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment imposed.
3. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the
location of any proposed depots or terminals.
4. The previous experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers
for hire, including the name of any other state or municipality where the
applicant has ever been licensed to operate a taxicab, whether his license was
ever suspended or revoked, or his application for the issuance or renewal of a
license denied, and the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation.
5. Appropriate evidence as to the applicant's good character and business and
financial responsibility so that an investigator will be able to properly evaluate
it.
6. Any other facts that the applicant believes tend to show why he should be
granted a license.
7. A full color sketch showing the color scheme of the taxicabs to be operated by
the applicant and another full color sketch of any insignia or design which the
§ 4-9.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.4
4:19
applicant intends to use to identify his taxicabs.
8. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Council may require
by resolution.
Applications shall be verified by oath or affirmation. Applications by a
partnership shall give the information required for each partner, and shall
be verified by all partners. Applications by corporations shall give the
information required for and be verified by all officers and directors and all
persons holding more than 10% of the corporation's common stock, as well as
the corporation itself.
b. Notice of Hearing. The Chief of Police shall advise the Mayor and Council of the
filing of an application. The Mayor and Council shall set a date for a hearing on the
application and shall notify the applicant. The date set shall be within a reasonable
time after the filing of the application. The applicant shall cause a notice of the time
and place of hearing to be published once in a newspaper circulating in the Borough
at least three days before the date set for the hearing.
c. Investigation. The Chief of Police or a police officer designated by him shall
institute an investigation of the facts stated in the application and shall evaluate the
application in the light of the criteria set forth in paragraph e. A report containing
the results of the investigation and evaluation, a recommendation by the Chief of
Police that the license be granted or denied, and the reasons for his recommendation
shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council at least three days before the date set
for the hearing. A copy of the report shall also be sent to the applicant.
d. Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing any person who is a resident or taxpayer of the
Borough may appear in person and make a brief statement or submit a written
statement in support of or in opposition to the granting of a license. In addition, the
applicant and any other person who will be affected by the grant or denial of the
license other than as a Borough resident or taxpayer shall have the right to be
represented by an attorney, to testify himself or to present witnesses in support of
his position, to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and at his own expense to have
a stenographic record made of the proceeding. This paragraph shall not prevent the
Mayor and Council from imposing reasonable limits on the number of witnesses
appearing in favor of or against the granting of the license, the time allowed for
each side to present its case, or for the examination or cross-examination of any
witness, or from imposing any other restriction which is necessary to insure that the
hearing is conducted in an orderly, fair and expeditious manner.
e. Factors Considered. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the
Mayor and Council shall take into consideration the following factors:
1. The character, business and financial responsibility and experience of the
applicant, and the probability that if granted a license, the applicant will
operate his taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this section.
2. The number of taxicabs already in operation, the need of the public for
additional service, and any increased convenience that would result to the
public if more taxicabs were placed in operation.
§ 4-9.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.4
4:20
§ 4-9.5. Taxicab Driver's License. [Ord. #53, §§ 2 — 5 & 8; 1970 Code § 7-5; Ord.
#89-14; Ord. #92-20]
3. Whether any increase in the number of taxicabs operating in the Borough
would produce or substantially increase traffic congestion including
congestion in the vicinity of railroad stations or other areas where taxicabs
would frequently pick up or discharge passengers, or would otherwise
inconvenience the public.
4. Any other factors directly related to the grant or denial of the application
which would substantially affect the public safety or convenience.
f. Issuance of License. The Mayor and Council shall by resolution grant or deny the
application. If the application is granted, the Chief of Police shall issue the license
on receiving from the applicant satisfactory proof that he has complied with all laws
of the State of New Jersey relating to the operation of taxicabs. The license shall
state the name and address of the licensee, the number of vehicles which the
licensee is authorized to operate, and the date of issuance.
g. License Term; Fees. A taxicab owner's license shall be valid for the remainder of
the calendar year in which it is issued. The license fee shall be $50 per year or
portion thereof per vehicle payable on the filing of the application for the issuance
or renewal of the license.
h. Renewals. Licenses for taxicab owners may be renewed by the Mayor and Council
without a hearing upon the licensee's filing with the Chief of Police a sworn
statement that there have been no changes in the information contained in the
issuance of the initial application and that he has continued to comply with all laws
of the State of New Jersey relating to the operation of taxicabs and is not in
violation of any provision of this section, and a report by the Chief of Police made
after investigation that the statements made in connection with the application for
renewal are correct.
a. Applications. Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the Chief
of Police on forms provided by him and shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and age of the applicant.
2. The number of the applicant's New Jersey motor vehicle operator's license.
3. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the
violation of any criminal or quasi-criminal statute, including municipal
ordinances and traffic laws. If the applicant has been convicted, the date and
place of the conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment imposed.
4. A list of all places where the applicant has ever applied for or been granted a
license to drive a taxicab.
5. A statement as to whether the applicant's license to operate a motor vehicle or
his license to drive a taxicab has ever been suspended or revoked, or his
application for the issuance or renewal of either license denied and, if so, the
date and place of the denial, suspension or revocation and the reasons for it.
§ 4-9.4 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.5
4:21
6. The names and addresses of all persons by whom the applicant has been
employed for the past five years, the position held, and the nature of the work
performed.
7. A statement by a physician licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey
certifying that he has examined the applicant on a specified date, which date
shall not be more than 60 days prior to the filing of the application, and that in
his opinion the applicant is not afflicted with epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or
any other infirmity which would affect his ability to safely operate a taxicab.
8. Three photographs at least two inches by two inches clearly showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant.
9. Appropriate evidence that the applicant is not a narcotics addict, alcoholic or
habitual drunkard and is of good moral character and clean in dress and person.
10. If the Chief of Police considers it necessary for the proper identification or
investigation of the applicant, the applicant shall be fingerprinted and the
fingerprints immediately processed for classification and identification.
b. Examination. At the time of filing of the application, the Chief of Police or a police
officer designated by him shall give the applicant a written or oral examination
designed to test the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this section, the
Motor Vehicle Act, the Traffic Act, and other ordinances and regulations having to
do with traffic and the geography of the Borough.
c. Investigation. The Chief of Police or a police officer designated by him shall also
conduct an investigation of the facts stated in the application and shall report the
results to the Mayor and Council within a reasonable time. The report shall include
a recommendation that the license be granted or denied and the reasons for the
recommendation.
d. Consideration of Application.
1. After considering the facts contained in the application and the report of the
Chief of Police, the Mayor and Council may grant the application or they may
decide to hold a hearing on this matter.
2. In the event that the Mayor and Council decide that a hearing is necessary, the
applicant shall be given at least five days' notice of the fact that a hearing will
be held and of its time and place. The applicant shall also be furnished with a
copy of the report of the Chief of Police.
3. At the hearing the applicant shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney,
to present witnesses or to testify himself on his own behalf, to crossexamine
any opposing witnesses, and at his own expense, to have a stenographic record
made of the proceedings. After considering the evidence, the Mayor and
Council shall either grant or deny the application.
e. Issuance of License; Contents. Upon approval of the application by the Mayor and
Council, the Chief of Police shall immediately issue the applicant a taxicab driver's
license. The license shall contain the licensee's name and address, physical
description, signature and photograph.
§ 4-9.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.5
4:22
§ 4-9.6. Inspection of Vehicles. [1970 Code § 7-6]
§ 4-9.7. Identification of Taxicabs. [Ord. #53, § 7; 1970 Code § 7-7]
§ 4-9.8. Fares. [1970 Code § 7-8]
f. Term of License; Fees. An initial license to drive a taxicab shall be valid for the
remainder of the calendar year in which it was issued. A taxicab driver's license
may be reviewed annually upon the payment of $20 unless it has been revoked or
suspended.
a. Initial Inspection. Before any vehicle is used as a taxicab within the Borough, it
shall be inspected by the Chief of Police or a police officer designated by him to
ascertain that it is in a safe, clean and sanitary condition and contains all safety
devices required by law.
b. Reinspections. All taxicabs shall be reinspected annually or more often if the Mayor
and Council so require by resolution. In addition, any police officer may inspect a
taxicab at any reasonable time to determine if it is clean, sanitary and in a safe and
proper operating condition.
c. Failure to Pass Inspection. Any taxicab which fails to pass inspection shall be
immediately taken out of service and shall not be operated again within the
Borough until the defects which led to its rejection are corrected. In the case of
minor defects which do not constitute an immediate danger to the health or safety
of the public, the taxicab may continue to operate for a period of one week at the
end of which time it shall be reinspected. If the defect has not by then been
corrected, the vehicle shall immediately be taken out of service and shall remain out
of service until the defect is corrected.
a. Identification Required. Each taxicab operated in the Borough shall have a sign
painted on each rear door. The sign shall contain the owner's name and the word
"taxicab" or "taxi" in letters which shall not be less than four inches nor more than
eight inches in height.
b. Imitation of Color Scheme or Insignia. No taxicab operated in the Borough shall
imitate the color scheme or any identifying design or insignia of another taxicab
lawfully operating in the Borough, nor shall one taxicab have a color scheme or
identifying design or insignia which is so similar to that of another taxicab as to be
likely to have a tendency to mislead the public. The person first using a particular
color scheme or identifying design or insignia for his taxicab shall have the prior
right to it.
a. Display of Rates. Every taxicab shall have displayed in it, in a manner so as to be
easily read by all passengers, a card giving the maximum permissible rates of fare.
b. Receipts. The driver of a taxicab, on request of the passenger, shall give the
passenger a receipt for the amount charged. The receipt shall show the name of the
owner, the license number of the taxicab, the amount of the fare, and the date of the
transaction.
c. Refusal to Pay Fare. No person after hiring a taxicab shall refuse to pay the legal
§ 4-9.5 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.8
4:23
§ 4-9.9. Solicitation, Acceptance and Discharge of Passengers. [1970 Code § 7-9]
§ 4-9.10. Additional Regulations. [Ord. #53, § 6; 1970 Code § 7-10]
fare, nor shall any person hire a taxicab with the intent not to pay the legal fare.
d. Disputes over Fares. All disputes as to the rate of fare shall, upon request of the
driver or passenger, be determined by the police officer in charge of the Borough
Police Station. Failure to comply with the officer's determination shall be a
violation of this section.
a. Additional Passengers. No driver shall permit any additional person to ride in his
taxicab as a passenger unless the person first employing the taxicab consents to the
acceptance of the additional passenger.
b. Number of Passengers. Every taxicab shall have in it a card displayed within plain
view of all passengers stating its maximum permissible seating capacity. This
capacity shall be determined by the Chief of Police or a police officer designated
by him at the time that the vehicle is initially inspected. No driver shall permit more
persons to be carried in his taxicab as passengers than the number stated as the
maximum permissible seating capacity.
c. Refusal to Carry Passengers. No driver shall refuse to carry any orderly person to a
destination within the Borough unless previously engaged, or unable or forbidden
by the provisions of this section to do so.
d. Soliciting for Hotels. It shall be a violation of this section for any taxicab driver to
solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to divert patrons from one hotel to
another.
e. Misrepresentation. No driver of a taxicab shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming that person as to the time or place of the arrival or
departure of any train or bus or as to the location of any hotel, public place or
private residence within the Borough, or as to the distance between any two points,
nor shall any driver convey a passenger to any other place or over any other route
than that which the passenger may have instructed him to take. Unless otherwise
ordered, passengers shall be conveyed only over the most direct, practical route to
their destination.
f. Obstruction of Streets. No taxicab while waiting for employment by passengers
shall stand on any public street or space other than at the place designated as a
taxicab stand, nor shall any driver of a taxicab seek employment by repeatedly
driving his taxicab to and fro in a short space in front of any theater, hall, hotel,
public resort, railroad station, or other place of public gathering, or by otherwise
interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from such places. No
taxicab driver shall engage in the practice commonly known as cruising.
a. Transfer of License. Each license issued under this section shall apply only to the
person to whom it is issued and shall not be transferable.
b. Display of License. Each driver licensed under this section shall display his driver's
license in such a manner that it can be seen by all persons riding in his taxicab as
§ 4-9.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.10
4:24
§ 4-9.11. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. #53, § 9; 1970 Code § 7-11]
§ 4-9.12. Limousines. [Ord. #2011-14]
passengers. No license shall be displayed in a taxicab which does not belong to the
person actually driving at the time.
c. Record. Every driver shall maintain a daily record which shall indicate with respect
to each trip he makes the time and place of origin, the time and place of destination,
and the amount of fare charged. All completed records shall be returned to the
owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The form on which the
record is kept shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be approved
by the Chief of Police.
d. Lost Property. Every driver of a taxicab at the beginning and end of his tour of duty
shall carefully search the cab for any property lost or left in it. Any lost property not
claimed by or delivered to the owner within 24 hours shall be reported in writing to
the Chief of Police by the driver or owner of the taxicab.
The report shall give brief particulars and a description of the property.
a. Generally. In addition to the causes for revocation of a license set forth in
subsection 4-1.9 of this Chapter, any license issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended or any application for the issuance or renewal of a license
denied for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to render reasonable, prompt, safe and adequate taxicab service.
2. The existence of a judgment unsatisfied of record against the licensee or
applicant in any suit arising over the operation of a motor vehicle.
3. Permitting any taxicab owned or driven by the licensee to become unsafe,
unsanitary or dirty.
4. Failure to comply with all applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. Drivers. If the licensee is a driver, his license may also be revoked or suspended for
the following reasons:
1. Revocation or suspension of his New Jersey motor vehicle operator's license.
2. Contraction by the licensee of a communicable or contagious disease.
3. Operating a taxicab in a reckless or grossly negligent manner, or habitually
operating a taxicab in a negligent manner.
a. Definitions.
1. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCABS — Shall mean limousines.
DRIVER — Shall mean any person who drives a limousine within this
Borough.
§ 4-9.10 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.12
4:25
LIMOUSINE — Shall mean a motor vehicle used in the business of carrying
passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a
premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not conducted
on a regular route and with a seating capacity in no event of more than 14
passengers, not including the driver, provided that such a vehicle shall not
have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers, not including the driver,
beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not including
the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing in this definition shall be
construed to include taxicab, hotel buses or buses regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Shall mean and include the business of carrying
passengers for hire by limousine.
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, co-partnership, association,
corporation or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers
appointed by any court whatsoever.
STREETS—Shall mean and include any street, drive, avenue, park, parkway,
highway, boulevard or other public place in the Borough of Moonachie.
b. Classes of Licenses. There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses,
to be known as "limousine owner's license" and "limousine driver's license."
1. Limousine Owner's License. A limousine owner's license shall entitle the
limousine therein described to be operated anywhere within this Borough by a
driver duly licensed hereunder, until such license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable. There shall
be no limit to the number of limousine owner's licenses issued.
2. Limousine Driver's License. A limousine driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this Borough any limousine duly
licensed hereunder, until the license either expires or is surrendered, suspended
or revoked, and shall not be transferable. There shall be no limit to the number
of limousine driver's licenses issued.
c. License Required; Inspection of Limousines.
1. No person shall hire out, keep or use for hire or pay, or to be kept or used for
hire or pay, any limousine within the Borough of Moonachie without first
having obtained an owner's license for that purpose, as provided by this
subsection.
2. No license required by this section shall be issued or renewed unless the
limousine sought to be licensed has been thoroughly and carefully inspected
by appropriate authority and proof of same is provided to the Borough of
Moonachie before the license is issued.
d. Application Requirements.
1. Each applicant for a limousine owner's and/or limousine driver's license shall
be required to provide a certified driver history abstract and criminal record
check at his or her expense to the satisfaction of the Moonachie Police
§ 4-9.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.12
4:26
Department. Both reports must contain the previous five years from the date
of application with the Borough of Moonachie.
2. Each application for a limousine owner's license shall, in addition to the
requirements of any law of the State, establish, to the satisfaction of the
Borough Clerk, the following:
(a) Application shall contain the full name and address of the owner, vehicle
identification number, make, model, color, year of the limousine, the
State registration number, number of doors on said vehicle and number
of persons the vehicle can carry as passengers.
(b) All applications shall be filed with the Borough Clerk who shall, prior to
the issuance of said license, receive proof from the applicant that the
applicant is at least 21 years of age.
(c) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be organized and
existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey and must present proof
thereof, or if organized and existing under the laws of another state, be
officially able to do business in the State of New Jersey and must supply
the name and address of the New Jersey registered agent for said
corporation.
(d) Applications for a limousine owner's license shall show proof of
insurance of $1,500,00 liability as per paragraph g herein.
3. Each applicant for a limousine driver's license shall, in addition to the
requirements of any law of the state, establish, to the satisfaction of the
Borough Clerk, that such applicant:
(a) Is currently licensed by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission and
maintains a valid New Jersey License.
(b) Is at least 21 years of age.
(c) Is a legal resident of the United States.
(d) Submits a certificate from a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey,
at the applicant's expense, certifying that the applicant has been examined
within the preceding 30 days and that such applicant has not infirmity of
body or mind, or visual impairment or deficiency, which might render the
applicant unfit for the safe operation of a limousine.
(e) Submits to a traffic violations check for the preceding five years to be
conducted by the Borough and that he or she has the sufficient knowledge
of the Borough's traffic regulations.
(f) Submit two recent photographs, being not less than 1 1/4 inches in height
by one inch in length of applicant, with the application.
4. In addition the applicant must demonstrate by providing a letter of compliance
from the Zoning Officer that the storage, housing and parking do not violate
any zoning provision of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 4-9.12 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.12
4:27
e. Refusal of Application for License; Suspension or Revocation of License. The
Borough Council or its designee may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or
may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any license issued under the
provisions of this subsection if the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly offense in this State or in any other
state or territory, or has been convicted of a violation under Title 39, Motor Vehicle
and Traffic Regulation, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or who violates any
provision of this subsection or has any judgment unsatisfied or record arising out of
an automobile accident or who has made false answers in the application for such
license or any renewal thereof or who has failed or fails to render reasonably
prompt, safe and adequate limousine services or who has not complied fully with
all requirements of this subsection for such class of licensure, or if the licensee or
applicant has in any degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to
property arising out of negligent operation of motor vehicle or as to any limousine
owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed by reason of unsafe
or unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or health of the occupants, and
others, or if the policy of insurance required herein has once lapsed or such
coverage is not maintained at all times, or a limousine, at any time carries more
passengers than the same is authorized to carry by the terms of this subsection.
f. Power of Attorney. The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver to the
Motor Vehicle Commission, concurrently with the filing of a certificate of
insurance pursuant to paragraph g,1 below a power of attorney, wherein and
whereby the owner shall appoint the Motor Vehicle Commission his true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy filed.
g. Limousine Operators Requirement.
1. Insurance Requirements.
(a) No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in this
Borough until the owner of the limousine shall have filed with the
Borough Clerk, in which the owner has his/her principal place of business
with this Borough, a certificate of insurance, by a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of this State in the sum of
$1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon
every limousine for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by a person as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public street.
(b) The operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy
remains in full force and affect as to the full and collectible amount of
$1,500,000 liability. Limousine owners, or anyone on its behalf, shall not
undertake to cancel or have canceled any such policy without giving the
Borough Clerk 10 days' notice of the intention to do so. No such policy
shall be filed by the Borough Clerk unless such policy shall contain a
provision to the effect that the Borough Clerk shall be afforded at least 10
days' notice of the intention of the insurance company which issued such
policy to cancel same.
§ 4-9.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.12
4:28
(c) The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance and
use of such limousine upon any public street or any fault in respect
thereto and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage
or injury as aforesaid.
2. Every person operating a limousine, whether an owner and/or driver, who is
transporting a child under the age of eight years and weighing less than 80
pounds on roadways, streets, or highways of the Borough of Moonachie, shall
secure the child in a child passenger restraint system or booster seat, as
described in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 213, in a rear
seat. If there are not rear seats, the child shall be secured in a child passenger
restraint system or booster seat, as described in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 213. In no event shall failure to wear a child passenger
restraint system or to use a booster seat be considered as contributory
negligence nor shall the failure to wear the child passenger restraint system be
admissible as evidence in the trial of any civil action.
3. Issuance of License of Operation; Drivers to Be License.
(a) The Borough Clerk, upon the filing of the required application and
certificate of insurance, shall issue a license, in duplicate, showing that
the owner of the limousine service has complied with the terms and
provisions of this subsection.
(b) The license shall state the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy and a description and the registration
number of each limousine service insured thereunder. The duplicate
license shall be filed with the Motor Vehicle Commission before any such
vehicle is registered as a limousine service.
(c) A limousine shall not be operated by anyone for service with the Borough
of Moonachie unless the driver thereof has been issued a valid limousine
driver's license.
4. Availability of License for Inspection; Minimum Equipment Standards.
(a) The original license shall be retained with the limousine and shall be
available for inspection by any police officer of the State.
(b) No limousine shall operate on the highways of this State unless it has a
license issued and the limousine is equipped, in accordance with
minimum standards established by the Motor Vehicle Commission in the
Department of Transportation with:
(1) A two-way communications system, which, at a minimum, shall
provide for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a
distance of not less than 100 miles and which requirements may be
satisfied by a mobile telephone.
(2) A removable first-aid kit and an operable fire extinguisher, which
shall be placed in an accessible place within the vehicle.
§ 4-9.12 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.12
4:29
(3) Sideboards attached to the permanent body construction of the
vehicle is the height of the vehicle floor if 10 inches or more above
ground level.
h. License Fees-Term of License. The annual limousine owner's license shall be $50
per limousine. The license shall be effective for a period from January 1 to
December 31 of each year, plus $10 for each limousine which is required under the
insurance policy.
i. Limousine Appearance. No lettering, emblem or advertising may be placed on a
licensed limousine, other than that required by the Department of Transportation or
any other supervising authority.
j. Limousine Identification. Subject to regulations to be promulgated by the Borough
Clerk, a limousine license shall be placed in the limousine at all times.
k. Solicitation Prohibited. Limousine drivers shall not knowingly solicit business in a
manner similar to that of a taxicab or attempt to solicit business by knowingly
misleading a prospective passenger.
l. Compliance with State Laws. Nothing in this subsection shall exempt any person
owning or operating a limousine from complying with the laws relating to the
ownership, regulations and operation of limousines in the State of New Jersey.
m. Violations and Penalties. A person who shall own and operate a limousine in any
street in this State in violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be subject
to the following penalties:
1. For operating a limousine without a license issued by a municipality, operating
a limousine without authority to operate a limousine in interstate services
granted by the Federal Highway Administration, or the Interstate Commerce
Commission, knowingly permitting a driver to operate a limousine without a
validly issued driver's license or a validly issued commercial driver's license,
if required, failure to have filed an insurance policy, operating a limousine in
which the number of passengers exceeds the maximum: a fine of $2,500 for
the first offense and a fine of $5,000 for the second or subsequent offense.
2. For operating a limousine without the special registration plates required or
operating a limousine without the limousine being properly inspected: a fine
of $1,250 for the first offense and a fine of $2,500 for the second or subsequent
offense.
3. For operating a limousine with the attached sideboards, if required, failure to
retain with the limousine proof of insurance or failure to execute and deliver
to the Motor Vehicle Commission the power of attorney required: a fine of
$250 for the first offense and $500 for the second and subsequent offense.
4. For failure to be equipped with a two-way communication system, a
removable first-aid kit or an operable fire extinguisher, a fine of $50 for the
first offense and $100 for the second and subsequent offense.
n. Unlicensed Drivers; Liability of Owner. In the event that the limousine is being
operated by a party who does not have the license called for in this subsection, both
§ 4-9.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-9.12
4:30
§ 4-10. MOBILE HOME PARKS.13
§ 4-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. #117, § 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.1]
As used in this section:
CAMP SITE — Shall mean any place where a person is permitted to sleep or dwell in
anything other than a permanent structure.
TRAILER — Shall mean any self-propelled or nonself-propelled vehicle or portable or
semi-portable structure used or intended for use as a temporary or permanent dwelling
or sleeping place for one or more persons, including but not limited to mobile homes,
dependent and independent travel trailers, piggy-back campers, camp cars, mobile home
buses and tents.
TRAILER CAMP — Shall mean any place where a trailer may be parked, other than an
enclosed building, for more than three hours, including but not limited to mobile home
parks and trailer parks.
§ 4-10.2. License Required. [Ord. #117, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.2]
No person shall operate a trailer camp or camp site within the Borough without having
obtained a license and paid the required license fee.
§ 4-10.3. Applications. [Ord. #117, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.3]
Applications for licenses shall be made to the Borough Clerk and shall contain the
following information:
the driver and the owner of the limousine shall be subject to the penalty provisions
hereinabove set forth.
a. The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name
and address of the registered agent and the address of the corporation's principal
place of business.
b. A statement as to whether the applicant is the owner of the premises upon which
the proposed trailer court will operate.
c. The total number of trailer stands in the proposed trailer camp.
d. Three copies of a site plan of the proposed trailer camp on a scale no smaller than
one inch equals 40 feet and clearly showing the following:
1. The area, shape and size of the site, all properties within 250 feet of the site
boundaries, and all buildings on those properties.
2. Topography of the site drawn at a ten-foot contour level.
3. Any prominent natural features on the site.
4. The location and size of all easements for gas, water and electric lines.
13. Editor's Note: See Chapter 23 for regulation of rents in mobile home parks.
§ 4-9.12 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-10.3
4:31
§ 4-10.4. License Fees. [Ord. #207, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.4; Ord.
#93-16; Ord. #2011-6]
The owner or operator of a trailer camp shall pay an annual license fee of $750 plus $3
per trailer per week whether occupied or not.
§ 4-10.5. Parking for Repair or Storage Restricted. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-10.5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer or camp car for any period exceeding
two hours on any street in the Borough, or on any premises within the Borough except
for the purpose of repair or storage.
§ 4-10.6. Repair or Storage Permit. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.6]
If any person desires to repair or store a trailer or camp car other than in a licensed
location, he shall obtain a permit from the Council. Such permit shall be granted upon
request without fee and shall be valid for a period of 10 days from the issuance thereof,
but may for good cause shown be renewed for a further ten-day period or periods, as
necessity may require. Any trailer or camp car undergoing repairs or being stored shall
not, during the period of repair or storage, be used by any person as a dwelling or
sleeping place. Nothing herein shall preclude the issuance of a permit without fee by
the Council for use of a trailer on private property for habitation for not longer than one
week. Such permits may be renewed in the discretion of the Council for further weekly
periods, not exceeding one month in total.
§ 4-10.7. Camp Registry. [Ord. #207, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.7]
Each licensee shall maintain a camp registry and each month shall submit three copies
of the same insofar as it pertains to the previous month, setting forth the license number
of each trailer, serial number, body type and license number of each automobile, date of
arrival, whether still at the camp, and if not, the date of departure, and the age, name and
last permanent address of the owner of each car and trailer and of each occupant thereof.
A copy shall be delivered to the Clerk and a copy to the Chief of Police, together with
payment to the Clerk of any fees due the Borough as provided herein. No license shall
be transferable without permission of the Council.
§ 4-10.8. Restrictions on Camps and Trailers. [Ord. #207, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #82-1;
5. The locations of all proposed trailer sites and accessory buildings, sidewalks,
driveways, roads, parking areas, buffer strips and recreation areas.
6. The proposed grading and drainage plan for the site.
e. Appropriate information as to the location and type of facilities provided for water
supply, sewage disposal and garbage disposal. If any laundry or similar facilities
are to be provided, information as to their location and type shall also be included.
This information may be included in the site plan.
f. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 4-10.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-10.8
4:32
1970 Code § 5-10.8]
§ 4-10.9. Weekly Count by Police. [Ord. #207, § 4; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-10.9]
The Police Department shall make a weekly check of trailer parks for the purpose of
counting the number of trailers parked therein, and shall submit the report to the Mayor
and Council.
§ 4-10.10. Health Regulations. [Ord. #117, §§ 5 — 10 & 12; Ord. #187; Ord.
#82-1; 1970 Code § 5-10.10]
The Board of Health shall establish rules and regulations relating to the establishment
and maintenance of adequate water supply, toilet facilities, garbage receptacles, drainage
and discharge of waste water and such other matters as may be required to maintain the
health and safety of the Borough.
Any water faucet, toilet, garbage receptacle, or other equipment required by the
provisions of this section in camp grounds, or which may hereafter be required by
any rules and regulations of the Board of Health pertaining to camp grounds, shall
be in addition to and shall not be construed to mean water faucets, toilets, garbage
receptacles or other equipment now or hereafter located in or adjacent to the camp
ground, and which may already or hereinafter be required under provisions of other laws
or ordinances.
No sanitary facilities shall be required where the trailers parked in the trailer park have
separate sanitary facilities built therein and such sanitary facilities can be connected with
the sanitary sewer installed on the premises for the purpose of accommodating trailers.
§ 4-10.11. Zoning.14 [Ord. #117; §§ 11, 13; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code §§ 5-10.11,
5-10.2; Ord. #2001-2, §§ 2 — 4]
a. There shall not be more than two trailer camps located within the Borough.
b. The maximum number of occupied trailers to be parked in any trailer camp shall
not exceed 200.
a. Installation; Relocation of Mobile Homes. The installation of a new mobile home
or the relocation of any existing mobile home shall be subject to review by the
Moonachie Building Department before construction permits are issued.
b. Processing of Application. Should it be found by the appropriate Official that the
proposed installation, location and/or placement of the mobile home does not meet
the Municipal, State Land Use Act or Federal guidelines for zoning, the Official
shall refer the application to the appropriate Municipal Board, Officer or Agency
for a decision. Should the application be approved by said Board, Officer or
Agency, and found to meet the zoning guidelines, the application shall be remanded
to the Construction Official for proper processing of the State of New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code required installation permits.
14. Editor's Note: See also Mobile Home Replacements, Alterations, Additions, subsection 4-10.15.
§ 4-10.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-10.11
4:33
§ 4-10.12. (Reserved) [Ord. #2001-2]
§ 4-10.13. Immoral Use Prohibited. [Ord. #117, § 15; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-10.13]
No person shall permit any licensed premises to be used for immoral purposes or permit
the violation thereon or therein of any penal law or any ordinance of the Borough.
§ 4-10.14. Inspection Authorized. [Ord. #117, §§ 16 & 17; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-10.14]
Each licensed place or premises shall at all times comply with all proper police, health
and fire regulations imposed by the Borough Council, Board of Health, the Police Chief
or the Fire Chief. Any business and the place and premises where conducted shall be
subject to examination and inspection by day or night by the Council or a committee
thereof, and by the police, fire and health authorities of the Borough.
§ 4-10.15. Mobile Home Replacements, Alterations, Additions.15 [Ord. #00-5, § 2]
c. Spacing of Homes. Replacement mobile homes or existing mobile homes which are
relocated to any new location within the mobile home park may not be installed
closer than six feet in any direction from any other existing or new mobile home.
d. Compliance with Regulations. Existing mobile homes to be relocated within the
park must meet all Federal and State Construction Code and Municipal ordinance
guidelines.
e. Alterations and Additions. All additions and alterations to existing mobile homes
must comply with the Uniform Construction Code and no addition to a mobile
home, i.e., deck, patio, awning, extension of trailer body to enlarge the mobile home
itself may be closer than six feet from any other mobile home or portion thereof.
Tool sheds are to be of noncombustible construction only.
f. Mobile Home Park Spaces; Numbering. Every mobile home park shall provide a
minimum of 600 square feet of space per trailer or camp car. Mobile homes shall
be arranged in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space not
less than 20 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
The allotted space per mobile home shall be numbered by a mark containing four
inch numbers which are clearly visible and the numbers shall be consecutive.
g. Permanent Foundations Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee
operating a trailer camp or place to cause or permit any trailer to be placed on a
permanent foundation or otherwise permanently fixed to the ground and any such
action shall automatically convert the trailer to a permanent dwelling subject to the
provisions of the Zoning Chapter and all other Borough ordinances applicable to
permanent structures.
a. No mobile home shall be replaced by another mobile home which is greater in
square footage than the sum total of the one or ones it is replacing. (Example: Two
15. Editor's Note: See also subsection 4-10.11.
§ 4-10.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-10.15
4:34
§ 4-11. TRUCK TRANSFER TERMINALS.
§ 4-11.1. Definition. [Ord. #124, §§ 2 & 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-11.1]
As used in this section:
TRUCK TRANSFER TERMINAL — Shall mean and describe any business on lands
and/or premises for the transfer of materials and other personal property by truck or other
motor vehicle on route which stops enroute in the Borough.
§ 4-11.2. License Required. [Ord. #124, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-11.2]
No person shall establish, operate or maintain a truck terminal unless he shall first obtain
a license from the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-11.3. Application. [Ord. #124, § 4; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-11.3]
Any person desiring to obtain a license shall file with the Clerk a written application
setting forth in addition to the information required by subsection 4-1.2:
existing mobile homes totaling 600 square feet can only be replaced by a single
mobile home no larger than 600 square feet.)
b. The replacement of any existing mobile home shall be governed by the relevant
Federal, State and local statutes, regulations and codes.
c. All additions and alterations to existing mobile homes shall be governed by relevant
Federal, State and local statutes, regulations and codes.
d. No additions or alterations to an existing mobile home (i.e., deck, patio, awning,
extension, etc.) shall be constructed or erected within six feet of another mobile
home or a portion thereof.
e. No mobile home shall be located, relocated or installed closer than six feet in any
direction to any existing or replacement mobile home.
f. All freestanding buildings (i.e., sheds, clubhouses, storage units, etc.) shall be
constructed of noncombustible material only.
g. No fence, gate, or property separation shall be over four feet in height. Any such
structure must be constructed of noncombustible material only.
h. For each application for a variance under this section, residents whose lot is
adjacent to or abuts that of the applicant must be given actual notice as well as those
property owners within 200 feet of the mobile home park.
a. The name and residence of the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the
names of the principal officers and their residences if the applicant is an association
or corporation.
b. The name of the record owner of the lands and premises to be licensed.
c. The name of the tenant or lessee of the lands and premises to be licensed.
§ 4-10.15 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-11.3
4:35
§ 4-11.4. Certificate of Occupancy Required. [Ord. #124, § 5; Ord. #82-1; 1970
Code § 5-11.4]
No license shall be issued unless the applicant has obtained a Certificate of Occupancy
of the location to be used as the truck transfer terminal.
§ 4-11.5. Location. [Ord. #124, § 6; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-11.5]
No premises shall be used for establishing, operating or maintaining a truck transfer
terminal other than in the Industrial Zone as set forth in the Zoning Chapter of the
Borough, nor shall any truck transfer terminal be operated or situated within a distance
of 150 feet of premises used exclusively for residential purposes or a school, church or
other place of public gathering.
§ 4-11.6. License Fee. [Ord. #203, § 1; Ord. #124, § 8; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-11.6]
The license fee to be paid for a license shall be $500.
§ 4-11.7. Transferability of License. [Ord. #124, § 9; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-11.7]
No license shall be transferable and any licensee who permits it to be used by any other
person shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and his license shall be subject to
immediate revocation.
§ 4-11.8. Explosives. [Ord. #124, § 10; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-11.8]
No explosives or volatile substances and flammable liquids or material shall be stored
enroute under the terms of this section, except in compliance with the fire prevention
code of the Borough and existing laws and ordinances pertaining thereto.
§ 4-12. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES.
§ 4-12.1. Annual Payment. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-13.1]
All of the fees required to be paid, or paid, under the terms hereof are intended to be
annual fees, but, when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which the same are so paid or payable, unless otherwise herein provided.
§ 4-12.2. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-13.2; Ord. #89-14; Ord.
#92-20; Ord. #2001-4; Ord. #2005-15, § 1]
The annual fees for the licenses herein are hereby fixed as follows:
d. The area to be occupied in the conduct of the business.
e. The nature of goods, merchandise and chattels transported and transferred.
§ 4-11.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-12.2
4:36
Business or Activity
Document
Required
Fee for Each Premises or
Establishment
Barber/Nail and Beauty License $75
Drug Store/Liquor Store License $100
Food or beverage processing License $100 per premises or
establishment $25 per vehicle
Frozen food processing License $100 per license
$25 per truck
Hotels, motels License $25 (1-25 rooms)
$50 (26-50 rooms)
$75 (51-100 rooms)
$100 (101 rooms and over)
Laundry, launderette, drycleaning
or dyeing
establishments
License $75
Milk, cream and dairy products
processing, sale or distribution
License $100 per premises or place
$50 per vehicle or conveyance
Port-O-Sans License $20 per permit
$15 per vehicle used for
cleaning or emptying vault or
tank
Processed food storage,
confectionery and handling
and distribution
License $100
Vending machines (soda,
candy, food)
License 1 machine $50
Each additional machine $25
Wholesale establishment with
retail outlet as auxiliary use
License $500
§ 4-12.3. Other License Fees. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-13.3]
Whenever a license or permit is required by the Board of Health and no specific fee is
established for such license or permit, the fee therefor shall be $25, payable on issuance
of such license or permit, which shall be for the balance of the calendar year in which
the same is so issued.
§ 4-12.4. Exemptions. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-13.4]
No fee for any permit, license or certificate issued hereunder shall be required of any
person declared by State law to be exempt from the payment of any such fee.
§ 4-12.2 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-12.5
4:37
§ 4-12.5. Waiver or Reduction of Fee. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-13.5]
For good reason shown, the Board of Health may waive or reduce the license fee in any
particular class of cases where the imposition would work hardship or injustice.
§ 4-13. JUNK YARDS.
§ 4-13.1. Definition. [Ord. #101, § 2; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.1]
As used in this section:
JUNK YARD — Shall mean an area, covered, or uncovered, used for the purpose of
buying, selling, exchanging or storing old or secondhand metals, bottles, glassware,
tinware, paper, lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or inoperable automobiles, or any
other thing which is no longer used or usable for its intended purpose, but which may
have value because of the parts or materials it contains.
§ 4-13.2. License Required. [Ord. #101, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.2]
No person shall operate a junk yard in the Borough without first having obtained a
license from the Clerk and paid the required license fee.
§ 4-13.3. License Fee. [Ord. #191, § 1; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.3]
The fee for a license to operate a junk yard shall be $500.
§ 4-13.4. Application Information. [Ord. #101, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.4]
In addition to the information required by subsection 4-1.2, application for a license
under this section shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale in triplicate
showing the dimensions of the premises, the location of all fences and screening and any
other information which may appropriately be required for the effective enforcement of
this section.
§ 4-13.5. Investigation. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.5]
In addition to the investigation provided for by subsection 4-1.3, the Construction
Official shall inspect the premises for which a license is desired to determine whether
it complies with the provisions of this section. He shall report the results of his
investigation to the Clerk. No license shall be issued unless the Construction Official's
report is favorable.
§ 4-13.6. Fencing. [Ord. #191, § 6; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.6]
Each licensed place or premises shall at all times be entirely surrounded by a fence
extending from the ground to a height not greater than eight feet. It shall be of cinder
block or other masonry construction and firmly supported on adequate concrete footing.
The fence shall not be used for advertising purposes either by the operator of the business
or by any other person, except that there may be affixed to the fence a sign not larger
than 20 inches by 20 inches setting forth the name of the business.
§ 4-13.7. Health and Safety Regulations. [Ord. #101, § 6; Ord. #191, §§ 2, 4 & 5;
§ 4-12.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-13.7
4:38
Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.7]
§ 4-13.8. Location. [Ord. #191, § 3; Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.8]
No license issued under this section shall entitle the licensee to operate at, in or on any
lot, building or location other than that which is specified in the license.
§ 4-13.9. Inspection. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-9.9]
The Construction Official may inspect any junk yard at any reasonable time to ascertain
whether the provisions of this section are being complied with.
§ 4-13.10. Police and Fire Regulations; Inspection. [Ord. #101, § 7; Ord. #82-1;
1970 Code § 5-9.10]
The licensed premises shall at all times comply with all necessary police and fire
regulations imposed by the Police and Fire Departments in order to prevent conflagration
and the storage and disposition of stolen property. The business and the premises where
conducted shall be subject to reasonable inspection by police and fire authorities. It shall
be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the Police Department to
immediately report, in writing, to the Mayor and Council any violation of any regulation
imposed by their respective departments. The report shall set out the specific regulation
violated and the nature of the violation.
§ 4-14. CONTRACTORS.
§ 4-14.1. Registration Required. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.1]
a. Adequate precautions shall be taken in a junk yard to prevent fire from breaking out
or spreading. In particular, no explosive or extremely inflammable material shall be
stored in a junk yard.
b. Junk shall be stacked and stored so as to permit customers of the junk yard and
other persons to move about easily and without risk of injury.
c. No material shall be stored or deposited on any licensed premises to a height greater
than the height of the fence required to be constructed around such premises.
d. It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metals or other materials on the
premises, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, or at any time
on Sundays and holidays.
e. No automobiles, parts thereof or other junk or material shall be stacked, placed or
kept within 20 feet of the inside sidewalk line of any street.
f. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any of the materials regulated herein
to be placed on the licensed premises in such a manner as to permit rainwater to
collect and remain in and about the premises for a period longer than 24 hours.
g. No operator of a junk yard shall permit rodents or conditions likely to attract rodents
or any other unhealthy or unsanitary condition to exist on the premises.
§ 4-13.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-14.1
4:39
§ 4-14.2. Registration Fee. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.2]
The fee for registration for all contractors shall be $15 and no subsequent fee shall be
required so long as the registration is not revoked.
§ 4-14.3. Building Construction Standards. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.3]
§ 4-14.4. Building Permits. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.4]
No permit shall be issued by the Construction Official of the Borough to anyone except
a licensed contractor or his duly authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
except to actual owners or occupants who intend to do the work themselves.
§ 4-14.5. Revocation of Registration. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.5]
The Construction Official shall revoke the registration of any contractor licensed
hereunder who shall be guilty of any one or more of the following acts or omissions:
§ 4-14.6. Notice of Violation; Revocation of License. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code
§ 5-15.6]
a. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of constructing, erecting,
altering, repairing, restoring, re-roofing, residing, demolition, moving the whole or
part of any building or structure or engaged in the business of the construction and
installation of swimming pools or signs shall be required to register with the
Construction Official.
b. The owner or occupant of a building or structure applying for a building permit
shall not be required to register provided that he intends to do and supervise his own
work.
a. All work shall be done in accordance with the State Uniform Construction Code
and must be done in a good and workmanlike manner.
b. After obtaining a building permit the person or persons doing the work shall notify
the Construction Official 24 hours prior to commencing any work whatever on any
building or structure.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation.
b. Violation of the State Uniform Construction Code or other ordinances, regulations
or State statutes.
c. Voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy.
a. The Construction Official shall notify the contractor in violation of this section in
writing, giving 10 days to rectify any violation therein enumerated.
b. Failure of the contractor to rectify the violation shall result in an automatic
revocation of the contractor's license.
§ 4-14.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-14.7
4:40
§ 4-14.7. Appeals. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.7]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Construction Official shall have the right of
appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such appeals shall be taken by filing with the Borough
Clerk, within 10 days after notice of revocation, a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for appeal. The Mayor and Council shall thereafter set a time and place for
hearing the appeal upon at least seven days' prior notice to the appellant. The decision of
the Mayor and Council on such appeal shall be final.
§ 4-14.8. Service of Notice. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.8]
Whenever notice is required to be given by this section, such notice may be effected by
personal service upon any principal or agent of the registered contractor or by certified
mail to the last address listed in the Construction Official's office, listed in conjunction
with the registration information.
§ 4-14.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.9]
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-14.10. Reregistration. [Ord. #82-1; 1970 Code § 5-15.10]
Any contractor, after revocation, may register, provided:
§ 4-15. LANDSCAPERS.
§ 4-15.1. Definitions. [Ord. #92-3, §§ I — III]
LANDSCAPERS — Shall mean any person, partnership or corporation engaged in
the business of landscaping as an occupation for hire and shall not include casual
employment by minors or family members.
LANDSCAPING FUNCTION — Shall include, but is not limited to the cultivation,
fertilization, seeding, planting, cutting, trimming, pruning or maintenance of grass,
shrubs, plants, trees or other foliage.
MULCHING — Shall mean the natural recycling of grass clippings by leaving them on
the lawn when mowing.
§ 4-15.2. License Required. [Ord. #92-3, § IV]
No person shall engage in the business of landscaping without first obtaining a license
therefore from the Borough of Moonachie.
a. He obtains certification from the Construction Official to the effect that all
violations have now been corrected.
b. Proof that any loss caused by the act or omission for which the registration was
revoked has been fully satisfied.
c. Payment of a reregistration fee of $20 is made.
§ 4-14.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-15.3
4:41
§ 4-15.3. Application. [Ord. #92-3, § V]
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall sign an application on forms
furnished by the Borough Clerk.
§ 4-15.4. License Fee. [Ord. #92-3, § VI]
A license fee shall be charged for each truck or vehicle engaged in the business of
landscaping within the Borough of Moonachie and shall be $25 for the first truck and
$10 for each additional truck thereafter per calendar year and no part of said fee shall
be prorated for any part of the year. Upon payment of fee the Clerk shall issue an
identification badge or sticker for the calendar year for which the application was filed,
which shall be affixed to each truck or vehicle and visibly displayed.
§ 4-15.5. Removal of Nonrecycled Clippings and Landscaping Debris. [Ord.
#92-3, § VII]
All landscapers shall provide for the removal of all lawn clippings not recycled by
mulching and any other landscaping debris and shall not leave or deposit said debris
at the curbside or any other site in the Borough of Moonachie. Any landscaper who
causes said lawnclippings not recycled by mulching or any other landscaping debris to
remain at curbside or anywhere in the Borough of Moonachie shall forfeit his license to
conduct his landscaping business anywhere in the Borough of Moonachie and shall also
be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided in this section.
§ 4-15.6. Compliance with Recycling Ordinance Required. [Ord. #92-3, § VIII]
All landscapers who are licensed to operate in the Borough of Moonachie, are required
to comply with the Borough's Municipal Recycling Ordinance, including filing such
reports as are required by said ordinance with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 4-15.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #92-3, § IX]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both.
§ 4-15.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 4-15.7
4:42
Chapter 5
PERSONNEL
Editor's Note: The salaries and range portions of the Salary and Personnel Policy
Ordinances are not codified at the direction of the Borough. See the Municipal
Clerk's office for amending ordinances.
The general power of a Borough to establish personnel policies is derived from N.J.S.A.
40:48-1, subject to limitations contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1, et seq., Officers and
Employees.
§ 5-1. PERSONNEL POLICIES.
§ 5-1.1. General Policies. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-1.1]
§ 5-1.2. Abolition or Modification of Offices. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-1.2]
The Borough Council may by ordinance abolish, increase, decrease or modify the terms
and compensation of any office of the Borough, except no office may be abolished where
such office has been or is created by general law. Except where an office is abolished,
no increase, decrease or modification of its terms and compensation shall affect any
incumbent holding such office for the duration of the term for which he was appointed.
§ 5-2. APPOINTMENTS.
§ 5-2.1. Power of Appointment. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-2.1]
All employees, officers and department heads of the Borough shall be appointed and
promoted by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, except as may be
otherwise provided by general law.
§ 5-2.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-2.2]
Original appointments to fill vacancies or for new positions shall be limited to qualified
persons who have been interviewed or tested concerning such factors as education,
experience, aptitude, knowledge, character and physical and mental fitness.
§ 5-2.3. Preference to Borough Employees and Residents. [Ord. #69-15; 1970
Code § 3-2.3]
Provided they are qualified for the positions for which they have applied, preference
shall be given in appointments to vacancies and new positions, first to employees of the
Borough and secondly, to persons who are residents of the Borough at the time of their
a. Employment in the Borough shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal
and political considerations.
b. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be on a merit basis.
c. Qualified Borough personnel shall be given first consideration for vacancies and
new positions.
§ 4-15.7 PERSONNEL § 5-2.3
5:1
appointment. The Mayor and Council may by ordinance provide that all officers and
employees shall be residents of the Borough.
§ 5-2.4. Application for Appointment. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-2.4]
Applicants for Borough employment shall apply on forms provided by the Borough
Clerk and which have been designed to obtain pertinent information concerning the
applicant's education, training, experience, character and other factors necessary to
determine his fitness and qualification for service to the Borough. All applications shall
be filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 5-2.5. Processing. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-2.5]
The Borough Clerk shall be charged with processing all applications for appointment to
vacancies or new positions, and reporting thereon to the Mayor and Council. Where it
appears that an applicant is otherwise qualified for Borough employment, the Borough
Clerk shall require that the applicant be examined by the Borough Physician to
determine that he is physically fit for the position for which he seeks employment.
§ 5-2.6. Grounds for Rejection of an Applicant. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-2.6]
An applicant for Borough Employment may be rejected where he:
§ 5-3. PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT.
§ 5-3.1. Probation. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-3.1]
Every person appointed to a new position shall be deemed to be on probation in the
position to which he shall have been appointed for a period of three months, but such
probation shall not affect permanent status of any other Borough employment that such
person may have achieved. Prior to his completion of the probationary period, such
employee or officer shall be evaluated by the Mayor and Council to determine whether
a. Is not qualified for appointment to the position for which he has applied;
b. Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he has applied;
c. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants;
d. Has been convicted of any crime or offense, including disorderly persons offenses
involving moral turpitude;
e. Has received other than an honorable discharge from the Armed Services of the
United States;
f. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency, insubordination or
misconduct;
g. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his application or
in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for appointment;
h. Is not within the age limits that have been established for the position for which he
seeks appointment.
§ 5-2.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-3.1
5:2
he shall be granted permanent status or dismissed. The Mayor and Council may require
reports and recommendations from immediate superiors and department heads for this
purpose.
§ 5-3.2. Personnel File. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-3.2]
The Borough Clerk shall initiate a personnel file for each employee of the Borough, and
all records of such employee concerning qualification, permanent status, work history,
accumulated vacation and sick leave, leave time and the like shall be maintained for such
employee in such file. The Borough Clerk shall make such files available for inspection
by the employee on a reasonable basis.
§ 5-4. WORKING CONDITIONS.
§ 5-4.1. Hours. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-4.1]
The official office hours of the Borough are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing time,
Monday through Friday. The hours of work for employees, including lunch hours, shall
be specified by the Borough Council.
§ 5-4.2. Holidays and Personal Leave. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-4.2; Ord.
#92-15, § 5; Ord. #93-8, § 5; Ord. #94-10, § 5; Ord. #95-10, § 5; Ord. No. 2016-8,
retroactive to Jan. 1, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-7 § 5; Ord. No. 2018-8, retroactive to
Jan. 1, 2018; 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-6; 11-12-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-6;
11-30-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-7, retroactive to 1-1-2021]
a. All permanent, full-time employees of the Borough of Moonachie are entitled to 14
paid holidays annually as follows, except as provided for by contract, whichever is
appropriate. All part-time employees with fixed, scheduled hours are entitled to any
of the listed holidays that occur on their regularly scheduled day of work.
2021 New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
General Election Day
President's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Good Friday
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve - observed Dec. 23
Christmas Day - observed Dec. 24
New Year's Eve - observed Dec. 30
§ 5-3.1 PERSONNEL § 5-4.2
5:3
§ 5-4.3. Vacations. [Ord. #69-15; Ord. #75-8, § 5; Ord. #80-2, § 6; Ord. #81-5, § 6;
1970 Code § 3-4.3; Ord. #92-15, § 4; Ord. #93-8, § 4; Ord. #94-10, § 4; Ord.
#95-10, § 4; Ord. No. 2016-8 § 4, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-7 § 4,
retroactive to Jan. 1, 2017; Ord. No. 2018-8, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2018;
10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-6; 11-12-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-6; 11-30-2021 by
Ord. No. 2021-7, retroactive to 1-1-2021]
2022 New Year's Day (a 2022 Holiday) - observed Dec. 31
b. Additionally, each such permanent, full-time employee shall have the right to take
four personal days of their choosing with the approval of the department head, two
of which will be charged to sick days.
a. Employees hired before January 1, 2015.
1. All employees hired prior to January 1, 2015, eligible for vacation leave with
pay shall be entitled to the use of vacation leave as provided below or as
provided by contractual agreement, whichever is appropriate:
(a) One working day of vacation for each full month of employment during
the first calendar year of employment.
(b) Twelve working days of vacation commencing the second calendar year
of service through four years of service.
(c) Fifteen working days of vacation commencing five years of service
through nine years of service.
(d) Sixteen working days of vacation commencing 10 years of service.
(e) Seventeen working days of vacation commencing 11 years of service.
(f) Eighteen working days of vacation commencing 12 years of service.
(g) Nineteen working days of vacation commencing 13 years of service.
(h) Twenty working days of vacation commencing 14 years of service.
(i) Twenty-one working days of vacation commencing 15 years of service.
(j) Twenty-two working days of vacation commencing 16 years of service.
(k) Twenty-three working days of vacation commencing 17 years of service.
(l) Twenty-four working days of vacation commencing 18 years of service.
(m) Twenty-five working days of vacation commencing 19 years of service.
Conflicts concerning the choice of dates when scheduling vacations will be
resolved within the work unit on the basis of seniority. Specific requests
for vacation utilization which do not conflict with operational considerations
shall not be unreasonably denied.
b. Employees hired on or after January 1, 2015.
§ 5-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-4.3
5:4
1. All employees hired on or after January 1, 2015, eligible for vacation leave
with pay shall be entitled to the use of vacation leave as provided below or as
provided by contractual agreement, whichever is appropriate:
(a) One working day of vacation for each full month of employment during
the first calendar year of employment.
(b) Twelve working days of vacation commencing the second calendar year
of service through four years of service.
(c) Fifteen working days of vacation commencing five years of service
through nine years of service.
(d) Sixteen working days of vacation commencing 10 years of service.
(e) Seventeen working days of vacation commencing 11 years of service.
(f) Eighteen working days of vacation commencing 12 years of service.
(g) Nineteen working days of vacation commencing 13 years of service.
(h) Twenty working days of vacation commencing 14 years of service.
(i) Twenty-one working days of vacation commencing 15 years of service.
Conflicts concerning the choice of dates when scheduling vacations will be
resolved within the work unit on the basis of seniority. Specific requests
for vacation utilization which do not conflict with operational considerations
shall not be unreasonably denied.
c. Part-time employees.
1. All part-time employees with fixed, scheduled hours eligible for vacation
leave with pay shall be entitled to the use of vacation leave as provided below
or as provided by contractual agreement, whichever is appropriate:
(a) One-half working day of vacation for each full month of employment
during the first calendar year of employment.
(b) Six working days of vacation commencing the second calendar year of
service through four years of service.
(c) Eight working days of vacation commencing five years of service through
10 years of service.
(d) Nine working days of vacation commencing 11 years of service through
12 years of service.
(e) Ten working days of vacation commencing 13 years of service through
14 years of service.
(f) Eleven working days of vacation commencing 15 years of service.
§ 5-4.3 PERSONNEL § 5-4.3
5:5
§ 5-4.4. Sick Leave. [Ord. #69-15; Ord. #84-12, § 1; 1970 Code § 3-4.4; Ord. No.
2016-8, retroactive to Jan. 1,2016; Ord. No. 2017-7 § 6, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2017;
Ord. #2018-8, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2018; 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-6;
11-12-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-6; 11-30-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-7, retroactive to
1-1-2021]
Conflicts concerning the choice of dates when scheduling vacations will be
resolved within the work unit on the basis of seniority. Specific requests
for vacation utilization which do not conflict with operational considerations
shall not be unreasonably denied.
d. Schedule of vacation leave.
1. Vacation leave is credited in advance at the beginning of the calendar year in
anticipation of continued employment for the full year and may be used on that
basis. Vacation allowance must be taken during the current calendar year at
such time as permitted or directed by the department head unless the
department head determines it cannot be taken because of pressure of work.
2. Where an employee has an earned vacation balance which has not been
previously scheduled as of October 1, the department head will meet with the
employee to determine a schedule of such lost time so that no accrued vacation
time will be lost.
e. Upon separation or upon retirement, an employee shall be entitled to vacation
allowance for the current year (prorated upon the number of months worked in the
calendar year) in which separation or retirement becomes effective and any
vacation leave which may have been carried over, with prior approval, from the
preceding calendar year.
f. Upon the death of an active employee having vacation credits, a sum of money
equal to the compensation figured on his salary rate at the time of death shall be
calculated and paid to his estate.
g. When the vacation allowance for an employee changes based on his years of service
during any calendar year, the additional annual allowance will be given for the
entire year.
h. When an employee not otherwise covered by contract provision of a specific
bargaining unit has attained five years of service, but less than 25 years of service,
that person may elect to receive monetary compensation in exchange for unused
vacation days not to exceed five days from the current year allotment. If an
employee with more than 25 years of service has unused vacation time from the
current year, that employee may request to receive compensation for all unused
days from the current year allotment. Any compensation described herein shall be
calculated at the current salary rate. If an employee with more than 25 years of
service has accrued vacation time prior to January 1, 1998, the employee may elect
to be reimbursed for those accumulated vacation days at the 1998 salary rate.
a. Sick leave shall accumulate on the basis of 15 days per year for full-time
employees. In the first year of employment, an employee shall be entitled to 1 1/4
§ 5-4.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-4.4
5:6
§ 5-4.5. Leave of Absence as a Result of Injury in Line of Duty. [Ord. #69-15; 1970
Code § 3-4.5]
days of sick leave for each month of employment.
b. Sick leave shall accumulate on the basis of eight days per year for part-time
employees with fixed, scheduled hours. In the first year of employment, an
employee shall be entitled to 1/2 day of sick leave for each month of employment.
c. Sick leave may be accumulated under the following conditions:
1. All accumulated sick days as of 12-31-1997 for noncontractual employees will
be frozen at the rate of pay in effect on 12-31-1997 and will be subject to the
Mayor and Council approval for payment to the employee on retirement or on
termination for any reason.
2. At year-end, a full-time employee may receive payment for up to 10 unused
sick days from that current year's allotment. At year end, part-time employees
with fixed, scheduled hours may receive payment for up to five unused sick
days from that current year's allotment. Payment will be at the rate of pay in
effect for that year.
3. An employee will be allowed to bank unused sick time from the current year,
but any payout for those days is to be at the salary rate in effect when the days
were banked.
4. Maximum payout for sick days accumulated after January 1, 1998:
(a) For retirement or termination prior to five years of continuous full-time
employment with the Borough of Moonachie, the employee will be
reimbursed for up to a maximum of 30 days of accumulated sick time.
(b) For retirement or termination after five years of continuous full-time
employment with the Borough of Moonachie, the employee will be
reimbursed for up to a maximum of 60 days of accumulated sick time.
d. Payment required herein and above shall not be made if an employee is terminated
for just cause. The Employer's determination in this regard shall be final and not
subject to challenge.
a. When a Borough employee is injured in the line of duty, the Council may, pursuant
to R.S. 40:11-8, pass a resolution giving the employee up to one year's leave of
absence with pay. When such action is taken the employee shall not be charged any
sick leave time for time lost to such injury.
b. Prior to the passage of the resolution referred to in paragraph a., a contract shall be
executed between the employee and the Borough setting forth that the employee
shall reimburse the Borough for monies he may receive as workmen's
compensation, temporary benefits or from legal settlement or judgment against the
person or persons responsible for the injury.
§ 5-4.4 PERSONNEL § 5-4.6
5:7
§ 5-4.6. Leave Because of Death in Immediate Family. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code
§ 3-4.6]
Leave with pay not exceeding three days shall be granted to any employee in the event
of death in his immediate family. The term "immediate family" for the purpose of this
subsection shall include:
§ 5-4.7. Outside Employment. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-4.7]
Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside business activities
without the prior approval of their department head or the Borough Council. No
application for permission to accept outside employment shall be granted unless there
is reasonable probability that such outside employment will not interfere with the
employee's performance or compromise his position with the Borough through a conflict
of interest or if, in the case of a full-time employee of the Borough, such outside
employment shall exceed 20 hours per week.
§ 5-4.8. Terminal Leave. [Ord. #92-15, § 6; Ord. #93-8, § 6; Ord. #94-10, § 6; Ord.
#95-10, § 6; Ord. No. 2016-8, retroactive to Jan. 1,2016; Ord. No. 2017-7 § 7,
retroactive to Jan. 1,2017; Ord. #2018-8, retroactive to Jan. 1,2018; 10-24-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-6; 11-12-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-6; 11-30-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-7,
retroactive to 1-1-2021]
§ 5-5. DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
§ 5-5.1. Disciplinary Actions Enumerated. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-5.1]
An employee who has acquired permanent status may be disciplined by any of the
a. The employee's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister.
b. The child, parent, brother or sister of his spouse.
c. A relative living under the same roof.
a. Terminal leave benefits, if any, shall be determined by the Mayor and Council,
subject to any other conditions and/or required payments as provided above, on a
case-by-case basis based upon a merit review of the particular employee's work
history. If the employee is a member of a specific bargaining unit, the terminal leave
benefits shall be in accordance with the terms of the present contract with that
bargaining unit.
b. Terminal payment due to any employee upon death shall be paid to the estate of
said employee.
c. Payment required herein and above shall not be made if an employee is terminated
for just cause. The employer's determination in this regard shall be final and not
subject to challenge.
d. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, each employee of the
Borough of Moonachie shall be entitled to any and all of those benefits which are
required under the rules and/or statutes governing the Department of Personnel.
§ 5-4.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-5.1
5:8
following actions, which are stated in order of severity, for the causes stated in this
section by a department head or the Borough Council, except that no employee shall be
suspended or dismissed without the approval of the Mayor and Council:
§ 5-5.2. Causes of Disciplinary Action. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-5.2]
The causes for which disciplinary action may be invoked are the following:
§ 5-6. MERITORIOUS ACTIONS. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-6]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Borough to recognize and encourage
meritorious actions on the part of its officers and employees. To this end, letters of
commendation concerning Borough employees from their superiors and from members
of the public with whom they deal shall be directed to the attention of the Mayor and
Council, and then recorded in the employee's personnel file. In addition, the Mayor and
Council may, of its own motion, commend the work of particular officers and employees
and cause such commendation to be inserted in their personnel files.
§ 5-7. BONDING OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code
§ 3-7]
Every officer or employee of the Borough who, by virtue of his office or position, is
entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public monies or funds, and any
other officer or employee who may be required so to do by the Mayor and Council shall,
before entering upon the duties of his office or position, execute and deliver a surety
a. Informal, verbal reproof.
b. Written reproof.
c. Suspension from duty.
d. Dismissal.
a. Neglect of duty.
b. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave has expired, or
after such leave has been disapproved or revoked; provided, however, that any
regular member or officer of the Police Department who shall be absent from duty
without just cause for a term of five days continuously and without leave of absence
shall, at the expiration of such five days, cease to be a member of the Police
Department as provided by R.S. 40:47-3, as amended.
c. Incompetency or inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical disability.
d. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
e. Intoxication while on duty.
f. Commission of a criminal act.
g. Disobedience of a rule or regulation of the Borough.
h. Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
§ 5-5.1 PERSONNEL § 5-7
5:9
bond in such amount as may be fixed by the Mayor and Council, binding him to the
Borough in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of
his duty. Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall execute such bond
with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the Borough Clerk, except that the Clerk
shall deliver his bond to the Borough Treasurer, before he enters upon the discharge of
his duties of the office or employment.
If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond within 30 days
after notification of his election or appointment, his office or position may be declared
vacant.
In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the State or any ordinance
of the Borough to give a bond for the faithful performance of his duties, such bond shall
be secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this State and the premium
therefor shall be paid by the Borough. Each such bond shall be approved by the Borough
Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
§ 5-8. CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 5-8.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-8.1]
No elected or appointed official, officer or employee of the Borough shall engage in any
business transaction, professional activity, or have a financial or other private interest,
either direct or indirect, which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his
official duties, unless full disclosure is made as to such interest in writing to the Mayor
and Council.
§ 5-8.2. Employment or Investments Affecting Duties. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code
§ 3-8.2]
No elected or appointed official, officer or employee of the Borough shall accept
employment, engage in any business transaction or make any investment which will be
detrimental to the Borough in the exercise of his official duties or which will interfere in
any manner with the discharge of his official duties.
§ 5-8.3. Representation of Private Interests before Borough Agencies,
Departments or Municipal Court. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-8.3]
No elected or appointed official, officer or employee of the Borough shall represent
any private interests to the detriment of the Borough or for the purpose of unwarranted
personal gain before any Borough agency or department, or the Municipal Court, or in
any litigation to which the Borough is a party.
§ 5-8.4. Disclosure of Interest in Legislation. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-8.4]
In the event that any elected or appointed official, or the Borough Clerk, Borough
Treasurer, Borough Attorney, Borough Engineer, the Mayor or any Councilman has a
direct or indirect financial interest in any proposed legislation, he shall publicly disclose
on the official records of the Borough the nature and extent of such interest.
§ 5-7 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-8.5
5:10
§ 5-8.5. Improper Use of Official Position. [Ord. #69-15; 1970 Code § 3-8.5]
No elected or appointed official, officer or employee of the Borough shall improperly
use his official position in order to obtain a personal discount or other benefit from any
person.
§ 5-9. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
§ 5-9.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. #86-3, § 1]
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for the certain defense of actions
against and the indemnification of public employees as may be permitted by N.J.S.A.
59:10-1, et seq.
§ 5-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. #86-3, § 2]
As used in this section:
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean and include an officer, employee or servant whether or not
compensated or part-time, who is authorized to perform any act or service; provided,
however, that term shall specifically exclude any independent contractor, but is intended
to include any professional staff of the Borough who, for purposes of this section, shall
not be regarded as independent contractors.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE—Shall mean any employee or former employee of the Borough
who shall have been employed as an employee defined above.
§ 5-9.3. Action to be Taken. [Ord. #86-3, § 3]
The Borough shall provide for the defense of any action brought against a public
employee an account of any act or omission in the scope of that employee's employment,
and this obligation shall extend to any cross-actions, counterclaims or cross-complaint
against any such employee.
§ 5-9.4. Exceptions. [Ord. #86-3, § 4]
The provisions provided herein shall not apply when the Mayor and Council of the
Borough determine that any of the following shall have occurred:
a. The act or omission was not within the scope of the employee's employment; or
b. The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, malice or willful misconduct
in office; or
c. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a clear conflict of interest
between the Borough and the public employee; or
d. The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance policy or
by policies, whether obtained by the Borough or by any other person; or
e. The public employee failed to deliver to the Mayor and Council of the Borough, the
Borough Attorney or Borough Clerk, or any one of those, within 15 calendar days
after the time he shall have been served with any summons, complaints, process,
§ 5-8.5 PERSONNEL § 5-9.4
5:11
§ 5-9.5. Methods of Providing Defense. [Ord. #86-3, § 5]
The defense shall be at the option of the Municipality. The Borough may provide any
defense required of it under this section through an attorney from its own staff or by
employing other counsel at the option of the Mayor and Council of the Borough.
§ 5-9.6. Borough Control of All Litigation. [Ord. #86-3, § 6]
Whenever the Borough shall provide any defense provided hereunder, the Mayor,
through counsel appointed by the Borough, shall assume exclusive control over the
representation of the public employee, and such employee shall cooperate fully with
the defense. Where it is impracticable to so do, the attorney representing the insurance
company on behalf of the Borough or such other appointed person shall assume
exclusive control.
§ 5-9.7. Indemnification. [Ord. #86-3, § 7]
In any case where the Borough shall be required to provide a defense under the terms
of this section, the Borough shall pay or reimburse the public employee for any of the
following:
§ 5-10. CIVIL SERVICE.
§ 5-10.1. Preamble. [Ord. #156-B; 1970 Code § 3-9.1]
At the general election held in November 1953, there was submitted to the voters of the
Borough the question of whether or not the Borough should adopt the provisions of the
Civil Service Act of the State of New Jersey, and adoption thereof was approved and
authorized by a majority of the voters of the Borough at this election. Thereafter, the
notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy of the same; or
f. The public employee has failed to cooperate with the Municipality in the defense of
this action.
a. Any bona fide settlement agreement entered into by the employee when approved
by Mayor and Council of the Borough;
b. Any judgment entered against the employee; and
c. If Mayor and Council have failed to provide such required defense, all costs of
defending the action including reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with
costs of any appeal.
Where the Borough would be required under the terms and conditions hereunder
to provide any defense, except for the fact that such defense is provided for by
insurance, the Borough shall provide indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the
extent not already covered by insurance.
Nothing in this section shall either permit or authorize the Borough to pay any
punitive or exemplary damage or damages resulting from the commission relating
to any crime.
§ 5-9.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 5-10.1
5:12
Civil Service Commission of the State of New Jersey made a survey covering the duties,
salaries and respective departments of all Borough officers and employees. Following
this survey the Civil Service Commission submitted to the Mayor and Council three
separate and distinct schedules as follows:
§ 5-10.2. Schedules Incorporated. [Ord. #156-B; 1970 Code § 3-9.2]
The schedules referred to in subsection 5-10.1, which were recommended to the
Borough for adoption by the Civil Service Commission of the State of New Jersey,
consisting of the following, are hereby made a part of this section in their entirety, the
same as though specifically set forth herein:
a. Schedule 1. A complete list of the employees of the Borough, giving a suggested
title for each employee, the salary of the same, and the department to which such
employee is assigned.
b. Schedule 2. A duties classification of employees, setting forth suggested titles to be
used for employees of the Borough, their respective duties, typical tasks, minimum
qualifications for the purpose of examination, and suggested salary schedules.
c. Schedule 3. Recommended rules for the installation and administration of Civil
Service procedures in and for the Borough.
a. Schedule 1. A schedule of catalogued lists of present employees of the Borough,
together with the title of each such employee, the salary paid, and the date of
election or appointment.
b. Schedule 2. A schedule of all positions in the Borough, containing under such
positions the duties, typical tasks, minimum qualifications, probable line of
promotion and salary range for each such position. This schedule is hereby adopted
as the Official Civil Service classification of positions and employees in and for the
Borough.
c. Schedule 3. Recommended rules for the installation and administration of Civil
Service procedures in and for the Borough.
§ 5-10.1 PERSONNEL § 5-10.2
5:13

Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1970 Code § 8-1]
This Chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages in
the Borough of Moonachie in accordance with the provisions of an Act of the Legislature
of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages,"
comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its supplements and amendments and also
comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #90-4]
For the purpose of this Chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the same meanings
as N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1970 Code § 8-2.1]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued, and all proceedings under this Chapter
shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations referred to in Section 6-1, and
all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1970 Code § 8-2.2]
All licenses required by this Chapter shall be issued by the governing body, which shall
also administer the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1970 Code § 8-2.3]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Borough without having
obtained a license in accordance with the act referred to in Section 6-1 and the provisions
of this Chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [Ord. #113, § 1;1970 Code § 8-3; Ord. #89-15; Ord. #92-21]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the
Borough shall be as follows:
1993 1994 1995
a. Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$615 $735 $880
b. Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$480 $575 $690
§ 5-10.2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL § 6-3.4
6:1
1993 1994 1995
c. Limited Retail Distribution
License
$95 $110 $130
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. #100, § 1; Ord. #81-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 8-4.1; New;
Ord. #2009-3]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed or delivered in any licensed
premises on any day of the week, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day
except New Year's Day and Christmas Day each year as hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.2. (Reserved)16
§ 6-4.3. (Reserved)17
§ 6-4.4. New Year's Day and Christmas Day. [Ord. #100, § 1; Ord. #81-4, § 1;
1970 Code § 8-4.2]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1 and December 25. On
those days no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, consumed or delivered in the
licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.5. Time. [Ord. #81-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 8-4.6]
The hours fixed herein shall be according to prevailing time.
§ 6-4.6. Sales to Certain Persons. [1970 Code § 8-6]
No licensee or employee of the licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly,
any alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person or person under the legal age, nor
permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of the
above-named persons.
§ 6-4.7. Closing Provisions. [Ord. #90-4]
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the entire licensed
premises shall be closed and no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain thereon
except the licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee.
§ 6-5. (RESERVED)18
16. Editor's Note: Former subsection 6-4.2, pertaining to restrictions of hours on Saturdays, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1970 Code § 8-4.3 and Ordinance Nos. 100 and 84-1, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2009-3.
17. Editor's Note: Former subsection 6-4.3 pertaining to restriction of hours on Sundays, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1970 Code 38-4.4 and Ordinance Nos. 70-9 and 81-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2009-3.
18. Editor's Note: Former Section 6-5 pertaining to persons under the legal age and disorderly persons, previously codified
herein was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-3.
§ 6-3.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 6-6
6:2
§ 6-6. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1970 Code § 8-7]
Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked for violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, any provision of any applicable statute or any of the
rules or regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, by service of a five-day notice of charges preferred against hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed for a violation of this Chapter.
§ 6-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL § 6-6
6:3

Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: The power of the Municipality to adopt ordinances concerning
traffic and parking is contained in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197. Various statutory provisions
throughout Title 39 control the manner in which municipalities may regulate
parking and traffic. N.J.S.A.39:4-8 requires that all traffic and parking ordinances
be approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED. [1970 Code § 9-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Chapter, the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. [1970 Code § 9-2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this Chapter, they shall mean either Eastern
Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the
Borough.
§ 7-3. PARKING.
§ 7-3.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1970 Code § 9-3.1]
The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any
person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other
New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter provided.
§ 7-3.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [1970 Code § 9-3.2b, c, d]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking on streets or
sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police officer is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations,
etc., dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs
are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section shall be
deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and any
police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 6-6 TRAFFIC § 7-3.3
7:1
§ 7-3.3. Parking Prohibited on Snow Covered Streets. [1970 Code § 9-3.2a]
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the street, no
vehicle shall be parked on the following main traveled or major roadways or portions
thereof:
All Streets in the Borough.
The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until the
streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with
the normal flow of traffic.
§ 7-3.4. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord. #143, §§ 1 & 2;
Ord. #172; Ord. #189, §§ 1, 3 & 4; Ord. #210, §§ 1A, 1B & 1C; Ord. #7-26-62,
§§ 1A, 1B & 1C; Ord. #235, § 1B; Ord. #74-14, § 1; Ord. #75-2, § 3; Ord. #75-12;
Ord. #77-4, § 1; Ord. #83-10, § 1; 1970 Code § 9-3.3; Ord. #85-11, § 1; Ord.
#87-18; Ord. #87-26, § 1; Ord. #90-18, § 1; Ord. #96-12; Ord. #2002-18, § 1; Ord.
No. 2016-1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule I which can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.5. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets. [Ord.
#68-1, § 1C; Ord. #70-12, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #76-1, § 2; 1970 Code § 9-3.4; Ord. #85-5,
§ 1; Ord. #85-11, § 2; Ord. #87-23, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #90-18, § 2; Ord. #96-6; Ord.
#99-12; Ord. #2002-2, § 3; Ord. #2002-13, § 1; Ord. #2003-12, § 1; Ord. #2018-1]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day on any of the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II which can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.6. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. #83-10, § 2; 1970 Code § 9-5D; Ord. #87-25, § 1; Ord. #90-18, § 3;
Ord. #97-8, § 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III on
any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III which can be
found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.7. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. #68-1, § 1D; Ord. #189,
§§ 1 — 42; Ord. #210, § 3; Ord. #70-11, § 1; Ord. #70-12, §§ 3 & 4; Ord. #74-15,
§§ 1 — 3; Ord. #76-1, § 1; 1970 Code § 9-3.5; Ord. #87-2, § 1; Ord. #90-18, § 4]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit specified, between the hours
listed, on any day, except Sunday and public holidays, on any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV which can be found in Chapter 7A
§ 7-3.8. Parking of Large Commercial Motor Vehicles Overnight. [Ord. #2003-5,
§§ 1 — 3; Ord. #2004-2, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #2004-16, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #2007-5, §§ 1 —
3]
a. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to park on any public street between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday including holidays the following:
§ 7-3.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 7-3.8
7:2
§ 7-4. LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES.
§ 7-4.1. Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded from Certain Streets. [Ord. #70-11, § 4;
Ord. #70-12, § 5; 1970 Code § 9-5; Ord. #2003-22, § 1; Ord. #2004-11, § 1]
Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials, from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V which
can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-4.2. Penalty. [Ord. #2003-22, § 1; Ord. #2004-11, § 1]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $33. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a new violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-4.3. Trucks Over 10 Tons Excluded from Certain Streets. [Ord. #2012-3]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:716.1, the streets or parts of streets as described are hereby
designated as routes for vehicles over 10 tons. Trucks over 10 tons gross weight are
hereby excluded, except for the pickup and delivery of materials, from the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule XXI which can be found in Chapter 7A
§ 7-4.4. Penalty. [Ord. #2012-3]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
trucks, limousines, omnibuses, or trailers, attached or in combination thereof in
excess of any one of the following:
GVW 3.5 tons
Length 24 feet
Height 8 feet
1. Exceptions:
(a) When such motor vehicle is parked in a location at which parking is
otherwise permitted and when it is actively engaged in the loading or
delivery of passengers, goods, or materials from or to premises in front of
which it is directly parked and then only for so long as it is actively being
loaded or unloaded.
(b) When such motor vehicle is necessary to the rendering of services to the
premises or the owners or occupants thereof, in front of which it is
directly parked if parking in that location is otherwise permitted and then
only for as long as is necessary to the rendering of such services.
b. Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
c. Violations and Penalties. Any person, owner or operator who shall violate any
provision of this subsection shall be subject to a fine of $35.
§ 7-3.8 TRAFFIC § 7-4.4
7:3
punished by a fine not exceeding $100. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a new violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-5. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. #87-19, § 1]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI, which can be found in Chapter
7A, are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction indicated.
§ 7-6. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-6.1. Through Streets. [Ord. #150, A1; 1970 Code § 9-4; New; Ord. #87-11, § 1;
Ord. #00-10, § 1; Ord. #2002-5, § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule VII, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby designated as Through
Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where YIELD signs having sides 36 inches in length are provided
for in the designations.
§ 7-6.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. #90-4; Ord. #92-7, § 1; Ord. #2002-12, § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule
VIII, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
STOP signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-6.3. Yield Intersections. [Ord. #90-4]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule
IX, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby designated as Yield Intersections.
YIELD signs having sides 36 inches in length shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-7. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. #90-4; Ord. #96-3]
The locations described in Schedule X, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby
designated as Loading Zones.
§ 7-8. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. #90-4]
The locations described in Schedule XI, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby
designated as Taxi Stands.
§ 7-9. BUS STOPS. [Ord. #90-4; Ord. #90-18, § 5; Ord. #97-8, § 2; Ord. #2001-3,
§ 4]
The locations described in Schedule XII, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are hereby
designated as Bus Stops.
§ 7-10. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-10.1. Left Turn Prohibition. [Ord. #77-4, § 3; 1970 Code § 9-5A.1; Ord. #97-8,
§ 7-4.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 7-10.1
7:4
§ 3]
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XIII which
can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.2. U-Turn Prohibition. [Ord. #90-4]
No person shall make a U-Turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XIV which
can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.3. No Turns. [Ord. #90-4]
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XV which can
be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.4. Right Turn on Red Traffic Signal Prohibited. [Ord. #87-2, § 2; Ord.
#90-4]
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (STOP) indication
whenever an official sign is presented prohibiting such turn on the red signal as described
in Schedule XVI which can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.5. Lane Use Reservations. [Ord. #77-4, § 2; Ord. #83-10, § 3; 1970 Code
§ 9-5B]
The lane locations described in Schedule XVII, which can be found in Chapter 7A, are
designated as Lane Use Reservations and traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 7-10.6. No Right Turns Permitted During Certain Hours. [Ord. #90-18, § 6]
No person shall make a right turn during the specified hours at any of the locations
described in Schedule XVIIA which can be found in Chapter 7A.
§ 7-11. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. #90-4]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII, which can be found in
Chapter 7A, shall have the speed limits designated in such schedule.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the above
designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-12. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-12.1. Parking Restrictions. [Ord. #90-4; Ord. #95-11; Ord. #2002-14, § 3; Ord.
#2003-22, § 1; Ord. #2004-11, § 1; Ord. #2005-14, §§ 1, 3; Ord. #2017-5 § 1; Ord.
#2018-1]
No person shall park in the area situated on the premises described in Schedule XIX,
which can be found in Chapter 7A, unless they have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, when using a motor
vehicle for which a special vehicle identification card has been issued by the
Commission.
§ 7-10.1 TRAFFIC § 7-12.2
7:5
§ 7-12.2. Penalty. [Ord. #2003-22, § 1; Ord. #2004-11, § 1]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a minimum fine of $253. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a new violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-13. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS. [Ord. #77-1, §§ 1 & 2; 1970 Code
§ 9-5C]
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersections designated in
Schedule XX which can be found in Chapter 7A. The traffic signal installation shall
be in accordance with the provision of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic
regulations, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes; shall conform to the design
and shall be maintained in operation, as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-14. PENALTY. [1970 Code § 9-6; Ord. #90-4]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this ordinance or any supplement thereto shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days or both.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie covered in this Traffic
Chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the
prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Chapter.
§ 7-15. APPLICABILITY OF THE PROVISIONS OF SUBTITLE ONE OF
TITLE 39 OF REVISED STATUTES OF NEW JERSEY FOR THE
REGULATION OF THE USE OF MUNICIPAL AND/OR PRIVATE
ROADWAYS, STREETS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS BY MOTOR
VEHICLES.
§ 7-15.1. Provisions. [Ord. #91-13, §§ 1 — 9]
a. The following agencies and/or property owners have filed a written consent with
the Borough of Moonachie that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public roads,
streets, driveways and parking lots, located in the Borough of Moonachie, County
of Bergen and the following regulations and provisions shall be enforceable.
b. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines provided.
c. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site
plan and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.19
d. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various types of
19. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk attached to
Ordinance No. 91-13.
§ 7-12.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 7-15.1
7:6
§ 7-15.2. Fee Owners Subject to These Provisions. [Ord. #91-13, § 9]
The following parcels and/or individuals shall be subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow
of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil filling areas, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
f. That all signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for by
the applicant property owner. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to
insure that installations meet State and Federal specifications, and all signs shall
conform to the current manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
g. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be 15
m.p.h.
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the
above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of Transportation.
h. One-Way Entrance and Exit. The following described entrance and exit as shown
on each respective site plan20 are hereby designated as one-way in the direction
indicated.
i. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every person
convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to
a penalty of: (a) first offense, $100; (b) second or subsequent offenses, not less than
$100 nor greater than $1,000 plus community service up to 90 days or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
j. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the
regulation.
a. Borough of Moonachie/Municipal Building and Police Headquarters;
b. Robert L. Craig School;
c. Moonachie Civic Center and Senior Citizens Center.
All parcels and fee owners who are subject to this section shall receive from
the Borough Clerk within 20 days of adoption of this section, the site plan21
prepared by the Department of Transportation, and shall, at their sole cost and
expense, undertake any and all improvements to comply with the site requirements
20. Editor's 43`1: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk attached to
Ordinance No. 91-13.
21. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the Borough Clerk attached to
Ordinance No. 91-13.
§ 7-15.1 TRAFFIC § 7-15.2
7:7
§ 7-16. PARKING AND RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
§ 7-16.1. Parking Permits; Hours; Streets. [Ord. #99-11, § 1; Ord. #2002-13, § 3;
Ord. No. 2017-5 § 3]
§ 7-16.2. Exceptions. [Ord. #99-11, § II]
delineated thereon.
a. No vehicles shall be parked on any of the streets hereafter listed in the Borough of
Moonachie between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
except for legal holidays, unless:
1. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of the
Borough of Moonachie and the vehicle has displayed, facing outward on the
driver's side rear window, a current residential parking permit.
b. Permit Parking Only Streets Designated. The following streets are hereby
designated as "Parking Permit Zone Only" streets in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this Section.
Name of Street Location
Anderson Avenue From Berger Street to Union Street
Berger Street Entire length
Edstan Drive [Ord. No. 2017-5
§ 3]
From Moonachie Road to Washington Place
Oak Street Entire length
Old Moonachie Avenue North Side entire length from
Rooney Place Entire length
Union Street Entire length
Washington Place [Ord. No.
2017-5 § 3]
Entire length
a. The prohibitions set forth in paragraph a, subsection 7-16.1, shall not apply to the
following classifications of vehicles:
1. Visitor's vehicles. A vehicle displaying a current visitor parking mirror tag
permit may park provided that the operator of the vehicle is a bona fide
transient guest of a resident of the Borough of Moonachie. The visitor's permit
shall be displayed on the rearview mirror of the vehicle in such a manner as to
be clearly visible by an officer enforcing parking regulations.
2. Contractor, service and delivery vehicles. Contractor, service and delivery
vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial business may park
without permit during the times they are rendering residential service within
the Borough.
3. Emergency and utility vehicles. Emergency vehicles, gas, electric,
§ 7-15.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 7-16.2
7:8
§ 7-16.3. Application for Parking Permit. [Ord. #99-11, § III]
§ 7-16.4. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. #99-11, § IV]
§ 7-16.5. Penalty. [Ord. #99-11, § V; Ord. #2003-22, § 1; Ord. #2004-11, § 1]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $23. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a new violation occurs or continues.
telecommunication and any other similar vehicles may park within the
Borough during the times they are rendering service or repairs within the
Borough.
4. Health care providers. Health care providers must obtain a health care parking
permit to park their vehicles within the Borough during the times they are
rendering assistance and/or health care service to residents of the Borough.
a. Application for parking permits under this section shall be made in writing on forms
provided to the Borough Police Chief or his/her designee. Permits shall be granted
only under the following terms and conditions:
1. Residents. To persons who are residents, a permanent permit valid for two
years shall be issued for every vehicle owned or principally operated by such
person.
2. Visitors. Two visitor tag permits shall be issued to each resident requesting
them for use only by visitors to that residential unit.
a. The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any
person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or
limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles set forth in N.J.S.A.
39:4-138.
b. The provisions of subsection 7-3.5 (Schedule II which can be found in Chapter 7A),
prohibiting parking during certain hours and days on certain streets shall remain in
effect and the possession of a parking permit shall not be a defense to a violation of
this section.
§ 7-16.2 TRAFFIC § 7-16.5
7:9

Chapter 7A
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
§ 7A-1. SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.4, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Sides Location
Anderson Avenue Both Cul de sac easterly side of Berry's Creek
easterly to West Commercial Avenue
Barett Place Both Entire length
Broad Street South Moonachie Road to Bruno Street
Caesar Place Both Entire length
Capitol Drive Both Entire length
Carol Place Both Entire length
Commercial Avenue Both Entire length
Congress Drive Both Entire length
Daniel Street Both Cul de sac
East Joseph Street Southerly From a point 394 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Moonachie Road extending
180 feet to the east from that point
East Park Street Both Charles Street to Little Ferry Boundary
East Park Street Both Moonachie Road to Molinari Street
Empire Boulevard Both Entire length
Garden Street Both Entire length
Gotham Parkway Both Entire length
Grand Street Both Entire length
Graphic Place Easterly Entire length
Graphic Place Westerly From northerly curbline of East Park
Street extending 186 feet north
Industrial Avenue Both Entire length
Joseph Street Both Edstan Drive to Redneck Avenue
Knickerbocker Road Both Entire length
Maple Street Both Cul de sac.
Old Moonachie Avenue South Entire length
Oxford Drive22 [Ord. No.
2016-1]
Both Entire length
§ 7-16.5 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-1
7A:1
Name of Street Sides Location
Purcell Court Both Entire length
Ramella Avenue Both Entire length
Romeo Street Easterly Moonachie Avenue to Anderson Avenue
Romeo Street Westerly From the southerly curb-line of
Moonachie Avenue extending 40 feet
south and from 244 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Moonachie Avenue
to the northerly curbline of Anderson
Avenue
South Joseph Street Both Entire length
State Street Both Entire length
Teresa Court Both Cul de sac.
Union Avenue Both Redneck Avenue to Little Ferry
Boundary
West Commercial Avenue Both Entire length
Willow Street Both Entire length
§ 7A-2. SCHEDULE II: PARKING PROHIBITED CERTAIN HOURS. [Ord.
#2018-1]
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.5, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
a. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on the
west side of the streets hereinafter listed on Thursdays. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on the east side of the streets
hereinafter listed on Mondays.
Name of Street Location
Albert Street Entire length
Anderson Street Entire length
Bruno Street Entire length
Diamond Street Entire length
Edstan Drive Entire length
Frederick Street From Joseph Street north to Broad
Street
Henry Street Entire length
22. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 90-3 renamed Sony Drive to Lladro Drive. Ordinance No. 2016-1 renamed Lladro Drive
to Oxford Drive.
§ 7A-1 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-2
7A:2
Name of Street Location
Jackson Place Entire length
Lincoln Place Entire length
Molinari Street Entire length
Sova Place Entire length
William Street Entire length
b. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on the
south side of the streets hereinafter listed on Mondays. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on the north side of the streets
hereinafter listed on Thursdays.
Name of Street Location
Berger Street Entire length
Broad Street Entire length
Concord Street Entire length
East Joseph Street Entire length
East Park Street Entire length
Jefferson Place Entire length
Joseph Street Entire length
Jubilee Place Entire length
Maple Place Entire length
Monte Place Entire length
Oak Street Entire length
Rooney Place Entire length
Sedita Place Entire length
Truman Place Entire length
Union Street Entire length
Washington Place Entire length
West Park Street Entire length
c. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on
either side of the streets hereinafter listed on Mondays through Fridays, excluding
legal holidays, as those days are set forth in N.J.S.A. 36:1-1. The NO PARKING
CERTAIN HOURS set forth in this paragraph is meant to supplement the other
provisions of this subsection and are not to be interpreted to the exclusion of the
other paragraphs of this subsection.
§ 7A-2 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-2
7A:3
§ 7A-3. SCHEDULE III: NO STOPPING OR STANDING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.6, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts
of streets.
Name of Street Location
Anderson Avenue Entire length
Berger Street Entire length
Concord Street Entire length
Oak Street Entire length
Old Moonachie Avenue Entire length
Rooney Place Entire length
Union Street Entire length
d. (Reserved)
e. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on either
side of the street, as listed, on days when the Moonachie School District is in
session.
The NO PARKING CERTAIN HOURS set forth in this paragraph is meant to
supplement the other provisions of this subsection and are not to be interpreted to
the exclusion of the other paragraphs of this subsection:
Name of Street Side Location
West Park Street Northerly Beginning 25 feet from the westerly
curbline of Albert Street to a point
175 feet to the West
West Park Street Southerly Beginning 25 feet from the westerly
curbline of Albert Street to a point
218 feet to the West
f. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when the Moonachie School District is in session.
The NO PARKING CERTAIN HOURS set forth in this paragraph is meant to
supplement the provisions of this subsection and are not to be interpreted to the
exclusion of the other paragraphs of this subsection.
Name of Street Side Location
West Park Street Northerly From Moonachie Road to Albert
Street
§ 7A-2 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-3
7A:4
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Broad Street South At any time From the easterly curbline of Bruno
Street to Moonachie Road
Joseph Street South At any time From the westerly curbline of Bruno
Street to a point 110 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Moonachie
Road
Joseph Street North At any time From the westerly curbline of
Molinari Street to the easterly
curbline of Bruno Street
Joseph Street South At any time Westerly curbline of Bruno Street to
a point 130 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Moonachie Road
Joseph Street North At any time Easterly curbline of Bruno Street to
a point 205 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Moonachie Road
Moonachie Road Both At any time From a point 310 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Joseph Street
to a point 110 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Maple Street
Moonachie Road East At any time Northerly curbline of Joseph Street
to a point 100 feet south of East
Park Street, and from a point 100
feet south of the southerly curbline
of Joseph Street to a point 125 feet
south from the southerly curbline of
Maple Street
Moonachie Road West At any time 115 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Joseph Street to a point
200 feet south thereof, and from the
northerly curbline of Joseph Street
to a point 300 feet north thereof
Moonachie Avenue Both At any time Along the north side of Moonachie
Avenue from the Wood-Ridge -
Moonachie Corporate Line to
Moonachie Road
Moonachie Avenue Both At any time Along the south side of Moonachie
Avenue from the Wood-Ridge -
Moonachie Corporate Line to the
Carlstadt-Moonachie Corporate
Line
§ 7A-3 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-3
7A:5
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
State Street Both At any time From a point 400 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Capitol Drive
on both sides of the street to the cul
de sac.
§ 7A-4. SCHEDULE IV: TIME LIMITED PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.7, no person shall park a vehicle for
longer than the time limit shown on any of the following streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Broad Street North 15 minutes Beginning 25 feet from the westerly
curbline of Moonachie Road to 25
feet of the easterly curbline of
Bruno Street
Commercial Avenue West 15 minutes Beginning 200 feet from the
southerly curbline of Moonachie
Avenue to a point 150 feet to the
south
Graphic Place West 15 minutes Beginning 186 feet from the
northerly curbline of East Park
Street and extending to the cul de
sac.
Romeo Street West 15 minutes Beginning 25 feet from the
southerly curbline of Moonachie
Avenue and extending south 220
feet therefrom
§ 7A-5. SCHEDULE V: TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS EXCLUDED.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.1, trucks over four tons gross weight
are excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pick
up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Albert Street Entire length
Berger Street Entire length
Broad Street Entire length
Bruno Street Entire length
Concord Street Entire length
Daniel Street Entire length
East Joseph Street Entire length
Edstan Drive Entire length
§ 7A-3 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-5
7A:6
Name of Street Location
Frederick Street Entire length
Henry Street Entire length
Jackson Place Entire length
Jefferson Place Entire length
Joseph Street Entire length
Lincoln Place Entire length
Maple Street Entire length
Mavus Place Entire length
Molinari Street Entire length
Monte Place Entire length
Oak Street Entire length
Park Street Entire length
Ramella Avenue Entire length
Rooney Place Entire length
Roosevelt Place Entire length
Sedita Place Entire length
Sova Place Entire length
Truman Place Entire length
Union Street Entire length
Washington Place Entire length
William Street Entire length
§ 7A-6. SCHEDULE VI: ONE-WAY STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-5, the following described streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Location
East Joseph Street East Beginning at a point on East Joseph Street, the point
being distant from the intersection with Moonachie
Road, 670.00 feet in an easterly direction to the
westerly terminus Block 30 traveling, thence;
a. Easterly along the southern alignment of East
Joseph Street to a bend point, thence;
b. Northerly along the eastern frontage of Block 30,
thence;
§ 7A-5 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-6
7A:7
Name of Street Direction Location
c. Southwesterly along the north portion of Block
30, the Block being further described as an island
area surrounded by right-of-way designated as
East Joseph Street to the point or place of
beginning
The description detailing a one-way roadway area in a
counterclockwise direction around the above
described island area
§ 7A-7. SCHEDULE VII: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.1, the following described streets or
parts of streets are hereby designated as Through Streets. STOP signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD
signs are provided for in the designation.
Broad Street
Between Moonachie Road and Henry Street
Commercial Avenue
Entire length
East Park Street
Entire length
Edstan Drive
Between Moonachie Road and Joseph Street
Grand Street
Between Moonachie Avenue and Barrett Avenue
Joseph Street
Between Moonachie Road and Redneck Avenue
Lincoln Place
Entire length
West Commercial Avenue
Between Commercial Avenue and Grand Street
West Park Street
Entire length
§ 7A-8. SCHEDULE VIII: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.2, the following intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
§ 7A-6 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-8
7A:8
Joseph Street and Edstan Drive:
STOP signs to be installed on Joseph Street eastbound and westbound at the Edstan
Drive intersection.
§ 7A-9. SCHEDULE IX: YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.3, the following intersections are
designated as Yield Intersections.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-10. SCHEDULE X: LOADING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-7, the following described locations are
hereby designated as Loading Zones.
Name of Street Location
West Park Street Beginning 25 feet from the westerly
curbline of Moonachie Road and
extending to a point 50 feet west.
§ 7A-11. SCHEDULE XI: TAXI STANDS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-8, the following described locations are
hereby designated as Taxi Stands.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-12. SCHEDULE XII: BUS STOPS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-9, the following described locations are
hereby designated as Bus Stops.
Name of Street Side Location
Moonachie Road Westerly Beginning 25 feet from the northerly
curbline of Rooney Place and extending to
a point 80 feet north
Moonachie Road Westerly Beginning 225 feet from the southerly side
of Edstan Drive and extending to a point
125 feet to the south
Moonachie Road Easterly Beginning 165 feet from the southerly
curbline of Carol Place and extending to a
point 110 feet to the south
Moonachie Road Easterly Beginning 25 feet from the southerly
curbline of East Joseph Street and
extending to a point 75 feet to the south
§ 7A-8 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-12
7A:9
Name of Street Side Location
Moonachie Road Easterly Beginning 25 feet from the southerly
curbline of East Park Street and extending
to a point 75 feet to the south
Moonachie Road Easterly Beginning 25 feet from the southerly
curbline of Joseph Street and extending 75
feet to the south
Moonachie Road Westerly Southerly curbline of Joseph Street to a
point 115 feet south thereof
Moonachie Road Easterly Southerly curbline 25 feet from East Park
Street and extending 75 feet to the south
Moonachie Road North Easterly Between Empire Boulevard and Edstan
Drive — Mid-block. Beginning 293 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Empire
Boulevard and extending 135 feet northerly
therefrom
Moonachie Road North Easterly Ramella Avenue — Far side. Beginning at
the northerly curbline of Ramella Avenue
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
§ 7A-13. SCHEDULE XIII: NO LEFT TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.1, no person shall make a left turn
at any of the following locations.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Moonachie Road East At any time From the driveway exit on
Moonachie Road CR#503 for
the commercial tenant at 250
Moonachie Road located 436
feet from the northerly curbline
of Empire Boulevard to
southbound on Moonachie Road
Park Street East At any time East on Park Street to north on
Moonachie Road
§ 7A-14. SCHEDULE XIV: NO U-TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.2, no person shall make a U-Turn
at any of the following intersections.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-15. SCHEDULE XV: NO TURNS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.3, no person shall make a turn at
any of the following locations.
§ 7A-12 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-15
7A:10
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-16. SCHEDULE XVI: NO RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL.
In accordance with subsection 7-10.4, no person shall make a right turn when facing a
steady red signal (STOP) indication at any of the following locations.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-17. SCHEDULE XVII: LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.5, the following described locations
are designated as Lane Use Reservations.
The center lane in each direction along Moonachie Road at its intersection with Joseph
Street shall be designated and reserved for left turns only.
§ 7A-18. SCHEDULE XVIIA: NO RIGHT TURNS PERMITTED DURING
CERTAIN HOURS.
In accordance with subsection 7-10.6, no person shall make a right turn during the
specified hours at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Days and Hours Location
Joseph Street Monday through Friday
between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
East on Joseph Street to
south on Edstan Drive
Joseph Street At any time, for
commercial vehicles only.
Driveway exit on Joseph
Street for the commercial
tenant at 100 Redneck
Avenue
§ 7A-19. SCHEDULE XVIII: SPEED LIMITS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-11, the following speed limits shall be
established on the following streets or parts of streets.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-20. SCHEDULE XIX: PARKING AREA FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
[Ord. 2017-5; Ord. #2018-1]
In accordance with Section 7-12, the parking area herein designated and established for
handicapped persons only is for the use of persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, when using a motor
vehicle on which is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle identification card
has been issued by such Commission. No other person shall park a vehicle or any part
thereof within the bounds of such area.
125 Moonachie Road.
§ 7A-15 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES § 7A-20
7A:11
Also known as Moonachie Civic Center and Senior Citizen Center which particular
spaces are identified by the site plan prepared by Boswell Engineering dated February 2,
1993.
28 Oak Street.
West curbline from Anderson Avenue north 296 feet, then 22 feet north from that point.
The width of the space should be seven feet.
§ 7A-21. SCHEDULE XX: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-13, traffic control signals shall be
installed and operated at the following intersections.
(RESERVED)
§ 7A-22. SCHEDULE XXI: TRUCKS OVER 10 TONS EXCLUDED.
In accordance with the provision of subsection 7-4.3, trucks over 10 tons gross weight
are excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets, except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Locations
Industrial Avenue From Industrial Avenue to Berger Street and
Moonachie Avenue
§ 7A-20 MOONACHIE CODE § 7A-22
7A:12
Chapter 8
ANIMAL CONTROL
Editor's Note: For regulations concerning animals in public parks and lands, see
subsection 9-1.2 of Chapter 9, Recreational Facilities.
§ 8-1. DOGS.23
§ 8-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #83-8, § 1; 1970 Code § 6-1]
As used in this section:
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE—Shall mean any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Shall mean any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
NON-SPAYED OR NON-NEUTERED DOG — Shall mean any dog of reproductive
age which has not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered through
sterilization.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall mean and include every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has such dog in his
keeping.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean any establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this section or otherwise.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog which has been declared by a judge to be a
vicious dog which has attacked or bitten any human being, or which habitually attacks
other dogs or domestic animals.
§ 8-1.2. Licensing Provisions. [Ord. #32, §§ 1, 3&4; Ord. #88, § 1; Ord. #81-12,
§ 1; Ord. #83-8, § 2; 1970 Code § 6-2; Ord. #2009-9]
a. License; When Required. Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of
licensing age:
1. Any dog owned or kept within the Borough by a resident of the Borough on
the 31st day of January of any calendar year.
2. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar year and
kept within the Borough for more than 10 days after acquisition.
23. Editor's Note: The statute that provides for the licensing of dogs is N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1. et seq.
§ 7A-22 ANIMAL CONTROL § 8-1.2
8:1
§ 8-1.3. Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters and Pounds. [1970 Code § 6-3]
3. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
4. Any licensed dog brought into the Borough by any person and kept within the
Borough for more than 10 days.
5. Any dog licensed by another state brought into the borough by any person and
kept within the Borough for more than 90 days.
b. Application for License. An application for license shall give the following
information:
1. A general description of the dog, including breed, sex, age, color and
markings, and whether such dog is of a long or short haired variety.
2. Name, street or post office address of the owner or keeper of such dog.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which applications are
received.
c. Application for License; When Made. Applications for licenses for dogs which are
required to be licensed by the provisions of paragraph a, 1, shall be made before
February 1 of each calendar year. In all other cases, application for license shall be
made within 10 days of the day on which the dog in question first becomes subject
to the provisions of this subsection.
d. License Record. The information on all applications and the registration number
issued to each licensed dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Borough Clerk. In addition, he shall forward similar information to the State
Department of Health each month on forms furnished by that department.
e. Fees. There shall be an annual license fee of $8.80 and an annual registration fee of
$1.20 for New Jersey Pilot Clinic Fund for each dog. Moreover, pursuant to the
Animal Population Control Program, there will be an additional annual New Jersey
surcharge of $3 on all licenses issued for non-spayed and non-neutered dogs.
f. Expiration Date. Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on January 31 of
the calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
g. Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any dog licensed
under subsection 8-1.3 of this Chapter. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "seeing eye dogs" shall be licensed in the same manner as
other dogs, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required to pay any fee.
a. License Required. Any person who keeps or operates, or proposes to establish, a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Clerk for a license. Any person
holding such license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by him and kept at such establishments. Such licenses shall not be
transferable to another owner or different premises.
b. Application Information. An application shall contain the following information:
1. The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
§ 8-1.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 8-1.3
8:2
§ 8-1.4. Disposition of Fees. [1970 Code § 6-4]
License fees and other monies collected or received under the provisions of this section,
2. The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed to be
located, together with a general description of the premises.
3. The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
4. The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such establishment at
any one time.
c. Approval of Health Officer. No license shall be issued until the proposed licensee
submits a written statement from the Health Officer of the Board of Health that the
establishment or proposed establishment complies with local and State rules
governing the location of the sanitation at such establishments.
d. License Term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all such licenses shall
expire on June 30 of each year.
e. License Fees. The annual fees for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be as follows:
1. Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs, $10.
2. Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs, $25.
3. Pet shop, $10.
4. Shelter or pound, no fee.
f. Compliance with State Regulations. Any license issued for a kennel, pet shop,
shelter or pound shall be subject to revocation by the Borough Council on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or the Board of Health of the
Borough for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health or the Borough Board of Health, after the owner has been
afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health or the Borough Board
of Health.
Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall comply with all Borough ordinances and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the preservation of sanitation
therein, and the prevention of the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within
and from such establishments.
g. Report to State Health Department. The Borough Clerk shall forward to the State
Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds within 30
days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and
address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
h. Control of Dogs Off Premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
shall be permitted off such premises, except on a leash or in a crate, or under other
safe control.
§ 8-1.3 ANIMAL CONTROL § 8-1.4
8:3
except the registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer within
30 days after collection or receipt, and shall be placed in a special account separate
from any of the other accounts of the Borough to be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this section; local
prevention and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of
the local Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the subject,
and for administering the provisions of this section. Any unexpended balance remaining
in such special account shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year
following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this subsection. At the
end of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of the Borough any
amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special
account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
The registration tag fee of $0.50 for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days after
collection by the Clerk to the State Department of Health.
§ 8-1.5. Dog Canvass. [1970 Code § 6-5]
The Chief of Police shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept
or harbored within the Borough and shall report to the Clerk, the Board of Health of
the Borough and to the State Department of Health the results thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together
with the registration number of each dog, the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or
harbored by each person, together with a complete description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 8-1.6. Vicious Dogs. [Ord. #32, § 10; 1970 Code § 6-6]
§ 8-1.7. Impounding and Destruction of Certain Dogs. [Ord. #32, § 8; 1970 Code
§ 6-7]
a. Complaint; Investigation; Report. It shall be the duty of the Police Department and
the Dog Warden to receive and investigate complaints against dogs. If they deem
any dog complained of to be a vicious dog, as defined in subsection 8-1.1, they shall
report their findings in writing to the Municipal Judge.
b. Notice; Hearing. The Municipal Judge shall notify in writing the owner or keeper
of an allegedly vicious dog that a complaint has been made and require such person
to appear before him at a stated time and place for a hearing. The Municipal Judge
shall conduct the hearing in the same manner as he would conduct the trial of a
criminal case. If the Municipal Judge decides that the dog complained of is a
vicious dog, he shall so notify the owner or keeper of the dog.
c. Control of Vicious Dogs. No person owning or keeping a dog which has been
determined to be a vicious dog shall permit such dog to be off the property of the
owner or keeper without being securely muzzled.
a. Causes for Impounding. The Dog Warden shall take into custody and impound, or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded, any of the following dogs:
§ 8-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 8-1.7
8:4
1. Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this
section.
2. Any dog off the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog which the
Poundmaster or his agent has reason to believe is a stray dog.
3. Any dog off the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog without a current
registration tag on its collar.
4. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog.
5. Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog, provided that such
dog may also be seized by any police officer and that if it cannot be seized
with safety, it may be killed.
b. Access to Premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any
duty under this section is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when he is in
immediate pursuit of the dog, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if
the owner is present and forbids same.
c. Notice of Seizure. If any dog impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any
person or the owner or keeper of the dog is known, the Dog Warden shall
immediately serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
person owning, keeping or harboring the dog, a notice in writing stating that the
dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after service of the notice.
A notice under this paragraph may be served either by delivering it to the person on
whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of
abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid
letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode, or to the
address given on the collar.
d. Disposition of Unclaimed Dogs. The Dog Warden is authorized and empowered to
cause the destruction of any unclaimed dog, in as humane a manner as possible,
under any of the following contingencies:
1. When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person owning, keeping
or harboring such dog within seven days after notice or within seven days of
the dog's detention when notice has not been or cannot be given as set forth in
paragraph c above.
2. If the person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has not claimed
the dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention,
including maintenance, not to exceed $3.50 for the first day, and $1 per day
for each additional day.
3. If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the person owning,
keeping or harboring such dog has not produced a license and registration tag
as provided in this section.
§ 8-1.7 ANIMAL CONTROL § 8-1.8
8:5
§ 8-1.8. Regulations. [Ord. #32, §§ 4, 5&9; Ord. #74-6, §§ 1 — 3; 1970 Code § 6-8;
Ord. #2005-10]
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Borough except in compliance with the
provisions of this section and the following regulations.
a. Wearing of Registration. All dogs for which licenses are required shall wear a collar
or harness with the registration tag for such dog securely fastened thereto.
b. Use of Registration Tags. No person, except an officer in the performance of his
duties, shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent
of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was
not issued.
c. Interference with Official Duties. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with
anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this section.
d. Disturbing the Peace. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog which
habitually barks or cries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
e. Running-at-Large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall permit it
to run at large on the public streets or in any public park, public building or other
public place within the Borough.
f. Leashing of Dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or
permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Borough
unless it is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
g. Property Damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it to
do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property.
h. Commission of Nuisance.
1. Defiling Private Property. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit such dog to defecate upon or otherwise soil or defile or commit any
nuisance upon any private property other than the property of the
aforementioned person unless with the consent of the owner of the private
property.
2. Defiling Public Property. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall permit such dog to defecate, soil or defile, or commit any nuisance upon
any sidewalk, street or thoroughfare in or upon any public property.
3. Removal of Feces Duty of Owner. The person owning, keeping or harboring a
dog who has defecated in areas defined in paragraphs a and b, shall
immediately remove and dispose of all feces deposited thereon in a sanitary
manner.
4. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 8-1.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 8-1.9
8:6
§ 8-1.9. Enforcement. [Ord. #32, § 8; 1970 Code § 6-9]
The Borough Council shall have the power to appoint a Dog Warden whose duty it shall
be to enforce the provisions of this section. The Council shall also have the power to
appoint one or more persons, to be known as dog catchers, who may impound unlicensed
dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this section.
§ 8-2. WILDLIFE FEEDING. [Ord. #2005-10]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of Moonachie, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of
this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED—Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does
not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other
property owned or operated by the Borough of Moonachie, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
c. Enforcement.
1. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Board of Health and/
or other municipal officials of the Borough of Moonachie.
2. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to cease
the feeding immediately.
d. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 8-1.9 ANIMAL CONTROL § 8-2
8:7

Chapter 9
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 9-1. PARKS AND PUBLIC LAND.
§ 9-1.1. Rules and Regulations; Observance Required; Suspension. [Ord. #79-11,
§ 1; 1970 Code § 4-11.1]
No person shall commit any act or do anything in violation of the rules and regulations
contained in this section in any park or public land in the Borough. The Council may,
however, in its discretion, temporarily suspend such rules and regulations as it shall
deem advisable.
§ 9-1.2. Animals.24 [Ord. #79-11, § 2; 1970 Code § 4-11.2]
In public parks and public areas, no person shall:
§ 9-1.3. Vehicles. [Ord. #79-11, § 3; 1970 Code § 4-11.3]
In public parks and public areas, no person shall:
a. Permit any dog or other animal to run at large in any public park.
b. Drive or ride a horse anywhere in any place other than upon the drives in such park,
and all horses taken into any public park shall be well broken and at all times kept
in such control that they may be easily or quickly turned and stopped.
c. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw any missile at
any animal or bird, or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or the
eggs or nest of any birds.
d. Fish in any of the waters in any public park except waters that may be designated
for such purpose by the Superintendent of Public Works.
a. Loiter in an unlighted vehicle in any unlighted area between sunset and sunrise.
b. Park a vehicle in other than established or designated parking areas during daylight
hours.
c. Wash or service any automobile or truck or other vehicle.
d. Park or stand a taxicab or other vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for
hire, for the purpose of picking up passengers.
e. Drive a commercial motor vehicle used to carry goods, wares, merchandise or
rubbish upon any part of any public park.
f. Operate minibikes, snowmobiles or any other motorized equipment, save
automobiles, within any conservation, recreation or park area. (Automobiles shall
be permitted to be driven only on designated roadways.)
24. Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning animals, see Chapter 8, Animal Control.
§ 8-2 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 9-1.4
9:1
§ 9-1.4. Vegetation. [Ord. #79-11, § 4,1970 Code § 4-11.4]
In public parks and public areas, no person shall:
§ 9-1.5. Littering. [Ord. #79-11, § 5; 1970 Code § 4-11.5]
In public parks and public areas, no person shall:
§ 9-1.6. Miscellaneous Prohibited Activities. [Ord. #79-11, § 6; 1970 Code
§ 4-11.6]
In public parks and public areas, no person shall:
a. Damage, cut, carve or remove any tree, shrub or vegetation, or pick the flowers or
seeds of any tree, shrub or other vegetation.
b. Spray or otherwise deposit any substance which will or may result in injury or death
to birds or wildlife or be injurious to any tree or vegetation.
a. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, automobile parts,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash, and fail to place
such materials in a receptacle placed for such purpose.
b. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any
fountain, pond, lake or stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any part of
any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any substance
or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in pollution of such water.
c. Drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material, or light, build, kindle or maintain any
fire except in places provided for such purpose.
d. Throw debris on the ice of any lake or pond.
e. Dump or otherwise deposit earth, street sweepings or other landfill materials.
a. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
b. Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language.
c. Commit any indecent act.
d. Carry, possess, dispense or consume any intoxicating liquors, including wine and
beer.
e. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person occupying any area or
participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
f. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any
building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, water
line or other public utility or paths or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or public property or
appurtenances whatsoever, real or personal.
§ 9-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 9-1.6
9:2
§ 9-1.7. Opening and Closing Times. [Ord. #79-11, § 7; Ord. #83-5, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 4-11.7]
All public parks of the Borough shall open at sunrise throughout the year. All public
parks of the Borough shall close at sunset throughout the year.
§ 9-2. PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS.
§ 9-2.1. Definition. [Ord. #74-8, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-10.1]
Playgrounds and recreational areas shall be any areas designated by the Mayor and
Council within the limits of the Borough which are opened to the public, irrespective of
whether such areas shall be owned by the Borough.
§ 9-2.2. Prohibitions and Restrictions. [Ord. #74-8, §§ 2 — 22; 1970 Code § 4-10.2]
The following regulations shall apply to playgrounds and recreational areas:
g. Swim or bathe in any area other than the swimming area properly posted as such.
h. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article, unless by special
permission of the Borough Council or its designate.
i. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
j. Cause any substance or material to be emptied into any body of water by any
means, or tamper with a dam whereby normal water levels will be altered.
k. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription,
whether temporary or permanent.
l. Dig, trench or excavate any earth materials by tool, blasting or by any other means.
m. Beg or solicit any subscriptions or contributions of any kind, or tell fortunes.
a. Injuring, Defacing or Removing Park Property Prohibited. No person shall injure,
deface, displace, remove, destroy or tamper with any property, walks, pathways,
facilities or equipment of any nature or of any kind located in or about any
playground or recreational area.
b. Injuring or Setting Fire to Plants Prohibited. No person shall destroy, cut, injure or
remove any growing things, plant, growth or any branch thereof; or set fire, or assist
another to set fire, to any timber, shrubs, plants, flowers, grass or plant growth,
except at such time when permission to do so shall have been given by proper
authority.
c. Playing of Games Restricted. No person shall play baseball, softball, football or any
other sport except in areas designated for any such activity and under such rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
d. Selling or Offering for Sale Restricted. No person shall offer to sell, or sell, any
object or merchandise or any other thing, in any playground or recreational area,
§ 9-1.6 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 9-2.2
9:3
unless a permit is first obtained therefor from the Borough.
e. Removal of Turf or Other Materials Prohibited. No person shall take, dig, remove
or carry away any sward, gravel, sand, turf, or earth in any playground or
recreational area.
f. Discarding Ashes or Rubbish Prohibited. No person shall take into, carry through,
leave in or throw, cast, lay, drop, or discharge into or on, or suffer or permit any
servant, agent, employee or person in his charge to take into, carry through, leave
in or throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or on, the playground or recreational
areas, any ashes or rubbish or any sort of sick, diseased or dead animals, organic
refuse or any other offensive matter.
g. Presence of Animals Prohibited. No dogs or any other animals shall be permitted in
any playground or recreational areas.
h. Use of Intoxicating Beverages Restricted. No person shall sell, buy, exchange, offer
or solicit for sale, consume, use, carry or possess any alcoholic beverages except by
permission of the Borough, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such
permission, however, is subject to the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Commission and the laws of the State of New Jersey.25
i. Littering Prohibited. No person shall scatter, drop or leave in any portion of the
playground or recreational areas, except in the receptacles provided for the purpose,
any paper, rags, garbage, dead flowers or any other rubbish or refuse.
j. Posting, Disturbing, Displaying of Advertising Matter Restricted. No person shall
post, paste or affix any sign, placard, notice or advertisement of any nature on any
tree, plant, building, pole, equipment or any other structure or fixture.
No person shall distribute any circulars, cards, or any other signs or written, printed,
or manufactured matter without first receiving permission from the Borough, which
permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
k. Interfering with Water Facilities Prohibited. No basin, pool, lake or fountain in any
playground or recreational area shall be fouled by stone, wood or other substance,
nor bathed in, nor waded into, excepting wading pools designated as such by the
Mayor and Council and under such rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by
the Mayor and Council.
l. Annoyance of Playground or Recreational Area; Animals Prohibited. No person
shall molest or in any manner disturb or annoy any animal or fish or fowl which
may be placed in any fountain, pool, basin, or enclosure of any playground or
recreational area.
m. Picnics, Sale of Refreshments Restricted. No picnics may be held upon or in any
playground or recreational areas except in those sections set apart for that purpose.
No refreshments of any kind shall be sold or offered for sale in connection with a
picnic without first obtaining permission from the Borough.
n. Disorderly Conduct Prohibited; Promulgation of Rules Authorized. Indecent
25. Editor's Note: Regulations pertaining to Alcoholic Beverage Control are in Chapter 6 of this Code.
§ 9-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 9-2.2
9:4
§ 9-2.3. Hours of Use. [Ord. #74-8, § 23; Ord. #83-5, § 1; 1970 Code § 4-10.3]
No person shall remain, stay or loiter in any playground or recreational areas between
sunset and sunrise.
No person shall be convicted of the violation of this provision unless a police officer
or any person having all of the power and authority of police officers under 40:12-6 or
under any other statutory provision, has first ordered such person to move on and leave
and the person has refused to do so.
§ 9-2.4. Permit System For Use of Borough Recreation Areas. [Ord. #90-2, §§ I —
exposure of the person, disorderly conduct, objectionable noise, riot, breach of
peace, and use of profane language is expressly forbidden in the playground and
recreational areas.
The Mayor and Council shall, in its discretion, prescribe rules for the proper use of
the playground and recreational areas, and a violation of those rules shall be deemed
a violation of this section.
o. Permit Required for Assemblies. No person shall hold, conduct, or address any
public assemblage or take part in any public debate, without first obtaining
permission from the Mayor and Council, which permission shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
No exhibitions, concerts, or entertainment shall be given in any playground or
recreational area or place without first obtaining permission from the Mayor and
Council, which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
p. Discharge of Firearms Prohibited. No person shall discharge or fire any weapon of
any kind within playground or recreational areas.
q. Discharge of Fireworks Restricted. No person shall fire, discharge or set off any
rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib, or any firework of any kind containing any
substance of explosive character of any kind or nature. This prohibition shall not
prevent special fireworks exhibitions to be given under the auspices or direction of
the Borough upon special permit issued by the Mayor and Council and in
accordance with Borough ordinances pertaining thereto.
r. Fires Restricted. No person shall kindle or make or build any fire except in a picnic
grille or fireplace expressly provided for that purpose. Any fires kindled, made or
built not in grilles or fireplaces expressly provided for that purpose shall be made
only after first obtaining permission from the Borough.
s. Missiles Prohibited. No person shall throw stones or any other missiles that may
inflict bodily harm or property damage.
t. Vehicle Regulations. No vehicles of any kind are permitted in the playground or
recreational areas except as authorized for maintenance or construction purposes,
or except upon such paths as may be expressly designated therefor.
u. Gambling Prohibited. Betting or gambling of any form as well as the maintaining
of any gambling equipment or devices is prohibited.
§ 9-2.2 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 9-2.4
9:5
VII; Ord. #2009-14, § 1; Ord. #2011-1]
a. Establishment. The following described parcel is hereby established as a
recreational facility available to the public for recreational activities in accordance
with the terms set forth herein:
1. Block 45, Lot 1, on the current Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, the same
being located at Redneck Avenue.
b. Power to Lease Land. The Mayor and Council are hereby empowered to acquire by
lease any land within the confines of the Borough, and entrances to and exits from
any such lands, for the purpose of making the same available to the public for
recreational activities. Any such lease shall be for such a period of time and upon
such terms and conditions as the Mayor and Council shall determine by Resolution.
c. Hours of Use. Any resident, organization or appropriate group of the Borough may
utilize the hereinafter set forth Borough recreational facility between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. upon securing a permit therefor.
This section is not intended to apply to informal groups of residents who may utilize
the said Borough recreational facility on an intermittent basis.
d. Issuance of Permits. Permits shall be issued by the Mayor and Council or its
authorized designee upon written application therefor and payment of the required
fee.
e. Application for Permit.
1. Application shall be made on forms approved by the Borough Clerk and shall
set forth the name and address of the applicant, fee to be charged and those
items set forth in paragraphs 2 and 3 hereinbelow.
2. Appropriate insurance coverage shall be provided for by each applicant
naming the Borough and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey as
named insureds thereon in an amount and form established by the application
document set forth in paragraph 1 above. A copy of the insurance certificate
must accompany the completed application.
3. Each applicant shall be obligated to sign an Indemnification and Hold
Harmless Agreement on forms provided by the Borough.
f. Fees.
1. The fee for a recreational facility use permit shall be as follows:
(a) $100 per daily permit effective March 1,2011.
(b) $400 for a seasonal league permit for a period not to exceed 90 days
effective March 1,2011.
2. All fees are payable at the time of making the application for the permit and
are nonrefundable unless the permit is not approved by the Mayor and Council
or its authorized designee.
§ 9-2.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 9-2.4
9:6
3. The Mayor and Council may waive any required permit fee upon Resolution
duly enacted.
§ 9-2.4 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 9-2.4
9:7

Chapter 10
BUILDING AND HOUSING
Editor's Note: The power to adopt a housing code by reference is contained in R.S.
40:49-5.1, 5.2 and 5.3.
§ 10-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 10-1.1. Established; Members. [Ord. #78-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 11-1.1]
There is hereby established in the Borough a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing
agency to be known as the "Building Construction Agency," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official, and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs State
of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. All rules
and regulations governing the functions and duties of all personnel in such agency shall
be as set forth by the Construction Official, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 10-1.2. Official Positions. [Ord. #78-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 11-1.2]
Each official position created in subsection 10-1.1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C.217 as amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23;
provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may
be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L.
1975, C. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 10-1.3. Office Location. [Ord. #78-4, § 1; 1970 Code § 11-1.3]
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at one office
location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
§ 10-1.4. Fee Schedule. [Ord. #78-4, § 2; Ord. #83-3, § 1; 1970 Code § 11-1.4; Ord.
#87-21, § 1; Ord. #94-11, § I; Ord. #2010-9]
a. The fee for a construction or zoning permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in subsection 10-1.4 of this section and shall be paid before the permit is
issued.
1. Building Subcode Fees.
Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $50
All other uses and commercial: $100
(a) New construction or additions:
(1) Per cubic foot of volume: $0.04.
§ 9-2.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.4
10:1
(2) Minimum fee (principal building): $350.
(3) Minimum fee (accessory building): $100.
(4) Modular structures: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
(b) Alterations, repairs, renovations, reconstruction and change of use:
(1) Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $20.
(c) Roofing, re-roofing and siding:
(1) Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $20.
(d) Demolition:
(1) Residential.
[a] Principal building: $350.
[b] Accessory structure: $100.
(2) Nonresidential/mixed use.
[a] Principal: $750.
[b] Accessory structure: $200.
(3) Interior demolition, per subcode.
[a] Residential: $100.
[b] Mixed use/commercial: $200.
(e) State surcharge: Calculated upon current State fees N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19(b).
(f) Lead hazard abatement with Certificate of Clearance: $145.
(g) Asbestos abatement with Administrative Certificate: $160.
(h) Certificate of Occupancy — U.C.C.
(1) Residential (new construction or rehabilitation): $100.
(2) Nonresidential: $200.
(i) Temporary Certificate of Occupancy — U.C.C.
Initial issuance: No fee.
(1) Each subsequent renewal and request for Certificate of Occupancy:
$30.
(j) Change of contractor — $25 plus any additional items or cost.
(k) Plan review fee: 20% of the anticipated permit fee which is
nonrefundable.
§ 10-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.4
10:2
(l) Withdrawn permit administrative fee: 30% includes plan review.
(m) Reinstatement of lapsed permit fee: 80% of original fee.
(n) Certificate of Continued Occupancy — U.C.C., applicant requested:
(1) General visual inspection by all Subcode Officials: $100 per
subcode.
(o) Uniform Construction Code Variations:
(1) Residential: $100.
(2) Commercial/mixed use: $200.
(p) Retaining walls: plus zoning review fee:
(1) Under four feet in height: Zoning permit: $25.
(2) Over four feet in height: Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $20.
(q) Zoning review fee (requires survey, a current survey depicts as exists):
$25.
(r) Patios: $25 plus zoning review fee.
(s) Fences: plus zoning review fee.
(1) Not associated with pool:
[a] Fifty feet of fencing or less in length:
[1] With a current property survey: $25.
[2] Without a current property survey: $50.
[b] More than 50 feet in length: $25.
(2) Pool fence/barrier or fence over six feet high:
[a] With a current property survey: Per $1,000 of estimated cost:
$20.
[b] With a current property survey: Not permitted.
(t) Swimming pool: Building permit only, does not include fence/barrier:
permit also requires zoning review fees:
(1) Aboveground: $100.
(2) Semi-inground: $300 Also requires Soil Movement Permit.
(3) Inground: Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $20. Also requires Soil
Movement Permit.
(u) Signs: plus zoning review fee:
§ 10-1.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.4
10:3
(1) Up to 24 square feet: $50 per sign.
(2) Twenty-five to 50 square feet: $100 per sign.
(3) Fifty square feet and above: $150 per sign.
(4) Freestanding sign: $100 two-sided.
(v) Trailers used for construction offices and storage: plus zoning review fee:
(1) Residential: $100 each.
(2) Nonresidential/mixed use: $300 each.
(w) Sidewalks:
(1) Public new/replacements/repair over 25%: $25.
(2) Private walkways: zoning review fee only.
(x) Driveways: plus zoning review fee:
(1) Resurface same size:
[a] With a current property survey $25.
[b] Without current property survey $50.
(2) Enlargement:
[a] With a current property survey $25.
[b] Without a property survey: Not permitted.
(y) Change of tenancy/occupancy zoning — Plus fire prevention fees.
(1) Residential: $100 plus $40 each per additional unit.
(2) Nonresidential or mixed: $200 plus $100 per additional unit.
(z) Shed: (Only 1 permitted) plus zoning review fee:
(1) Under 100 square feet (zoning fees only):
[a] With a current property survey: $25.
[b] Without a property survey: Not permitted.
(2) Between 100 and 200 square feet (U.C.C. permit):
[a] With a current property survey: Per $1,000 of estimated cost:
$20.
[b] Without a current property survey: Not permitted.
(3) Over 200 square feet: Requires Soil Movement Permit and
foundation.
§ 10-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.4
10:4
[a] With a current property survey: Per $1,000 of estimated cost:
$20.
[b] Without a current property survey: Not permitted.
(aa) Temporary tents:
(1) Over 900 square feet or 30 feet of length in one direction: $100.
(bb) Storage tanks in gallons per installation:
(1) Up to 330: $75.
(2) 331 to 660: $125.
(3) 661 to 1,000: $200.
(4) 1,001 to 5,000: $500.
(5) 5,001 or more $1,000.
(cc) Tank demotion, per tank:
(1) Residential: $100.
(2) All other uses and commercial: $200.
(dd) Certificate of Compliance, annual inspection for public swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs: $100.
(ee) Relocation of structure: Plus zoning review fee:
(1) $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
(ff) Special inspection fee request—For emergency/extraordinary situations:
(1) Special inspection fees. Any person, partnership or corporation who
requests and obtains a required code inspection either before or after
regular Building Department hours of business or on holidays and
weekends shall be required to pay, in addition to any established
permit and certificate fees, the current contractual hourly
compensation rate 1 1/2 times their normal hourly salary) for the
Code Officials performing the inspections, plus an administrative
surcharge 20% of said calculated amount. Said fee shall be
calculated and based on the amount of time required for said
inspections with payment for a minimum inspection time of no less
than two hours with the calculated surcharge.
(gg) Search of Borough records: Current year and back two years, no retrieval
fee the per page copy charges. Beyond two years from the date of request:
$40 per hour or part thereof retrieval fee, plus copy charges per page.
(hh) Every person, partnership or corporation who engages in a service
regulated by the State Uniform Construction Code shall obtain a license
from the Borough of Moonachie Building Department prior to operating,
§ 10-1.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.4
10:5
conducting or otherwise performing or engaging in any service regulated
other than any residential R3/R5 use group. The license when issued
will be valid for the remainder of the calendar year and shall need to be
renewed every January 1 for the New Year. The license shall be made on
a form provided by the Borough and may include information concerning
liability, insurance, Federal employment number, social security
numbers, driver's license number, years in business and other licenses
held. Any license which is not renewed with 45 days after January 1 of
each year shall require a new application subject to the initial fee. The
Construction Official shall revoke a license for violations of the Uniform
Construction Code with just cause.
(1) Initial application $50.
(2) Annual renewal $40.
2. Electrical Subcode Fees.
Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $50.
All other uses and commercial: $100.
(a) Receptacles and fixtures (lighting fixtures, receptacles, switches,
detectors, light poles, motors-fractional horsepower, emergency and exist
lights, communication points and alarm devices/fire alarm control panel):
(1) One to 25 units: $30.
(2) Each additional 25 or fraction thereof: $25.
(b) Motors and electrical devices over one horsepower up to:
(1) One horsepower to 10 horsepower: $45.
(2) From 11 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $100.
(3) From 51 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $200.
(4) Grater than 101 horsepower: $450.
(c) Transformers and generators over one kilowatts up to: (Equipment and
appliances, including electrical range oven, dishwasher, dryer, water
heater, boiler, furnace, baseboard heat, space heating, transfer switches,
or any other fixed or plug in appliances) each:
(1) One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $30.
(2) Over 11 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $60.
(3) Over 46 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $100.
(4) Over 112.5 kilowatts: $450.
(d) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
(1) Less than or equal to 150 amps: $60.
§ 10-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.4
10:6
(2) 151 amps or equal to 200 amps: $70.
(3) 201 amps or equal to 400 amps: $200.
(4) 401 amps or equal to 1,200 amps: $450.
(5) Over 1,201 amps: $750.
(6) Additional meters included in service: $35.
(e) Air-conditioning units (disconnect, compress/condenser and air handler):
(1) Each: $60.
(2) Replacement of any system part: $35
(f) Burglar alarm system (complete): $60.
(g) Hydro massage tub (interior whirlpool tub/spa): $45.
(h) Swimming pools: (includes receptacle, switch, trench, bonding and equip
potential bonding matt):
(1) Aboveground: $75.
(2) Semi-inground: $90.
(3) Inground: $125.
(4) Light, each: $35.
(i) Hot tub or spa (exterior): $100.
(j) Certificate of Compliance, (annual inspection for public swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs): $100.
3. Plumbing Subcode Fees:
Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $50.
All other uses and commercial: $100.
(a) Water closet/toilet/urinals/bidets: $20.
(b) Bathtub: $20.
(c) Lavatory/sink: $20.
(d) Shower: $20.
(e) Floor drain: $20.
(f) Dishwasher: $20.
(g) Drinking fountain/water cooler: $20.
(h) Washing machine: $20.
§ 10-1.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.4
10:7
(i) Hose bib: $20.
(j) Stacks: $20.
(k) Water heater:
Residential: $70.
Commercial: $100.
(l) Fuel oil piping: $65.
(m) Gas piping: $20 per connection.
(n) Steam/hot water boiler/furnace:
Residential: $55.
Commercial: $100.
(o) Sewer pump/ejector: $65.
(p) Interceptor/separators: $65.
(q) Backflow preventor:
Residential: $65.
Commercial with Test Ports: $100.
(r) Grease trap: $65.
(s) Sewer connection/replace/repair:
Residential: $65.
Commercial: $100.
(t) Water service connection/two inch or less: $65.
Over two inch: $100.
(u) Refrigerant units: $65.
(v) Active solar system: $65.
(w) Garbage disposal: $20.
(x) Indirect connection: $20.
(y) Humidifier: $20.
(z) Condensate line/drain: $20.
(aa) Roof drains: $20.
(bb) Septic connection: $65.
§ 10-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.4
10:8
(cc) Water softener: $65.
(dd) Swimming pool:
Aboveground: $65.
Semi-inground:$80.
Inground: $100.
(ee) Annual testing of commercial backflow devices: $75 per device.
4. Fire Protection Subcode Fees.
Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $50.
All other uses and commercial: $100.
(a) Installation of flammable/combustible/liquid storage tanks:
(1) Up to 350 gallons: $75.
(2) Over 350 gallons to 1,000 gallons: $100.
(3) Over 1,000 gallons to 5,000 gallons: $250.
(4) Over 5,000 gallons to 10,000 gallons: $500.
(5) Over 10,000 gallons: $1,000.
(b) Alarm/supervisory/signaling devices (smoke, heat, carbon monoxide,
pull stations, water flow, tampers, low/high air, horn/strobes and bells)
each:
(1) 1 thru 6: $60.
(2) Each additional device: $5.
(c) Wet and dry sprinkler heads:
(1) 1 thru 19: $100.
(2) 20 thru 100: $200.
(3) 101 thru 200: $400.
(4) 201 thru 400: $748.
(5) 401 thru 1,000: $1,036.
(6) Over 1,000: $1,323.
(d) Stand pipes: $289.
(e) Kitchen hood exhaust system: $200.
(f) Pre-engineered systems:
§ 10-1.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.4
10:9
(1) Wet chemical: $150.
(2) Dry chemical: $150.
(3) CO2 suppression: $150.
(4) Foam suppression: $150.
(5) FM200 suppression: $150.
(g) Smoke control systems: $500.
(h) Gas or oil-fired appliance: $50.
(i) Fireplaces: $75.
(j) Fire sprinkler component fee costs in addition to sprinkler heads:
(1) Hydraulic calculations or alterations to pipe schedule, plan review:
$75.
(2) Dry pipe alarm, pre-action and similar devices: $75.
(3) Supervisory devices, each: $25.
(4) Water service for fire line:
[a] Up to two inch: $100.
[b] 2 1/2 to five inch: $200.
[c] Six inch or larger: $300.
(5) Fire pumps: $500.
(k) Fire alarm system components fees in addition to alarm devices:
(1) Fire alarm panel, new installation or replacement: $100.
(2) Fire alarm system security and other devices (i.e. door locks,
electromagnetic releases hold open devices, elevator control valves
and floor control valves): $10 each
(l) Metal chimney or lines, R3/R5 each: $50, Mixed use/commercial: $100.
(m) Emergency lights and exist signs, each: $5.
5. Mechanical Subcode Fees.
(a) R3/R5 structure/use group minimum fee: $50.
(1) Water heater: $55.
(2) Fuel oil piping connections: $65.
(3) Gas piping connections: $20 per connection.
§ 10-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.4
10:10
§ 10-1.5. Report of Construction Official. [Ord. #78-4, § 2; 1970 Code § 11-1.5]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the Subcode Officials prepare and
submit to the Mayor and Council bi-annually, a report recommending a fee schedule
based on the operating expenses of the agency, and any other expenses of the
Municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction
Code Act.
§ 10-1.6. Surcharge Fee. [Ord. #78-4, § 2; 1970 Code § 11-1.6; Ord. #2010-9]
In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support programs
required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the Regulations, the enforcing
agency shall collect in addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee as stated in
subsection 10-1.4a,1(e). Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter
ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than one month
next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, such fee shall be collected and remitted for the third
and fourth quarters only.
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year to the Bureau
of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the total amount of the surcharge
fee collected in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, such report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
§ 10-1.7. Fire Limits. [Ord. #78-4, § 4; 1970 Code § 11-1.7]
The fire limits of the Borough are established as the zones stated in the Zoning Chapter.
The districts are as follows:
(4) Steam boiler with backflow: $100.
(5) Hot water boiler with backflow: $100.
(6) Hot air furnace: $100.
(7) Oil tank: $75.
(8) LPG tank: $75.
(9) Fireplace: $75.
(10) Hydronic piping: $65.
(11) Radiant heat piping: $65.
(12) Lawn irrigation system: $65.
(b) All other uses and commercial: $100.
(1) Mechanical work on other than R3/R5 structure/use group shall be
calculated upon: $20 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
§ 10-1.4 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-1.7
10:11
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
B Business
M Industrial
C Commercial-Office
MHP Mobile Home Park
§ 10-1.8. Reflective Symbol on Structures Using Light-Framed Construction.
[Ord. #2015-1]
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean prefabricated open web wood
trusses, wooden I-beams and joists, truss joists, truss rafters, laminated beams,
engineered studs and similar materials.
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — Shall mean an emblem made of reflective material,
in the shape and form designed by the Moonachie Fire Department, containing
information identifying a structure as containing light-framed construction
practices.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean combination of material used to form a construction
for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land. The word "structure" shall also include any building or
improvement with a roof.
b. Determination as Light-Framed Construction Structure; Requirements. The
Borough Construction Official shall determine if a structure contains light-framed
construction. All structures containing light-framed construction lumber, materials
and methods must have a reflective symbol affixed to the exterior electrical meter
panel serving the structure. The reflective symbol shall be applied by the
Construction Official or Fire Official and shall be a condition before any issuance
of any certificates of approval or occupancy.
c. Design of Symbol. The reflective symbol shall be in the form designed by the
Moonachie Fire Department and will contain lettering to identify the location of
any light-frames construction materials, engineered systems or similar methods of
construction used in the structure.
d. Applicability. This subsection shall apply to all structures, whether residential,
commercial or otherwise, including structures existing at the time of the effective
date of this ordinance and permits existing dwelling to be identified and the emblem
affixed to the exterior electric meter panel.
e. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Construction Official and
Fire Official of the Borough of Moonachie.
f. Violations and Penalties. Any person violating this subsection by refusing to use
the reflective symbol or by removing or tampering with the reflective symbol shall
be subject to a fine in an amount of $250 per violation. Each day that a violation
§ 10-1.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-1.8
10:12
§ 10-2. MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 10-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #144, § 1; 1970 Code § 11-2.1]
No person shall move any building or structure through any streets of the Borough
without having obtained a permit.
§ 10-2.2. Application. [Ord. #144, § 2; 1970 Code § 11-2.2]
Any person desiring to move any building or structure shall make application to the
Borough Clerk for a permit. The application shall designate the streets through which
the moving will be done, the dimensions of the building, the estimated length of time
required for such moving, and such other facts as the Borough Clerk may require. The
fee for the permit shall be deposited with the Borough Clerk. The permit may be applied
for by the owner of the building or structure to be moved or by the mover or contractor.
§ 10-2.3. Bond Required. [Ord. #144, § 3; 1970 Code § 11-2.3]
The applicant shall file with the Borough Clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000, with
sureties satisfactory to the Borough Clerk, conditioned for the payment of any damage
or injury to the trees, streets or other Borough property along the designated route, and
conditioned for the placement of any trees or other Borough property destroyed by the
moving; and also conditioned for the payment of any additional fee due the Borough for
exceeding the time limit fixed for such moving.
§ 10-2.4. Fees. [Ord. #144, § 4; 1970 Code § 11-2.4]
The fee for a permit shall be $50 for the first day of the period required for such moving,
and $75 for each additional day in the case of dwellings, and $10 for the first day and
$20 for each additional day required to move a garage.
§ 10-2.5. Removal of Wires and Cables. [Ord. #144, § 5; 1970 Code § 11-2.5]
The person receiving such permit shall, at his own expense, arrange for the removal of
any wires or cables which may interfere with the moving. If any wires or cables which
may interfere with the moving pertain to the fire alarm system or police telephone system
or any other municipal system of the Borough, then the person receiving such permit
shall, at his own expense, arrange so that the removal of wires will not interfere in any
manner with the continual operation of such systems of the Borough.
§ 10-2.6. Traffic Control. [Ord. #144, § 6; 1970 Code § 11-2.6]
All moving operations as they relate to the problem of traffic shall be done under the
supervision of the Chief of Police at such times as may be fixed by him.
§ 10-2.7. Barricades and Detour Signs. [Ord. #144, § 7; 1970 Code § 11-2.7]
It shall be the duty and obligation of the contractor engaged in moving operations to
furnish and place barricades and detour signs which may be necessary for the proper
continues shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 10-1.8 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-2.7
10:13
diversion of motor vehicle traffic.
§ 10-3. HOUSING CODE.
§ 10-3.1. Adoption by Reference. [1970 Code § 11-3.1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey State Housing
Code as approved by the Departments of Health and Conservation and Economic
Development and filed in the Secretary of State's office on January 31, 1962, is hereby
adopted as a standard governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things
and conditions essential to making dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, and governing the condition of dwellings. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is attached to and made a part of this section without the text being
included herein.
§ 10-3.2. Where Code May Be Examined. [1970 Code § 11-3.2]
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file in the office
of the Clerk and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 10-3.3. Enforcing Authority. [1970 Code § 11-3.3; Ord. #90-4]
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this section shall be the
Construction Official.
§ 10-3.4. Standards. [1970 Code § 11-3.4; Ord. #90-4]
This section shall constitute the standards to guide the Construction Official in
determining the fitness of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises for
human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 10-3.5. Rules and Regulations. [1970 Code § 11-3.5]
The Construction Official may make rules and regulations which interpret or amplify
any provision of this section or for the purpose of making the provisions of this
subsection more effective. No regulation, however, shall be inconsistent with or alter or
amend any provision of this subsection, and no regulation shall impose any requirement
which is in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this subsection. Rules and regulations shall be
filed with the Clerk. Violations of rules and regulations shall be subject to the same
penalty as other violations of this section.
§ 10-3.6. Inspection. [1970 Code § 11-3.6; Ord. #90-4]
The Construction Official or his agents or employees shall make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located
within the Borough. For the purpose of making inspections, the Construction Official or
his agents are authorized to enter and examine any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit
or premises at reasonable hours as the circumstances of the case permit. This subsection
shall not be construed to prohibit the entry of the Construction Official or his agents at
any time when an actual emergency exists which tends to create a danger to public health
§ 10-2.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-3.6
10:14
or safety, or at any time when an inspection is requested by an owner or occupant.
§ 10-3.7. Identification. [1970 Code § 11-3.7; Ord. #90-4]
Upon presentation of proper identification, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the Construction Official or his agents
free access to the premises for the purpose of inspection or of making any repairs or
alterations which are necessary to effect compliance with this section.
§ 10-3.8. Interference with Inspection. [1970 Code § 11-3.8; Ord. #90-4]
Any person who shall refuse to give the Construction Official or his agents access to any
premises or part of a premises or who shall otherwise obstruct or impede an inspection
shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 10-3.9. Search Warrant. [1970 Code § 11-3.9; Ord. #90-4]
In addition to the provisions of subsection 10-3.8, the Construction Official or his agents
may upon affidavit, apply to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a nuisance or violation of this section exists on the premises, and if the
Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize
the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 10-3.10. Notice of Violation. [Ord. #139, §§ 1 & 2; Ord. #90-4]
Whenever the Construction Official determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of the alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible. The notice shall:
§ 10-3.11. Hearing Provisions. [Ord. #139, §§ 1, 3 & 5; 1970 Code § 11-3.11; Ord.
#90-4]
Any person affected by a notice which has been issued in connection with the
a. Be put in writing;
b. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
c. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
d. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require;
provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy is served on him personally; or if a copy is
sent by certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this
state. The notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this section and with rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 10-3.6 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-3.11
10:15
enforcement of any provision of this section, or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Construction Official, provided such person shall file in the office of the Construction
Official a written petition requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice is served. Upon receipt of
the petition, the Construction Official shall set a time and place for the hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice should be modified or
withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition is filed; provided that on application of the petitioner the Construction
Official may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the tenday
period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reason
for the postponement. After the hearing the Construction Official shall sustain, modify
or withdraw the notice, depending on his findings as to whether the provisions of this
section and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied
with. If the Construction Official sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order. Any notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically become an order
if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Construction Official
within 10 days after the notice is served. The proceedings at the hearings, including the
findings and the decision of the Construction Official, shall be summarized, reduced
to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Construction
Official. The record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Construction
Official may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of the State. Whenever the Construction Official finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but on petition to the Construction Official shall be afforded a hearing
as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending on his findings as to whether the
provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with, the building inspector shall continue such order in effect, modify or
revoke it.
§ 10-3.12. Unfit Dwellings. [Ord. #139, §§ 1, 3 & 4; 1970 Code § 11-3.12; Ord.
#90-4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public authority as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the Borough, charging that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as defined in the housing code, or whenever
it appears to the Construction Official on his own motion that any dwelling is unfit for
human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in, such
dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Construction Official at a place therein fixed not less than
10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear
in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint;
§ 10-3.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-3.12
10:16
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling
in hearings before the Construction Official.
§ 10-3.13. Order for Abatement or Demolition. [Ord. #139, §§ 5 — 8; 1970 Code
§ 11-3.13; Ord. #90-4]
If after notice and hearing, as provided above, the Construction Official determines that
the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as defined in the housing
code, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served on the owner and parties in interest an order requiring:
a. The repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the owner,
within a reasonable time, which shall be set forth in the order, or at the option of the
owner, to vacate or have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth
in the order.
b. That if the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health and
safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to repair, alter or
improve the building within the time specified in the order, the owner shall remove
or demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of
removal.
c. That if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or at the
option of the owner to vacate and close the building, the Construction Official may
cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed;
that the Construction Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
building so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
d. That if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building,
the Construction Official may cause such building to be removed or demolished or
may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement and receipt
of bids therefor.
e. That the amount of:
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and
advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under this
section shall be determined in favor of the Borough; and
2. The cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing,
or removal or demolition, if any, or the amounts of the balance thereof
remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials
derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property on which such cost
was incurred.
If the building is removed or demolished by the Construction Official, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost
of removal or demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials
or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the
§ 10-3.12 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-3.13
10:17
§ 10-3.14. Serving of Complaints or Orders on Unfit Dwellings. [Ord. #139, §§ 1
& 2; 1970 Code § 11-3.14; Ord. #90-4]
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this section shall
be served on persons either personally or by certified mail, but if the whereabouts of
any person is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Construction Official
in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Construction Official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order may be made by
publishing it once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having circulation
in the Borough. A copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected, and a copy shall be recorded with the Bergen County
Recording Officer.
§ 10-3.15. Powers of the Construction Official. [Ord. #139, § 10; 1970 Code
§ 11-3.15; Ord. #90-4]
The Construction Official is authorized and empowered to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of
this chapter, including the following, in addition to others herein granted:
building. If there are no credits, or if the sum total of the costs exceeds the
total of the credits, a detailed statement of the costs and the amount due shall
be filed with the Borough Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records
of tax liens, and a copy shall be forwarded to the owner by certified mail.
If the total of the credits exceeds the costs, the balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the Construction Official, shall be secured
in such manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such court; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or
party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the
municipal lien certificate.
a. To investigate dwelling conditions in the Borough in order to determine which
dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence.
c. To enter on premises for the purpose of making examination; provided that entry
shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
person in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems
necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such officers and
agents as he may designate.
§ 10-3.13 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-3.16
10:18
§ 10-3.16. Compliance with Housing Code. [1970 Code § 11-3.16]
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or rent to another for occupancy, any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not conform to the
provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code established hereby as the standard to
be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 10-3.17. Demolition Permit Required. [Ord. #139, § 12; 1970 Code § 11-3.17]
The owner of any building located within the Borough who desires to demolish the same
shall first obtain a permit for that purpose from the Borough Clerk and pay a fee of
$10 for each building or structure to be demolished. The fee shall be paid prior to the
issuance of any such permit. A permit shall be required, but without fee, for demolishing
any structure less than 150 square feet in area.
§ 10-4. RENTING OF ILLEGAL APARTMENTS.
§ 10-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. #87-5, § I]
The purpose of this section is to discourage and penalize real estate property owners
from operating and creating apartments contrary to the zoning regulations of the
Borough.
§ 10-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #87-5, § II]
As used in this section:
ILLEGAL DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean an apartment for which no Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued; an apartment which is occupied by a number of families in
excess of the zoning code; an apartment failing to meet State or municipal requirements
for health and safety; an apartment created without the requisite plumbing, electrical
and/or building permits or; an apartment in violation of any State, County or municipal
ordinance, resolution or regulation.
REAL ESTATE PROPERTY OWNER — Shall mean and include all natural persons,
partnerships, joint ventures, corporation and corporate shareholders owning or
controlling in excess of 5% of the voting stock of the corporation, all as shown on the
official tax records of the Borough or as disclosed by diligent inquiry into the ownership
of real estate where the apartment is located.
RELOCATION COSTS—Shall include the actual and reasonable expenses incurred in
moving persons, furnishings and other personal property, actual and reasonable losses
of tangible personal property occasioned by a relocation and the actual and reasonable
expenses of searching and acquiring a replacement apartment.
§ 10-4.3. Application. [Ord. #87-5, § III]
No person shall permit any person or family to occupy an illegal dwelling unit, house, or
mobile home within the Borough.
§ 10-3.16 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-4.4
10:19
§ 10-4.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #87-5, § IV]
The Zoning Officer/Construction Official shall upon the discovery of an illegal
apartment immediately serve such notice of illegal apartment upon the owner of the real
estate by certified mail at the owner's address as disclosed by the official tax records of
the Borough. If no receipt of such certified mail is returned within five days, then by
regular mail at the last known address.
§ 10-4.5. Relocation Expenses. [Ord. #8-5, § V; Ord. #94-16]
Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1974,
C.49 (C.2A:18-61.2) that results from zoning code enforcement activity for an illegal
occupancy, as set forth in clause (3) of subsection g of Section 2 of P.L. 1974, C.49
(C.2A:18-61.1), shall be considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation
assistance in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced
person. The owner of the structure shall be liable for the payment of relocation assistance
pursuant to this section. This section shall not be interpreted as creating a responsibility
by the Borough of Moonachie to pay relocation assistance.
§ 10-4.6. Payment. [Ord. #87-5, § VI]
Every real estate property owner shall make such payments and reimbursements to the
tenant within 30 days of notification of tenant's moving expenses.
§ 10-4.7. Penalty. [Ord. #87-5, § VII; Ord. #94-16]
Failure on the part of a real estate property owner to comply with the requirements of
this section shall subject the real estate property owner to a fine of $500 per day for the
first offense and $1,000 for each offense thereafter.
§ 10-5. CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY REQUIRED PRIOR
TO TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN PROPERTY.
§ 10-5.1. Required. [Ord. #87-6, § 1]
Each time there is a transfer of ownership of property within the Borough, which
property is used as or proposed to be used, in whole or in part, as a one-family dwelling,
as a two-family dwelling, as a three-family dwelling or as a four-family dwelling, a seller
of such property must obtain from the Construction Official a Certificate of Continued
Occupancy certifying that the property may be continued to be used as it is currently
being used and certifying that the use of the property is a permitted use in the zone in
which the property is located, by virtue of either the fact that the use is a permitted use
in the zone or by virtue of the fact that the use is a valid nonconforming use in the zone
or a permitted use by legal variance procedure.
§ 10-5.2. Fee for Certificate. [Ord. #87-6, § 2]
The fee for a Certificate of Continued Occupancy shall be $25 payable to the Borough
of Moonachie.
§ 10-4.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-5.3
10:20
§ 10-5.3. Inspection of Premises. [Ord. #87-6, § 3]
Before a Certificate of Continued Occupancy shall be issued, the Construction Official
shall make an inspection of the premises to determine whether the certificate may or may
not be issued.
§ 10-5.4. Application.
Applications for a Certificate of Continued Occupancy shall be submitted to the
Construction Official and once the application has been received by the Construction
Official, the certificate indicating whether the present use may or may not be continued
shall be issued within six business days of the receipt of the application.
§ 10-5.5. Notice of Violation; Penalty. [Ord. #87-6, § 5]
In the event a purchaser of property in the Borough fails to obtain a Certificate of
Continued Occupancy, the Construction Official shall notify the property owner of the
violation by posting a notice of violation at the subject premises. In the event that
the property owner fails to thereafter obtain a Certificate of Continued Occupancy, the
property owner shall be subject to a fine not less than $100 for each summons issued.
Each day a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance in the notice
provided for herein, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-6. NUMBERING OF STREETS.
§ 10-6.1. Numbering System Established; Map Adopted. [Ord. #80, § 1; 1970
Code § 13-3.1]
All lots of land, including the buildings erected thereon, on any public street, avenue or
highway within the corporate limits of the Borough shall be numbered in accordance
with the system of numbering as provided in and laid out on the map entitled
"Numbering Map of Borough of Moonachie," Part 1, "Numbering Map of Borough of
Moonachie," Part 2, dated December 1930 and prepared by F.C. Job, which map is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 10-6.2. Property Owner to Display Numbers. [Ord. #80, § 3; 1970 Code § 13-3.2]
It shall be the duty of each property owner to display in such manner so that it may be
plainly visible to the public on the front portion of each building owned by him, located
on any public street, avenue or highway within the Borough, the number assigned to
such premises by the terms of this section and it shall be the duty of property owners to
continue at all times to display such numbers.
§ 10-6.3. Building Occupying More Than One Lot. [1970 Code § 13-3.3]
In the event that any building shall be located or situated on more than one lot of land as
laid down on the map made a part hereof, then and in such case the owner of the property
may use all the numbers assigned to the premises or at his option may use the highest
number assigned.
§ 10-7. ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF NATIONAL MODEL CODES.
§ 10-5.3 BUILDING AND HOUSING § 10-7.1
10:21
§ 10-7.1. Adoption of the National Model Codes. [Ord. #86-18, § 1]
The following National Model Codes, as promulgated by the Department of Community
Affairs of the State of New Jersey on August 6,1981 are adopted by reference:
§ 10-7.2. Definition. [Ord. #86-18, § 1]
As used in this section:
B.O.C.A. — Shall mean Building Officials Code Administration International Inc.
§ 10-7.3. Penalties. [Ord. #86-18, § 1]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for each and every violation
thereof, and for each and every day that the violation continues to be in existence, be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 if not otherwise specified by ordinance or code.
§ 10-7.4. Enforcement Officers. [Ord. #86-18, § 1]
Members of the Building Department of the Borough and the Fire Prevention Bureau
are hereby designated as the public officers charged with the enforcement of the terms
of this section. All complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms of this section
are to be submitted in writing to the above mentioned public officers if not otherwise
discovered by routine inspection of the public officers.
a. B.O.C.A. Basic/National Fire Prevention Code 1984.
b. B.O.C.A. Basic/National Building Code 1984 (See Section 10-1 Uniform
Construction Code).
c. B.O.C.A. Mechanical Code 1984.
d. National Standard Plumbing Code 1983.
e. National Electrical Code 1984.
§ 10-7.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 10-7.4
10:22
Chapter 11
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 11-1. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Title. [Ord. #72-9, A I; 1970 Code § 11-4.1]
This section shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough and may
be referred to in this section as the Property Maintenance Code.
§ 11-1.2. Purposes. [Ord. #72-9, A I; 1970 Code § 11-4.2]
The purposes of this Code shall be:
§ 11-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. #72-9, AII; 1970 Code § 11-4.3]
As used in this section:
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building or structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots, including
all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto; and the open land space of any premises
a. To provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
b. To avoid, prevent and eliminate the maintenance or creation of hazards to the public
health or safety.
c. To avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or continue,
will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or surrounding properties.
d. To prevent the creation, continuation, extension or aggravation of blight.
e. To preserve property values in the Borough.
f. To prevent the physical deterioration or progressive downgrading of the quality of
housing facilities in the Borough.
g. To maintain the value and economic health of the commercial properties and
businesses that serve and help to support the Borough and its citizens.
h. To prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which constitute
nuisances and are thereby potentially dangerous or hazardous to the life, health or
safety of persons on or near the premises where such conditions exist.
i. To establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition of land,
buildings, structures and premises in the Borough.
j. To fix responsibilities and duties therefor upon owners, lessees, operators and
occupants of property.
k. To provide for administration and enforcement.
l. To fix penalties for the violation of this section.
§ 10-7.4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 11-1.3
11:1
outside of any building or structure erected thereon.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
OCCUPANT—Shall mean any person residing, living or sleeping in or on the premises
or having actual possession, use or occupancy of a dwelling premises, or rooming unit,
or any person or entity in possession of or using any premises, or part thereof, whether
or not the owner thereof and regardless of the duration of time of such possession, use or
occupancy.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person, persons, or entity not the owner, who has
charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises, or a part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, persons, or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care or control of
any lot, premises, building structure or part thereof, as owner or agent of the owner, or
as a fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee in possession, regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person, group of persons, or entity who is a
lessee, sub-lessee or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building structure or
land shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes of this section and
shall have responsibility over the portions of the premises so sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, right of way or multiples thereof
including the buildings or structures thereon.
REFUSE OR RUBBISH — Shall mean all discarded, useless, unusable, unused or
worthless solid waste matter or materials, combustible or noncombustible, including but
not limited to garbage; trash; ashes; paper; paper goods and products; wrappings; cans;
bottles; containers; yard clippings; garden waste; debris; junk; glass; boxes; crockery;
wood; mineral matter; plastic; rubber; leather; furniture; household goods; appliances;
bedding; scrap lumber; scrap metal; construction material; inoperable machinery or parts
thereof; garden or farming implements and supplies; dead or rotting vegetation; tires;
abandoned, inoperative or unusable automobiles and vehicles; and solid commercial or
industrial waste.
§ 11-1.4. General Regulations. [Ord. #72-9, A III; 1970 Code § 11-4.4]
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance according to the
statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey, its governmental agencies
or the ordinances of the Borough.
a.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises which is
potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life, health or safety of
persons on, near or passing within the proximity of premises where the condition
exists.
b.
a. Compliance of All Residential and Nonresidential Buildings, Structures, Lots and
Premises. Every residential and nonresidential building, structure, lot and the
premises or part of the premises on which it is situated in the Borough, previously
or presently used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business,
recreational, service, transportation, institutional, religious, charitable, quasi-
§ 11-1.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 11-1.4
11:2
§ 11-1.5. Duties and Responsibilities of Owners, Operators and Occupants. [Ord.
#72-9, AIV; 1970 Code § 11-4.5]
In furtherance of the purposes of this section, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the
owner, operator or occupant of premises to comply with any or all of the requirements
and standards of this section, to keep the premises free of conditions which constitute
violations hereof, and to promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions.
public, professional or industrial occupancy and uses accessory thereto, shall
comply with provisions of this section, whether or not any such building or
structure shall have been constructed, altered, or repaired before or after the
enactment of this section, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which may
have been issued for the use of occupancy of such building, or for the installation
or repair of equipment or facilities prior to October 26, 1972. Vacant lots, lands and
premises are also required to comply with the provisions of this section.
b. Interpretation of Standards. In any case where the provisions of this section impose
a higher or stricter standard than set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of
the Borough or under the laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of
its agencies, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions
of this Code impose a lower or lesser standard than any other regulation or
ordinance of the Borough or of the laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey,
or any of its agencies, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance, regulation, or law shall prevail.
c. Compliance with Other Ordinances. Compliance with this section shall not
constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the Borough
applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any one act of compliance
constitute a defense against any subsequent or other violation of this Code.
d. Responsibilities of Owner, Operator and Occupant. Owners, operators and
occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and responsibilities prescribed in
this section, and no such person or entity shall be relieved of any duty, obligation
or responsibility hereunder, nor re-entitled to assert as a defense against any charge
made against him or them for violation of this section, the fact that another owner,
operator or occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible therefor
and in violation thereof.
e. Application of Building Code. Any alterations to buildings, structures or
appurtenances thereto, or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this section shall be done in accordance with all
applicable sections of the State Uniform Construction Code.
f. Application of Zoning Law. Nothing contained in this section or any requirement
of compliance herewith shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of
the provisions of the Zoning Chapter or zoning laws of the Borough.
g. Existing Remedies. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the Borough or its officers or agencies relating to the removal
or demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to be dangerous,
unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 11-1.4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 11-1.6
11:3
§ 11-1.6. Maintenance Standards. [Ord. #72-9, A V; 1970 Code § 11-4.6]
The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following matter, materials or
conditions:
a. Refuse, as defined herein.
b. Rubbish, as defined herein.
c. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts, towers, exterior cellar
openings, basement hatchways, foundations or excavations.
d. Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, boilers, hot water heaters, television sets and
other similar major appliances.
e. Structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, structures or fences.
f. Rodents, vermin, pest infestations or rodent harborages.
g. Animal excrement.
h. Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such as holes, sudden depressions,
sharp or jagged projections or obstructions.
i. Buried rubble, refuse or rubbish.
j. Stagnant surface or ground water accumulations which create or are likely to create
mosquito or other insect breeding areas.
k. Nuisances, as defined herein.
l. Vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers, motorized or not, licensed or
unlicensed, registered or unregistered, which vehicles or parts thereof are or have
been junked, abandoned, dismantled or are in a state of visible disrepair.
m. Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited to, dead trees
or tree limbs, accumulations of ice, or any object, natural or man- made, which
could threaten the health and safety of persons if caused to fall, or other similar
dangerously loose and overhanging objects, which by reason of their location above
ground level constitute an actual hazard to persons or vehicles in the vicinity
thereof.
n. Inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, piers and columns, and other similar
structurally unsound, damaged or defective load bearing components which are
incapable of bearing imposed loads safely at all points.
o. Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing, broken, rotted, or
unsafe exterior portions of buildings or structures, including but not limited to
porches, landings, balconies, stairways, hand rails, steps, walls, overhangs, roofs,
fences, supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes, signs, loose,
crumbling or falling bricks, stones, mortar or plaster.
p. Exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or structures containing sharp, rough or
projecting surfaces or objects which might cause injury to persons coming in
contact therewith.
§ 11-1.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 11-1.6
11:4
§ 11-1.7. Administrative Provisions. [Ord. #72-9, A VI; 1970 Code § 11-4.7; New;
Ord. #2008-5; Ord. #2011-2]
q. Broken glass or windows; rotted, missing or substantially destroyed window frames
and sashes, door frames, exterior doors or other major exterior component parts of
buildings or structures.
r. Weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to public health and safety.
This includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and
ragweed growth.
Without limitation by the foregoing, it shall also be the duty and responsibility
of owners, occupants or operators to keep the exterior of all premises structurally
sound, in good general repair and sufficiently maintained, to an extent so as to
prevent and avoid conditions that violate the purposes of this section.
a. Enforcement Officer. The Construction Official of the Borough, Property
Maintenance Official, Department of Public Works Superintendent, Police
Department and/or their agents are designated as the officers charged with the
enforcement of this section and are hereinafter referred to as the enforcement
officers under this section.
b. Enforcement Procedure. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is
or has been a violation of any provision of this section, he shall give notice of the
violation to the person responsible therefor under this section. Notice shall be in
writing and shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such
notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if a copy thereof is
sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the person upon
which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the Borough or a
copy thereof handed to that person or a copy thereof left at the usual place of abode
or office of that person. Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without the
Borough. The notice shall also state that unless the violation is abated, removed,
cured, prevented or desisted from within 10 days of the date of service of such
notice (exclusive of the date of service) a summons shall be issued for such
violation. The enforcement officer may, at the time he issues the notice, extend the
period for compliance with the violation stated in this notice for a period in excess
of 10 days if, in his judgment, the abatement removal, prevention, cessation of or
cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day
period. In such cases the enforcement officer shall state a reasonably required
extended period in the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid
10 days. In the event the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented, or
destroyed from or otherwise fully remedied within the ten-day period or within such
extended period as set forth in the notice a summons shall then be issued against the
person so notified.
c. Emergency Conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency
condition in violation of the section exists, which condition requires immediate
attention in order to protect the public health or safety, he may issue an order by
service of notice as set forth in paragraph b of this subsection, reciting the existence
of an emergency condition and requiring that action be taken by the violator as soon
as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other
§ 11-1.6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 11-1.7
11:5
§ 11-1.8. Responsibility of Owner to Keep Premises Free of Litter. [Ord. #72-9, A
VII; 1970 Code § 11-4.8; Ord. #86-13, § 1]
No person, firm, or corporation owning, renting or leasing land within the Borough
shall allow paper, paper products, bottles, tin cans, containers, junk, garbage, discarded
furniture, tires, drums, debris or any other waste matter whatsoever, whether or not
expressly defined herein, to remain on the property or allow weeds, undergrowth,
cattails, or other vegetation to grow, thereby causing an unsightly appearance.
The Borough Administrator or Borough Clerk or other designated enforcement officer,
upon receiving a report through his designated agents that a violation of the above exists,
shall notify the owner and possessor of the lands, in writing, either personally or by
registered or certified mail, to take such steps as will effectively remove the violation
from the land within seven days after receipt of the notice.
§ 11-1.9. Penalty. [Ord. #72-9, A VII; 1970 Code § 11-4.8; Ord. #86-13, § 1]
Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 per
event, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both per event, in the discretion of the
Municipal Judge.
§ 11-1.10. Property Maintenance; Removal of Dangerous Conditions. [Ord.
#96-15, § 1]
In case with the property maintenance or other on-site conditions which in the
determination of the Property Maintenance Official represents a danger, hazard or
detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Moonachie, the
same shall be removed under the direction of the working foreman or other authorized
personnel, and the cost of correction, as nearly as can be ascertained, shall be certified by
the working foreman or authorized personnel to the Director of Finance. The Borough
Council shall examine the certification and if found to be correct, shall cause the cost to
be charged against the real estate abutting or shall become a lien and a tax in the way
and manner as the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon the premises, and shall bear
interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same manner as
other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or any other penalty for violation
of any of the provisions of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of the
Borough to collect the cost, as certified, for the correction of landscaping in the manner
herein authorized.
§ 11-2. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
provision of this section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person
to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately. Upon
objection in writing to the enforcement officer, any such person shall be afforded a
hearing before the Borough Council as soon as is reasonably possible. After such
a hearing and decision by the Council as to the existence or nonexistence of the
emergency condition, the Council may continue such order in effect, or modify or
withdraw it, subject to issuance of a summons for violation thereof, if such order is
continued.
§ 11-1.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 11-2.1
11:6
§ 11-2.1. Duty to Remove. [Ord. #69-14; 1970 Code § 4-5.1]
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering on any street in the
Borough shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of such street or the
abutting right-of-way actually used by the public, or in the event of ice which may be
so frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or ashes, within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed
thereon.
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises used by the public or business invitees shall
remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks, streets, right-of-ways and parking areas
used by the public in the transaction of business thereat, and in the event of ice which
may be so frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly
covered with sand or ashes, within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon.
§ 11-2.2. Casting of Snow or Ice. [Ord. #69-14; 1970 Code § 4-5.2]
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall throw, place or
deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the intent and purpose of this provision
to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulates within the private property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or
streets of the Borough.
§ 11-2.3. Authority to Remove. [Ord. #69-14; 1970 Code § 4-5.3]
In case snow or ice shall not be removed from the sidewalks or shall be cast, deposited or
placed on the sidewalks or the street by the owner, tenant or occupant of any premises,
the same shall be removed under the direction of the working foreman or authorized
personnel, and the cost of removal, as nearly as can be ascertained, shall be certified by
the working foreman or authorized personnel to the Director of Finance. The Borough
Council shall examine the certification and if found to be correct, shall cause the cost to
be charged against the real estate abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks. The amount
so charged shall become a lien and a tax in the way and manner as the taxes next to
be levied and assessed upon the premises, and shall bear interest and be enforced and
collected by the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. The imposition
and collection of a fine or any other penalty for violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Borough to collect the cost, as
certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 11-2.1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 11-2.3
11:7

Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 12-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Local Enforcement. [Ord. #85-10, § 1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383) the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough.
§ 12-1.2. Agency Designation. [Ord. #85-10, § 2; Ord. #96-14]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Borough of
Moonachie.
§ 12-1.3. Duties. [Ord. #85-10, § 3]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes
and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the
established boundaries of the Borough, other than owner-occupied one and two family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 12-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. #85-10, § 4]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 12-1.2 of this section shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on
behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 12-1.5. Organization. [Ord. #85-10, § 5]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 12-1.2 of this section shall be
under the direct supervision and control of Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention who
shall be the Fire Official.
§ 12-1.6. Appointments, Term of Office, Removal. [Ord. #85-10, § 6]
a. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct
supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council
from among a list of three recommendations provided by the Fire Chief and the
Board of Fire Officers.
b. Term of Office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of two years beginning
January 1 of the appointing year.
c. Inspectors and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may be
necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council upon recommendation of the Fire Official.
d. Removal from Office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall
§ 11-2.3 FIRE PREVENTION § 12-1.6
12:1
§ 12-1.7. Board of Appeals. [Ord. #85-10, § 7]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved
by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of Bergen County.
§ 12-1.8. Required Inspections and Fees. [Ord. #85-10, § 8]
The inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and regulations of the Department
of Community Affairs shall be required.
§ 12-1.9. Registration of Commercial and Industrial Businesses. [Ord. #96-14;
Ord. #2009-10]
All commercial and industrial businesses within the Borough of Moonachie shall register
with the Bureau of Fire Prevention of Moonachie annually. The annual registration/
inspection fee shall be as follows:
Business occupying a square footage of:
Square Footage Annual Fee
0-1,000 $50
1,001 - 2,000 $100
2,001 - 3,000 $125
3,001 - 4,000 $150
4,001 - 5,000 $175
5,001 - 6,000 $200
6,001 - 7,000 $225
7,001 - 8,000 $250
8,001 - 9,000 $275
9,001 - 10,000 $300
10,001 - 11,000 $350
11,001 - 14,000 $400
14,001 - 25,000 $500
25,001 - 50,000 $600
50,001 - 100,000 $850
100,000 and up $1,500
Multi-family dwellings (2 or more) $100
be subject to removal by the Mayor and Council for inefficiency or misconduct.
Each inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard by the appointing authority or a designated hearing officer.
§ 12-1.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 12-1.10
12:2
§ 12-1.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #96-14]
Any person, corporation or business entity violating subsection 12-1.9 shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $500.
§ 12-2. FIRE LANES.
§ 12-2.1. Designation. [Ord. #87-27, § 1]
The Fire Official, with the approval of the Chief Executive Officer of the Fire
Department and the Chief of Police of Moonachie, may designate fire lanes on private
property to which the public is invited or which is devoted to public use, if it is
necessary to provide safety for the public or to provide proper access for Fire Department
operations in the event of an emergency.
§ 12-2.2. Notification. [Ord. #87-27, § 2]
Whenever a determination has been made for fire lane designation, pursuant to
subsection 12-3.2, the Fire Official shall notify the owner of the property in writing by
registered or certified mail, or by hand delivering such notice, specifically describing the
area designated and the reason for making the designation. Any signs designating the
fire lanes shall be as directed by the Fire Official and same should be erected at the sole
cost of the property owner.
§ 12-2.3. Obstructions. [Ord. #87-27, § 3]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to park a motor vehicle in or
otherwise to obstruct a fire lane.
§ 12-2.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #87-27, § 4]
This section shall be enforced by the Borough Police Department and any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. In addition to the penalty provided, any vehicle parked
in violation of the regulations provided under this section may at the direction of the
Police Department be summarily towed away. Any fines imposed will be collected by
the Violations Clerk.
§ 12-2.5. Disclaimer. [Ord. #87-27, § 5]
Nothing in this section shall be deemed as the acceptance for public use of any of the
premises in any such parking area or in any way create any public easement therein.
§ 12-3. RAPID ENTRY BOX SYSTEMS.
§ 12-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2011-7]
The Governing Body of the Borough of Moonachie finds that in order to better protect
the property and welfare of certain businesses, business patrons and Fire Company
members, a uniform system for rapid entry into certain buildings in the event of a report
of a fire emergency is required.
§ 12-1.10 FIRE PREVENTION § 12-3.2
12:3
§ 12-3.2. Applicability. [Ord. #2011-7]
§ 12-3.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2011-7]
§ 12-3.4. Type of Rapid Entry Box Required. [Ord. #2011-7]
Each affected building or structure shall cause an appropriate rapid entry box to be
permanently mounted into the structure or building and accessible from outside the
structure or building. Each rapid entry box shall be of sufficient size and configuration
to allow the required contents as set forth below to be conveniently stored therein. In
order to assure acceptability of the rapid entry box chosen, each owner, tenant, or other
responsible party of each affected structure or building shall receive approval from the
Moonachie Fire Official as to the size, type and configuration of the proposed rapid entry
box.
§ 12-3.5. Location Requirements. [Ord. #2011-7]
The location of the outside of the building or structure at which the rapid entry box is
to be located must be, as nearly as possible, uniform amount similar type structures in
order to promote quick accessibility upon arrival of fire personnel at the scene of an
emergency. Given differing structural characteristics of different types of structures and
buildings, the location of the rapid entry box on the exterior of each building or structure
shall be submitted to and approved by the Borough Fire Official.
a. The following structures or buildings shall be required to have installed a rapid
entry box system.
1. Any industrial or warehouse building or structure.
2. Hotels, motels or multiple dwellings which have locked main entrances at any
time during the day or night or which have locked boiler rooms, electrical
rooms, basements, sprinkler control rooms or elevator control rooms.
3. All educational and day-care buildings or structures.
4. All mercantile buildings and structures including shopping centers.
5. All office buildings and structures.
6. All buildings and structures of public assembly including houses of worship
and restaurants.
a. The following words used in this section shall have the meanings set forth below
unless the context in which it is used clearly requires a different meaning:
AFFECTED STRUCTURES OR AFFECTED BUILDINGS — Shall mean any of
the structures or buildings described in subsection 12-3.2 above.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS—Shall mean a residential building containing three or
more dwelling units.
RAPID ENTRY BOX SYSTEM — Shall mean a locking vault-like container
permanently mounted into the affected structure or building and accessible from
outside of such structure or building.
§ 12-3.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 12-3.6
12:4
§ 12-3.6. Required Contents of Rapid Entry Box. [Ord. #2011-7]
The rapid entry box for each building or structure shall contain a separately and clearly
labeled key for each locked area within the building or structure (for example, boiler
rooms, electrical rooms, sprinkler control rooms, elevator control rooms, etc.), the
building plan of any structure or building in excess of 30,000 square feet, sprinkler keys,
elevator keys, and information concerning any hazardous materials contained with the
building or structure, and a clear indication as to the part of the building or structure
within such hazardous materials are contained.
§ 12-3.7. Compliance Deadline. [Ord. #2011-7]
Compliance with the provisions of this section must be achieved on or before January 1,
2012.
§ 12-3.8. Master Key Security. [Ord. #2011-7]
As used herein, "master key" shall mean the instrument used to gain access to the various
rapid entry system boxes to be utilized as a result of the provisions of this section. The
Fire Department shall establish a system of security and procedure to limit access to any
master key(s) to authorized personnel in times of emergency. The Fire Department shall,
to the extent feasible and practical, use the latest technological advances available to
preserve and enhance the security of the master key(s).
§ 12-3.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2011-7]
Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a $100 fine for the first
offense and a $500 fine for each subsequent offense. All enforcement of this section will
be conducted by the Fire Official or his designated Fire Inspectors, Fire Chief, and Fire
Subcode Official.
§ 12-3.6 FIRE PREVENTION § 12-3.9
12:5

Chapter 13
UTILITIES
Editor's Note: The power of the municipality to supply sewerage service and to
regulate the same is provided by N.J.S.A. 40:63-1, et seq.
Prior ordinance history includes prior 1970 Code §§ 12-1 through 12-21 and
Ordinance Nos. 226, 72-1, 74-13, 79-17, 80-4, 82-8, 83-2, 87-1, 90-19 and 92-1.
§ 13-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-1]
As used in this Chapter.
GARBAGE—Shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HOUSE CONNECTION — Shall mean that part of the sewage system extending from
the house plumbing system to the house sewer lateral.
HOUSE SEWER LATERAL — Shall mean that part of the sewage system that runs
from the sewer main to the curbline and including all necessary fittings.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAIN SEWER — Shall mean the sewers laid longitudinally along the centerline or
other part of the streets or other rights-of-way and to which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body or surface, or ground water.
PH — Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL — Shall mean a person licensed and authorized
to inspect plumbing pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-38 to 44 and R.S.
26:3-20.
PLUMBING SYSTEM—Shall mean the sanitary and storm drainage facilities together
with their venting systems and plumbing fixtures, the public or private water supply
system and the fire protection system within or adjacent to any building, structure or
conveyance, to a point of connection to a public or private sewerage system, public or
private water supply, or other acceptable terminal.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with
no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER—Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Shall mean that domestic sewage with storm and surface
water excluded, such as sewage discharging from the sanitary conveyance of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office and commercial buildings, factories and
§ 12-3.9 UTILITIES § 13-1
13:1
institutions.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — Shall mean any liquid wastes containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS—Shall mean all facilities for collection, pumping and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER —Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER INSPECTOR — Shall mean the Sewer Inspector of the Borough or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN — Shall mean a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 13-2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED. [Ord. #96-10, § 1; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Borough or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the Borough, any human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial
waste, or other objectionable waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Borough, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the Borough, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
§ 13-3. SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-3]
The owner of every house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purpose, situated within the Borough and abutting on any street, alley
or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public or
sanitary sewer system of the Borough, is required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter and of the requirements of the
Board of Health of the Borough within 180 days after date of official notice requiring
such action. In addition, owners of property with buildings thereon in the rear of other
properties and not abutting on a street, alley, or right-of-way shall be required to connect
into the public sewer in the street, alley or right-of-way to which the property shall
§ 13-1 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-3
13:2
have access. As public sewers become available to property served by a private sewage
disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer pursuant to the
terms of this Chapter and the septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 13-4. SUPERVISION OF SEWER CONNECTIONS. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-1, § 13-4]
In the administration of this Chapter, the connection from property shall be supervised
and administered by the Board of Health and all matters relating to sewers lying within
the street, from curb to curb, or from public sewer to curb, shall be within the jurisdiction
of the Department of Public Works and the Sewer Inspector.
§ 13-5. SEWER CONNECTIONS BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS
PROHIBITED. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-5]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or house sewer lateral and the appurtenances thereof.
The sewer contractor retained by the Borough, the Sewer Inspector or Department of
Public Works shall make all connections, alterations and repairs on the public sewer and
shall alter, maintain and repair the house sewer laterals and appurtenances thereof.
§ 13-6. MAINTENANCE OF SEWERS. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-6]
Maintenance of the public sewer and house sewer laterals and all connections to the
public sewer and all work performed on the sewer system between the main and the
curb, shall be performed by the Sewer Inspector, Department of Public Works or by a
contractor selected by the Borough. The contractor shall be governed by the terms of
the ordinances of the Board of Health and Borough relating to sewer installation and
maintenance, and shall comply with plans and specifications of the Borough Engineer
and the Sewer Inspector on file with the Borough Clerk. The contractor shall be required
to post a performance bond suitable to the Mayor and Council. The amount of work done
by the contractor will depend on the number of applications for connections to the public
sewer received and accepted by the Borough.
§ 13-7. INSTALLATION OF HOUSE SEWER LATERAL. [Ord. #96-10, § I;
Ord. #2005-1, § 13-7]
Where there is no house sewer lateral available, the property owner shall apply to the
Borough Clerk to have a house sewer lateral installed from the sewer main to the curb.
In each such case or in any instance where the connection to the house sewer lateral
a. Mobile Home Parks. Any structure other than mobile homes within or adjacent to a
mobile home park from which sewage is discharged including, but not limited to,
houses, stores, laundries and maintenance sheds, shall have a separate water meter
installed by the water utility, or if the water utility refuses in writing, by a person
licensed to install same, and inspected by the Borough Plumbing Inspector. Each
mobile home park operator shall comply with this section not more than 90 days
following final passage and publication of Ordinance 2005-1.26
26. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-1 was adopted February 24, 2005.
§ 13-3 UTILITIES § 13-7
13:3
requires the performance of labor or the furnishing of materials on the part of the
Borough, a minimum charge of $79 will be made. Where because of the nature and
extent of the work to be done or the pavement or terrain to be penetrated or the width of
the road, or such circumstances, the sum of $79 is not sufficient to cover the costs and
expenses of the Borough, the working foreman and the Borough Engineer shall fix the
fee at a higher figure to fully cover the costs and expenses of such connection or house
sewer lateral.
§ 13-8. DISCHARGE OF SUMP PUMPS OR ANY OTHER WATER INTO
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
§ 13-8.1. Cost Incident to House Connections. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2004-5,
§ 13-8.1; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-8]
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the house
connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Borough from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the house connection.
§ 13-8.2. Legislative Intent. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.2]
The Mayor and Council hereby declares its intent to regulate and control the flow of any
ground or surface waters except sanitary sewer waters into its sanitary sewer system.
It is the intent of this section to prevent ground waters, surface waters, and any other
waters from directly entering the sanitary system owned by the Borough of Moonachie
by means of sump pumps, storm drains or any other devices and to provide penalties for
the violations of same.
§ 13-8.3. Certificate of Occupancy.
Whenever it is necessary for a property owner to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy (or a
Continued Certificate of Occupancy) and/or there is a transfer of any ownership of any
residence or commercial building, the Construction Official shall be required to perform
the following duties and acts.
Upon application for a Certificate of Occupancy or a Continued Certificate of
Occupancy, the Construction Official shall inspect within 10 days, excluding weekends
and holidays, the subject premises in order to determine whether any sump pumps or
drains or other mechanical devices are discharging any waters directly into the sanitary
sewer system owned by the Borough of Moonachie. In the event that he determines
that there is such discharge, no Certificate of Occupancy or Continued Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued to the possessor of said property until said condition is
removed. Upon the inspection of such dwelling, the Construction Official shall file an
appropriate affidavit indicating that said inspection has been made and shall file same
with the Borough Clerk.
§ 13-8.4. Illicit Connection. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.4; Ord. #2005-9]
The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Moonachie, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 13-7 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-8.4
13:4
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include
the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14a-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical connection
that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater,
or other industrial waste (other than storm water) to the municipal separate storm
sewer system operated by the Borough of Moonachie, unless that discharge is
authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater
General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ014852). Nonphysical connections
may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Moonachie or other public
body, and is designed and used for collection and conveying storm water.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or biocides to control
fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER—Shall mean any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use
of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste
product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling
water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORM WATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is
§ 13-8.4 UTILITIES § 13-8.4
13:5
§ 13-8.5. Violations. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.5]
In the event that the owner of real property in the Borough of Moonachie violates any
subsection of the section, the Construction Official shall be empowered to give notice to
the property owner of the violation of same and the same shall be corrected within 30
days thereof. In the event that the property owner fails to comply with the order of the
Construction Official, they shall be determined to be in violation of this section.
§ 13-8.6. Right to Enter Upon Lands. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.6]
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this section any duly authorized officer,
agent or employee of the Borough shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands
for which an application has been filed and may examine and inspect such lands.
§ 13-8.7. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.7]
The Construction Official or Plumbing Official is hereby designated as the enforcement
officer.
§ 13-8.8. Penalties. [Ord. #2004-5, § 13-8.8]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a penalty not exceeding $500 or to community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
§ 13-9. CONNECTION OF HOUSE PLUMBING SYSTEM INSPECTION. [Ord.
#96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-9]
Before any portion of the existing plumbing system outside of the house is connected to
the house connection, the owner shall prove to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector
that it is clean and conforms in every respect to the ordinances of the Board of Health
and the ordinances of the Borough, and before any portion of the house connection is
connected to the sewer extension, the Plumbing Subcode Official shall be satisfied that
the house connection is in good order and conforms in every respect to the requirements
for construction thereof.
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through
an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Moonachie any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than storm water).
c. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Moonachie Police
Department and/or other municipal officials of the Borough of Moonachie.
d. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 13-8.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-10
13:6
§ 13-10. TRENCHES FOR HOUSE CONNECTIONS. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-01, § 13-10]
When installing the house connection, the trenches shall be dug in a careful manner
and properly sheathed where required. The excavated materials shall be piled in a
compact heap, so placed as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public.
Proper barricades and lights must be maintained around the trench to guard against
accidents. Extreme care shall be taken to prevent any dirt, stones or other undesirable
materials from entering the public sewer system through the house sewer lateral during
these operations.
In backfilling, the material for the two feet immediately over the pipe shall be selected
so it contains no stones. All backfill material for the trench shall be placed by tamping
in eight inch layers so as to avoid any settlement. When the trench has been filled to the
proper height, the surface material shall be replaced and heavily tamped and rolled.
Where the trench is excavated in rock, the rock must be carefully excavated to a depth
of six inches below the grade line of the sewer and the trench brought to the proper
elevation with gravel or other material satisfactory to the Plumbing Subcode Official.
The remainder of the trench must be backfilled with suitable material.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as abrogating any existing requirements of
the Borough relating to the excavation and backfilling of trenches, but the requirements
herein shall be in addition thereto.
Where subsoil conditions are bad, such special precaution shall be taken to secure a
watertight job as may be directed by the Plumbing Subcode Official. In quicksand, all
pipes must be laid out on planking, two inches thick by at least six inches wide.
§ 13-11. MEANS OF MAKING PLUMBING CONNECTION. [Ord. #96-10, § I;
Ord. #2005-1, § 13-11]
Where connection is made between the portion of the house plumbing system outside
of the building and the house connection, a long radius bend shall appropriately be
installed at this connection along with a clean-out as required by the plumbing code. This
connection shall be subject to the approval of the Plumbing Subcode Official who shall
be given ample notice prior to such work.
§ 13-12. TESTS BY PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-1, § 13-12]
The Plumbing Subcode Official may apply any appropriate test to the pipes and the
plumber and contractor at their own expense shall furnish all necessary tools, labor,
materials and assistance for such tests and shall remove or repair any defective materials
when so ordered by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 13-13. BOND REQUIRED. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-13]
Each contractor or other person performing work on Borough public property for the
purpose of installing house connections shall post a bond or cash acceptable to the
Department of Public Works or the Sewer Inspector. All work shall be adequately
guarded with barricades, lights and other measures for protection to the public from
§ 13-10 UTILITIES § 13-13
13:7
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Borough.
§ 13-14. SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
§ 13-14.1. Established. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-14.1]
There is hereby established the following schedule of fees and charges in connection
with the use, operation, maintenance and construction of the public sewer system in the
Borough of Moonachie which is connected to a sewer metering station owned by the
Bergen County Utility Authority.
§ 13-14.2. Residential Uses. [Ord. #80-4; §§ 1 & 4; Ord. #82-8, § 1; Ord. #83-2,
§ 1; 1970 Code § 12-14.1; Ord. #87-1, § 1a; Ord. #90-19, § 1; Ord. #92-1, § 1; Ord.
No. 2005-1; Ord. #2010-4; Ord. #2013-8; 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-3]
Each connection for a one-family dwelling unit shall be charged the sum of $315 per
year. Where a residence is also used as a professional office, the charge shall be 1 1/2
times the base charge of $315 per year. Such charge shall be paid quarterly at the time
and place set forth for the payment of real property taxes and shall be prorated to take
effect from the date of connection to an operating sewer.
Each mobile home park shall be charged in the sum of $315 per lot-pad, per year, to be
paid quarterly at the time and place set forth for the payment of real property taxes.
A two-family dwelling unit shall be charged the sum of $630 per year;
A three-family dwelling unit shall be charged the sum of $945 per year;
A four-family dwelling unit shall be charged the sum of $1,260 per year;
There shall be a charge of $315 for each additional family dwelling unit over and above
the four family units.
A dwelling unit shall be defined as a place to be occupied exclusively by a family,
having their own cooking and sanitary facilities and further being independent of and not
relating to any other dwelling unit in the building. Each charge shall be paid quarterly at
the time and place set forth for the payment of real property taxes and shall be prorated
to take effect from the date of connection to an operating sewer.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, allow a credit to senior
citizens, or disabled individuals, which amount shall be subject to periodic increases by
resolution.
This subsection of the section shall take effect January 1, 2022 (for 1st quarter 2022
usage) and shall be used to calculate that and all subsequent residential billings.
§ 13-14.3. Commercial and Industrial Uses. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-14.3; Ord. #2007-6; Ord. #2009-7; Ord. #2010-4; Ord. #2013-8; 7-22-2021 by
Ord. No. 2021-3]
Each connection for service to a commercial business or industrial establishment shall
be charged $109.55 per 1,000 cubic feet or less, as determined from the quarterly water
§ 13-13 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-14.3
13:8
meter reading. However, there shall be a minimum charge of $1,095.49 per year.
This subsection of the section shall take effect with the 3rd quarter, 2021 billings (April
through June. usage) and shall be used to calculate that and all subsequent commercial
and industrial billings.
§ 13-14.4. Large Industrial Users. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-14.4]
Those contributors defined and identified as large industrial users by the Bergen County
Utilities Authority shall also be charged a surcharge for actual use of wastewater
treatment services for biochemical oxygen demand, and total suspended solids, in
accordance with Section 13-21, Sanitary Sewers, Industrial Cost Recovery and User
Charge System based upon current annual sewer service rate as determined by the
Bergen County Utilities Authority. Surcharge shall be based on excess over Bergen
County Utilities Authority criteria for large industrial users.
§ 13-14.5. Time and Place of Payment. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-14.5]
All such charges shall be payable quarterly at the time and place set forth as printed on
the bill and shall be prorated to take effect from the date of connection to an operating
sewer.
§ 13-14.6. Reduction of Sewer Charges. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-14.6]
Each connection for service to a commercial business or industrial establishment
wherein the metered premises is not discharging the entire volume of water into the
sanitary sewer system, the user will be allowed a reduction in the charge provided the
said user installs facilities satisfactory to the Borough for measuring the volume either
discharged or not discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
The Borough may require the installation of facilities for measuring or determining
the volume of sewerage discharged into the sanitary sewer system. The Borough may
require any customer who is allowing well water or unmetered water from any source to
enter the sanitary sewerage system to install facilities for measuring or determining the
volume of the water entering the sanitary sewerage system. All meters required by the
terms of this section shall be read quarterly by a member of the Department of Public
Works.
§ 13-14.7. (Reserved)27
§ 13-15. CHARGES AS A MUNICIPAL LIEN. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-15]
The aforesaid charges for the use of public sewers shall draw the same rate of interest
from the date they became due as taxes upon real estate and shall be a lien upon the
premises connected until paid and the Borough shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties as it has by law for the collection of
taxes upon real estate.
27. Editor's Note: Former subsection 13-14.7, Timing or Scheduling of Biochemical Oxygen Demand and Total Suspended
Solids Sampling/Testing, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 96-13, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-1.
§ 13-14.3 UTILITIES § 13-16
13:9
§ 13-16. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 13-16.1. Storm Water Discharge Prohibited. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-16.1]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, roof
runoff or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer.
§ 13-16.2. Discharge of Specific Wastes Prohibited. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-1, § 13-16.3]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
any public sewer any of the following described waters or wastes:
§ 13-16.3. Interceptors Required. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-16.3; Ord.
#2009-5; Ord. #2012-1]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Sewer
Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer Inspector,
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
b. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight,
of fat, oil or grease.
c. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
d. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
e. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
f. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
g. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
h. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such matters at the sewage
treatment plant.
i. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
§ 13-16 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-16.3
13:10
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted
in place shall be gastight and watertight.
Every commercial establishment which prepares food for consumption of employees or
the public shall have installed a grease interceptor. All such establishments shall comply
with this section within 90 days of the effective date of Ordinance 2005-1.28
a. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GREASE TRAPS — Shall be given its normal definition in any food industry. A
device used to collect oil and grease at the entrance of the wastewater pipe system
and preventing the oil and grease from traveling through the wastewater pipes into
the waste water system of the Borough. A grease trap must be installed in such a
manner as to facilitate easy inspection and cleaning.
MAINTENANCE OF GREASE TRAPS — Shall mean grease traps must be
maintained and inspected to ensure that they are never allowed to reach more than
3/4 of their capacity.
MANUFACTURER, PROCESSOR OR DISTRIBUTOR — Shall be given its
normal definition in the industry. An establishment includes businesses which
manufacture and/or process and/or distribute food and/or food products.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall be given its normal definition in the
industry. A retail food establishment includes retail businesses which process and/
or serve food and food products.
b. Installation and maintenance of grease traps.
1. Grease traps shall be maintained and inspected to ensure efficient operation.
Grease traps shall be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The grease
trap installation shall be in continuous operation at all times.
2. Grease trap cleaning shall be done biweekly. A maintenance log including the
time, date and signature of the person performing the cleaning shall be kept on
the premise and shall be readily available for inspection by the Department of
Public Works personnel or Sewer Inspector. If it is determined that the system
is not sufficient, the cleaning shall be increased or a larger unit shall be
installed. Inspection records shall be maintained for a minimum of period of
five years.
3. Grease trap additives shall only be used with the approval of the Sewer
Inspector or Department of Public Works personnel. All removed material
shall be disposed of in accordance with all State, local and Federal regulations.
All maintenance logs and manifests shall be maintained on the premises and
made available upon request at the time of inspection by the Sewer Inspector
or Department of Public Works personnel. These logs and records shall be
maintained for a minimum period of five years.
28. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-1 was adopted February 24, 2005.
§ 13-16.3 UTILITIES § 13-16.3
13:11
4. (a) Inspection of Grease Traps. All food establishments must employ at their
own expense either a licensed plumbing inspector or a designated
Department of Public Works employee to conduct annual inspection of
their grease traps and conducting wastewater lines to ensure that waste oil
and grease are being adequately removed from the wastewater being
discharged into the sewer systems and the wastewater being introduced
into the sewer system is less than 140° F. The licensed plumber or the
Department of Public Works employee shall provide a formal inspection
report to both the food establishment and to Borough Department of
Health. This inspection report must contain the inspector's observation
with regard to the efficiency of the grease trap, the amount of oil and
grease found in the connecting wastewater lines, the percentage of oil and
grease being removed from wastewater being discharged into the sewer
system, the temperature of the wastewater being discharged into the
sewer system and the maintenance and efficiency of the grease trap. The
formal inspection shall be submitted within three weeks of the inspection
date.
(b) Fees. The annual fee for the inspection if performed by Department of
Public Works personnel is $150 and shall be paid in advance to the
Borough of Moonachie.
(c) Date of Inspection. The inspections as to the size, efficacy, temperature
and function of the grease trap should be on or before October 15th of the
year preceding the food license year.
5. The Department of Public Works personnel and Sewer Inspector shall have
access to any food establishment to inspect the grease trap not to exceed six
visits annually. No establishment can restrict access to the grease trap. If the
grease trap records are not accurate or up to date, a fine not to exceed $1,250
may be imposed. The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee
has the authority to issue a summons, as well as the Sewer Inspector.
6. Effective January 1, 2010, no food establishment will be issued a license to
operate within the Borough without presenting the plumbing inspection and
inspection logs to the Department of Health with the license application.
7. An inspection fee, in addition to annual food establishment license fee, shall
be imposed upon any food establishment as follows:
(a) For each inspection carried out pursuant to a complaint when such
inspection results in a determination that said establishment is in violation
of the State Sanitary Code or of any municipal ordinance or State and
Federal regulation relating thereto.
(b) For each reinspection carried out after either a failure of the regular
inspection, or failure of an inspection carried out pursuant to a complaint
as set forth in this section.
(c) There shall be a fee for each inspection in the amount of $100.
8. For all new construction or installation, waste disposals and commercial
§ 13-16.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-16.3
13:12
§ 13-16.4. Owners to Maintain Interceptors and Preliminary Treatment Facilities.
[Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-16.4]
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at
his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. Where preliminary treatment
facilities are provided for any waters or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense.
§ 13-16.5. Spillage of Objectionable Waste. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-16.5]
In the case of a spillage of any human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial waste,
other sanitary sewage or other objectionable waste, the property owner shall
immediately on discovering, or being notified of, said spillage, take steps to stop said
spillage. As soon as said spillage is stopped, the property owner shall remove said
spillage from the affected area, including top soil if necessary and clean any affected area
so that no odor is detectable and no residue is visible. No such spillage shall be buried in
the area. Containers of such spillage shall be removed from the premises immediately.
Penalties for violation of this section shall be:
$100: 1st offense
$500: 2nd offense
$1,000: 3rd and subsequent offenses
Each day or part thereof a spillage is allowed to remain shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 13-16.6. Emergency Plan. [Ord. #96-10, § 1; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-16.6]
The mobile home parks operator shall file an emergency plan for the repair, cleanup and
proper disposal of spillage with the Borough and shall include the name and telephone
number of an emergency contractor and a backup contractor available 24 hours a day
seven days a week. Said plan shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Health
Official, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Sewer Inspector and the Borough Council.
§ 13-16.7. Control Manhole Required. [Ord. #9-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-16.7]
When required by the Plumbing Subcode Official, the owner of any property served by
a house connection or building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer at a location specified by the Borough Engineer,
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
dishwashers shall discharge into grease trap.
§ 13-16.3 UTILITIES § 13-16.8
13:13
§ 13-16.8. Testing Procedures. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #96-13, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-16.8]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, to
which reference is made in subsection 13-16.2, shall be determined in accordance with
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage"
published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided for in subsection 13-16.7 or upon suitable samples taken at
the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 13-17. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-17]
No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest on a charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 13-18. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS. [Ord. #96-10, § I;
Ord. #2005-1, § 13-18]
The Sewer Inspector, Plumbing Subcode Official and other authorized employees of
the Borough bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter on
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Decisions of the Sewer Inspector or the Plumbing Subcode Official in the interpretation
and application of this Chapter shall be final and binding on the property owner affected.
The Sewer Inspector or Plumbing Subcode Official may waive strict compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter where such compliance would cause hardship, other than
increased financial expense, to the property owner involved.
§ 13-19. CEASE AND DESIST NOTICE. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-19]
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except subsection
13-16.5 and Section 13-18, shall be served by the Borough with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
§ 13-20. PENALTY FOR CONTINUED VIOLATION. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-1, § 13-20]
Except as noted elsewhere herein any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in Section 13-19 shall on conviction be subject to the General
Penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this Code.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable to the
§ 13-16.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-20
13:14
Borough for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Borough by reason of such
violation.
§ 13-21. SANITARY SEWERS; INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY AND USER
SYSTEMS.
§ 13-21.1. Preamble. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1, § 13-21.1]
The Federal Government has enacted and amended the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, now known as the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1150, et seq.).
The Bergen County Utilities Authority has enacted rules and regulations, as required by
the Federal Clean Water Act incorporating an industrial cost recovery system, a user
charge system, and regulations pertaining to the use of sanitary sewers.
The Borough is within the district serviced by the Bergen County Utilities Authority and
has contracted with the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the removal and treatment
of the wastewater contained within the sanitary sewers of the Borough.
The Borough desires to assure that the sanitary sewers operated and maintained by it will
conform to the best sanitary engineering practices and comply with the requirements of
the Federal Clean Water Act.
§ 13-21.2. Sewer Use in Compliance with County Authority. [Ord. #96-10, § I;
Ord. #2005-1, § 13-21.2]
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough shall be in compliance with the rules and
regulations enacted by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
§ 13-21.3. Systems Adopted and Enacted. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-21.3]
The Borough hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system and industrial cost
recovery system contained in the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities
Authority, and authorize their immediate implementation by the appropriate municipal
official, to be designated by resolution of the governing body.
§ 13-21.4. Rules and Regulations on File. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord. #2005-1,
§ 13-21.4]
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities
Authority have been and are filed in the office of the Borough Clerk and are available
for public inspection during normal business hours.
§ 13-21.5. Copies of Rules and Regulations Available. [Ord. #96-10, § I; Ord.
#2005-1, § 13-21.5]
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority can be
obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of publication.
§ 13-22. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 13-20 UTILITIES § 13-22.1
13:15
§ 13-22.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2011-9]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets
which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or
alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and
floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Moonachie so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 13-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2011-9]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean a
conveyance of system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Moonachie or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying storm water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet,
slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 13-22.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2011-14]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one singlefamily
house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual
potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a
thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on the property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 13-22.4. Design Standard. [Ord. #2011-14]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 13-22.3 above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 13-22.4 below prior to
the completion of the project.
§ 13-22.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-22.4
13:16
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemption to this standard see
paragraph c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate
in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into
a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no
more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets,
the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates
on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Example of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
c. The standard does not apply:
1. Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by
using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards.
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials
that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option
does not apply to outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one
inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
§ 13-22.4 UTILITIES § 13-22.5
13:17
§ 13-22.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #2011-14]
This section shall be enforced by the Moonachie Police Department and/or designee of
Municipal Stormwater Management Coordinator of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 13-22.6. Penalties. [Ord. #2011-14]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standard.
§ 13-23. FERTILIZER APPLICATION.
§ 13-23.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2011-10]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as
to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality. This section does not apply to fertilizer
application on commercial farms.
§ 13-23.2. Basics and Background. [Ord. #2011-10]
Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water bodies can result
in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic plants (eutrophication).
Excessive plant growth can result in diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen
and pH, which, in turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials
die off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen levels. The
presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of the affected water for
recreation and water supply.
While healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by stabilizing soil and
filtering precipitation, when fertilizers are applied to the land surface improperly or
in excess of the needs of target vegetation, nutrients can be transported by means of
stormwater to nearby waterways, contributing to the problematic growth of excessive
aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient amounts of phosphorus to
support adequate root growth for established turf. Over time, it is necessary to replenish
available phosphorus, but generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target
vegetation, such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will have
a greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or establishment of new
lawns or cover vegetation. A soils test and fertilizer application recommendation geared
to the soil and planting type is the best means to determine the amount of nutrients to
apply. Timing and placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid transport of
nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff. Fertilizer applied immediately prior
to a runoff-producing rainfall, outside the growing season or to impervious surfaces is
most likely to be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the management of the type,
amount and techniques for fertilizer application is necessary as one tool to protect water
resources.
This section does not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial farms but improper
application of fertilizer on forms would be problematic as well. Stewardship on the
§ 13-22.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-23.2
13:18
part of commercial farmers is needed to address this potential source of excess nutrient
load to water bodies. Commercial farmers are expected to implement best management
practices in accordance with conservation management plans or resources conservation
plans developed for the farm by the Natural Resource Conservation Service and
approved by the Soil Conservation District Board.
§ 13-23.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2011-10]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER—Shall mean the land area 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body. (The
Department of Environmental Protection believes that 25 feet is the appropriate buffer
width to be protective of water quality. However, in situations that warrant additional
flexibility, such as where lot sizes are exceptionally small or where the twenty-five foot
buffer constitutes the majority of the available property, the municipality may reduce the
buffer to 10 feet in width, with the additional requirements that a drop spreader be used
for fertilizer application).
COMMERCIAL FARM — Shall mean a farm management unit producing agricultural
or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER—Shall mean a fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient
content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting plant growth,
and which is sold, offered for sale or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall be used
to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or other material that
prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Shall mean any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5 with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except that it shall not
be considered to include animal (including human) or vegetable manures, agricultural
liming materials, or wood ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient
content.
SOILS TESTS — Shall mean a technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by Rutgers
Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATERBODY — Shall mean a surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 13-23.2 UTILITIES § 13-23.4
13:19
§ 13-23.4. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2011-10]
No person may do any of the following:
§ 13-23.5. Phosphorus Fertilizer Application. [Ord. #2011-10]
No person may do the following:
§ 13-23.6. Enforcement. [Ord. #2011-10]
This section shall be enforced by the Moonachie Police Department and/or designee of
Municipal Stormwater Management Coordinator of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 13-23.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2011-10]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standards.
a. Apply fertilizer when a run off producing rainfall is occurring or predicted and/or
when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer movement off-site exists.
b. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently applied to an
impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the target surface or returned
to either its original or another appropriate container for reuse.
c. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody.
d. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days to the start of or at any time after the end of the
recognized growing season in Zone 6b (northeastern, central and part of southern
New Jersey—March 1 to November 15 as identified by the USDA Plant Hardiness
Zones.
a. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to be needed
for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the
associated annual fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative
Research and Extension.
b. Exceptions.
1. Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land disturbance,
provided the application is in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
(b) Re-establishing or repairing a turf area.
2. Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular fertilizer
under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
3. Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container plantings,
flowerbeds or vegetable garden.
§ 13-23.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 13-23.7
13:20
Chapter 14
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION
Editor's Note: The power to regulate excavation and construction in the public
streets is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:67-1. The incidental power to perform work
where a landowner has refused to do so and to recover the cost thereof is contained
in N.J.S.A. 40:67-9.
§ 14-1. STREET EXCAVATIONS.
§ 14-1.1. Definition. [1970 Code § 13-1.1]
As used in this section:
STREET — Shall mean any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Borough as a public street, as well as any
State or County road or highway over which the Borough has acquired jurisdiction by
agreement.
§ 14-1.2. Permit Required. [Ord. #140, §§ 1, 4&8; 1970 Code § 13-1.2; Ord. #90-4;
4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
§ 14-1.3. Denial of Permit; Appeal. [Ord. #140, § 2; 1970 Code § 13-1.3; Ord.
#90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works is
authorized to refuse the issuance of any permit, if such refusal is in the interest of
public safety, convenience or health. In the event that any permit shall be refused by the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works, an appeal
may be taken to the the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council, after hearing
the applicant and the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of
Public Works and other evidence as may be produced, may either direct the issuance of
the permit or sustain the refusal of the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of
Department of Public Works.
a. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street without first
obtaining a permit from Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department
of Public Works.
b. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit, where an emergency
has arisen which make it necessary to start work immediately, provided that the
application for permit is made simultaneously with the commencement of the work
next business day. The permit, when issued, shall be retroactive to the date on
which the work has begun.
c. The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works
permits to other public bodies without fee.
§ 13-23.7 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-1.4
14:1
§ 14-1.4. Application for Permit. [Ord. #140, § 7; 1970 Code § 13-1.4; Ord. #90-4;
4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
Application for a permit shall be made to the Construction Official and/or
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and shall contain the following
information:
§ 14-1.5. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. #140, § 4; 1970 Code § 13-1.5; Ord. #90-4;
4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
Permits shall be issued under the authority of the Construction Official and/or
Superintendent of Department of Public Works and in accordance with the provisions of
this section and the regulations which the Construction Official and/or Superintendent
of Department of Public may establish. The Construction Official and/or Superintendent
of Department of Public Works shall determine the initial time limit during which the
permit shall valid.
§ 14-1.6. Contents of Permit; Filing. [Ord. #140, § 5; 1970 Code § 13-1.6; Ord.
#90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the name of the street
and the location where the excavation or tunnel is to be made, the dimensions of the
opening and the period during which the permit shall be valid. The original of each
permit shall remain on file with the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of
Department of Public Works.
§ 14-1.7. Fees. [Ord. #140, § 3; 1970 Code § 13-1.7; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
Fess shall be paid when the application is made. The applicant shall be charged a fee of
$100 for each permit.
a. Name and address of the applicant.
b. Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street number, if any,
of the abutting property.
c. The Borough tax map block and lot number of the property for the benefit of which
the opening is to be made.
d. Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
e. Character and purpose of the work proposed.
f. Time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
g. Each application shall be accompanied by a set of plans in quadruplicate showing
the exact location and dimensions of all openings.
h. The name and address of the workman or contractor who is to perform the work.
i. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace at his own cost and expense, the
street, curb, gutter and sidewalk in the same state and condition as they were at the
time of the commencement of the work within 48 hours of completion thereof.
§ 14-1.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-1.8
14:2
§ 14-1.8. Bonds. [Ord. #140, § 6; 1970 Code § 13-1.8; Ord. #90-4; 4-23-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1]
No permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have filed a bond in an amount of
$2,500. The bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and a surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as
follows:
§ 14-1.9. Insurance. [1970 Code § 13-1.9; Ord. #90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1]
No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the Construction Official and/
or Superintendent of Department of Public Works with satisfactory proof that he/her is
insured against injury to persons and damage to property caused by any act or omission
of the applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of the work
to be performed under the permit. The insurance shall cover all hazard likely to arise in
connection with the work, including but not limited to collapse and explosion, and shall
also insure against liability arising from completed operations. The limits of the policy of
insurance shall be $100,000 for injury to any one person, $300,000 for injuries to more
than one person in the same accident, and an aggregate of $100,000 for property damage
for a single incident. The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of
Public Works may waive the requirements of this subsection in the case of public utilities
on the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting claims against it up
to the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which would otherwise be required.
§ 14-1.10. Rules and Regulations; Backfilling. [Ord. #140, §§ 5, 9; 1970 Code
§ 13-1.10; Ord. #90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
All permits issued under this section shall be subject to the following rules and
regulations:
a. To indemnify and hold harmless the Borough from all loss, damage, claim or
expense including expenses incurred in the defense of any litigation arising out of
injury to any person or property resulting from any work done by the applicant
under the permit.
b. To indemnify the Borough for any expense incurred in enforcing any of the
provisions of this section.
c. To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or damage to his
property as a result of any act or omission of the applicant, his agents, employees
or subcontractors done in the course of any work under the permit.
d. The bond shall also be conditioned upon the applicant's restoring surface and
foundation of the street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to
the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
One bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the same applicant.
Bonds shall remain in force for a period to be determined by the Construction
Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
a. All excavation shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during the hours of
§ 14-1.8 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-1.10
14:3
§ 14-1.11. Rules and Regulations for Restoration of Surface. [Ord. #140, §§ 1, 4, 8,
1970 Code § 13-1.11; Ord. #90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in accordance with the
following rules, regulations and requirements:
darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This regulation shall not
excuse the permittee from taking any other precaution reasonably necessary for the
protection of persons or property.
b. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of interference with
travel on the street affected. No street shall be closed to traffic unless the closing is
approved by the Police Chief. The Police Department shall be informed of all street
closing at least 24 hours in advance.
c. The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works
may, upon application by the permittee, extend the time during which the permit
shall be valid.
d. All refuse and material must be removed within 48 hours.
e. All excavation shall be completely backfilled by the permittee, and shall be
compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner prescribed by the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
Where the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public
Works determines that the excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the
permittee shall backfill the excavation with sand, soft coal, cinders or other suitable
and clean material which shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth
and thoroughly compacted in the manner prescribed by the Construction Official
and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works. Upon completion of the
work, the permittee shall remove any excess material and leave the premises in a
clean condition. If the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department
of Public Works determines that any backfilled excavation has settled or caved in,
he/she shall notify the permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling until the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works
determines that settlement is complete.
f. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with rammed
concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
g. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall be done in
strict compliance with all applicable State laws and regulations.
h. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or any extension
granted by the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public
Works or is not performed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this
subsection and any other regulations that may be established by the Construction
Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works, then the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works may
complete the work and restore the surface of the street. The cost of completing the
work and restoring the street shall be charged to the permittee and may be deducted
from his deposit or recovered by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 14-1.10 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-1.11
14:4
§ 14-1.12. Permit Conditions and Regulations. [1970 Code § 13-1.12; Ord. #90-4;
4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
a. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation or surface
until the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public
Works has determine that settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area
properly prepared for restoration.
b. Any road in the Borough which has been resurfaced in the last 10 years for which a
new road opening permit is issued shall include the requirement that the party
performing the work must resurface the road from curb to curb and from street
corner to street corner.
c. The street surface shall be restored to the satisfaction of the Construction Official
and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
a. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is issued and
shall not be transferable.
b. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within 45 days
from the date of issuance of the permit. If work is not commenced within that time,
the permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended in writing by the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works.
c. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit together with a copy of the plan
endorsed with the approval of the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of
Department of Public Works shall be kept in possession the person actually
performing the work and shall be exhibited on demand to any duly authorized
representative of the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of
Public Works or to any Police Officer of the Borough.
d. Revocation of permit. The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of
Department of Public Works may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons:
1. Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable rules,
regulations, law or ordinance.
2. Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
3. Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers life or
property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy, unsanitary or
declared by any provision of this Code to constitute a nuisance.
The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as that set forth
in the Code for revocation of licenses, except that the initial hearing shall
be before the Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of
Public Works with a right of appeal to the Borough Council; and the
Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works
may provide in his or her decision that revocation shall not become effective
if the permittee corrects the violation within a specified period of time.
e. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case the Borough Council by
resolution may impose special conditions to which the issuance of the permit may
§ 14-1.11 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-1.12
14:5
§ 14-1.13. Power to Make Additional Rules and Regulations. [1970 Code
§ 13-1.13; Ord. #90-4; 4-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1]
The Construction Official and/or Superintendent of Department of Public Works may
make any rules and regulations which he/her considers necessary for the administration
and enforcement of this section, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or
amend any provision of this section, or impose any requirement which is in addition
to those expressly or by implication imposed by this section. No regulation shall be
effective unless they shall be approved by resolution of the Borough Council. Copies of
all current regulation shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the issuance of the
permit.
§ 14-2. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL.
§ 14-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.1; Ord. #90-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove or cause to be constructed
or removed any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter or any part thereof within any
public right-of-way in the Borough without first having obtained a permit to do so from
the Construction Official.
§ 14-2.2. Application Information. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.2; Ord. #90-4]
Application for a permit shall be made to the Construction Official by the owner of the
premises or his agent on forms provided by the Borough and shall contain the following
information:
§ 14-2.3. Fees. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.3; Ord. #90-4]
A fee of $5 shall be charged for each permit and in addition thereto the applicant shall
be subject, or may decide that any provision of this section shall not apply or shall
be altered.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed work, and the
name and address of the owner of the property on which the work is to be
performed, if other than the applicant.
c. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the work is to
be done.
d. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
e. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact location with
respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and prominent object, as well as
its width and relationship to the grade of the street and the adjacent property, and in
the case of a driveway apron, its slope or pitch.
f. Any other information that the Construction Official deems necessary in order to
determine whether the work will comply with this Chapter.
§ 14-1.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-2.3
14:6
pay the cost of all tests which the Construction Official deems necessary. The fee shall
be paid at the time the application is filed and the cost of all proposed tests shall be paid
prior to the issuance of any permit.
§ 14-2.4. Specifications. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.4; Ord. #90-4]
§ 14-2.5. Notice Required. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.5; Ord. #90-4]
The applicant shall notify the Construction Official at least 24 hours prior to the time of
pouring or laying any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter so that the Construction
Official may arrange for adequate inspection and testing.
§ 14-2.6. Exception. [Ord. #69-10; 1970 Code § 13-2.6]
This section shall not apply to:
§ 14-3. DUMPSTERS. [Ord. #2011-11]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits the spilling,
dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the
containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough
of Moonachie and/or the waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 14-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #86-2, § 1; Ord. #2011-11 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DUMPSTER — Shall mean a bulk storage container, not less than one cubic yard in
a. All materials and work shall be in accordance with Borough specifications on file
in the office of the Construction Official.
b. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be promptly
replaced in accordance with Borough specifications.
c. No concrete sidewalk shall be replaced or covered with blacktop.
d. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire section or
sections of curb or curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced. The breaking and
recapping of curbing is specifically prohibited.
a. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters in a major
subdivision where the work is covered by performance guarantees required by the
Planning Board.
b. The repair or replacement of less than eight lineal feet of an existing sidewalk.
§ 14-2.3 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-3.1
14:7
size, utilized on nonresidential property, constructed of metal or approved materials, for
the collection of garbage, litter, refuse, or rubbish stored on premises and dumped or
collected by mechanical or manual means. All dumpsters used in the Borough shall have
a tight-fitting cover.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Borough of Moonachie or other public body, and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans, garbage pails, and
plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by
separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow
removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 14-3.2. Preparation for Collection and Dumpsters. [Ord. #86-2, § 2]
§ 14-3.3. Maintenance of Dumpsters. [Ord. #86-2, § 3]
No owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant of any privately owned building where a
dumpster is in use shall:
a. All garbage, litter, refuse and rubbish placed in dumpsters shall be thoroughly
drained of all water and wrapped securely.
b. No dumpster shall be filled to the extent that the cover cannot be securely closed.
a. Permit the dumpster at any time to become offensive, through odor, appearance or
for any reason.
b. Permit the accumulation of garbage, litter, refuse or rubbish outside the confines of
the dumpster.
c. Maintain a dumpster without a cover tightly secured on the dumpster, excepting
when the dumpster is being filled with or emptied of garbage, litter, refuse and/or
rubbish.
The owner of any dumpster located in the Borough shall print or cause to be printed
on the dumpster, in visible letters at least three inches high, the name of the owner
of the dumpster.
§ 14-3.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-3.4
14:8
§ 14-3.4. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2011-12]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall
prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or dumpster must
ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids,
semi- liquids or solids to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of Moonachie.
§ 14-3.5. Exception for Prohibition. [Ord. #2011-12]
§ 14-3.6. Enforcement. [Ord. #2011-11; Ord. #2011-12]
This section shall enforced by the Policy Department and/or designee of the Stormwater
Management Coordinator of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 14-3.7. Penalties. [Ord. #2011-11; Ord. #2011-12]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 14-4. RECYCLING AND SOLID WASTE.29
§ 14-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.1]
COMMINGLED — Shall mean a combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those materials
designated within the Bergen County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling.
These materials include:
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpster or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater under a valid
NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white goods placed
curbside for pickup).
Electronic waste shall mean a computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax machines; a
cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display or similar video
display device with a screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally
(a)
29. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 87-20, 90-08, 93-17, 95-1 and 96-1.
§ 14-3.4 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-4.1
14:9
Furthermore, all materials collected by the County at special recycling days (electronic
recycling, tires, batteries, used motor oils, insecticides and pesticides, et al.) must be
recycled.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or rented or leased,
or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E99.13a) and
shall include hotels, motels, or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests
as those terms are defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C.55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or persons
appointed by the Municipal Governing Body or his or her designee who shall be
authorized to, among other things; enforce the provisions of this section, and any rules
and regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) — Shall mean all solid waste generated at
residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the boundaries of the
municipality of Moonachie.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed and returned
to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid waste for the
purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from
solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
and that contains one or more circuit boards, including a television, and cell phones;
Residential Commercial
Newspaper Corrugated cardboard
Glass beverage containers High-grade office paper
Aluminum cans Glass beverage containers
Ferrous scrap Ferrous scrap
Leaves White goods
White goods; metal Aluminum cans
Tin cans Mixed paper (including magazines and
newspaper)
Grass Construction and demolition debris
Construction and demolition debris Type 1 and Type 2 plastic containers
Corrugated cardboard
Mixed paper
Type 1 and Type 2 plastic containers
(b)
§ 14-4.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-4.2
14:10
§ 14-4.2. Recycling Coordinator. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.2]
§ 14-4.3. Source Separation; Exemption from Source Separation Requirements.
[Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.3]
a. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created.
b. The Recycling Coordinator shall serve for one calendar year and until the next
Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed.
c. The present Recycling Coordinator shall serve for the remainder of the calendar
year in which this section becomes effective.
d. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint the Recycling
Coordinator.
e. The Recycling Coordinator shall administer the recycling program of the Borough
of Moonachie.
f. The salary of the Recycling Coordinator shall be determined by the Mayor and
Council.
a. Mandatory Source Separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential premises, which shall include
but not be limited to retail and other commercial locations, as well as government,
schools and other institutional locations within the Municipality of Moonachie, to
separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable
materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other solid waste generated by
the owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises and shall be placed separately at
the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter established
by regulations promulgated by the Recycling Department of the Borough of
Moonachie.
b. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the Governing Body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional premises
within its municipal boundaries from the source separation requirements of the
ordinance which requires persons generating municipal solid waste within its
municipal boundaries to source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the
specified recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this Chapter, a commercial or institutional generator of solid waste shall
file an application for exemption with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator on
forms to be provided for this purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the
following information:
The name of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and
lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of the person
making application on behalf of the commercial or institutional entity; the name,
address, official contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides
the service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a certification
that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled, and that, at least on an
annual basis, said recycling service provider or commercial/institutional generator
§ 14-4.2 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-4.3
14:11
§ 14-4.4. Collection of Recyclable Materials and Solid Waste Materials. [Ord.
#2009-12, § 14-4.4]
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as follows:
§ 14-4.5. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirements. [Ord. #2009-12,
§ 14-4.5]
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this section. For
multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible for setting up and
maintaining the recycling system, including collection of recyclable materials, in
accordance with guidelines or regulations established by the appropriate municipal
office. Violations and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or management, in
those instances where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every six months
during their occupancy.
§ 14-4.6. Nonresidential Establishment Compliance Requirements. [Ord.
#2009-12, § 14-4.6]
shall provide written documentation to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the
total number of tons collected and recycled for each designated material.
a. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials shall be
placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of
curb and sidewalk, as near to the street (but not in the street) as not to constitute a
danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without
providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the premises shall
keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items
to be disposed of shall be placed as noted above any time after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day
of collection. After collection, any containers shall be removed from the curbside
by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
b. All containers containing solid waste materials shall be placed, prior to collection,
between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near
to the street (but not in the street) as not to constitute a danger, where such
receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without providing obstruction
to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles
clean and in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above any time after 5:00 p.m. of the day immediately
preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day of collection.
After collection, any containers shall be removed from the curbside by no later than
7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
c. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with the Health
Code of the Municipality of Moonachie. All containers shall be kept in a clean and
safe manner and must be covered at all times.
a. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this section.
§ 14-4.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-4.6
14:12
§ 14-4.7. New Developments of Multifamily Residential Units or Commercial,
Institutional, or Industrial Properties (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and
99.16c.). [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.7]
§ 14-4.8. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with Recyclable
Materials. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.8]
b. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder shall be the
responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial property owner or their
designee, unless the municipality provides for the collection of designated
recyclable materials. All commercial, institutional or industrial properties which
provide outdoor litter receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also
provide receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide for
separate recycling service for their contents.
c. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an annual basis to
the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be prescribed, on recycling
activities at their premises, including the amount of recycled material, by material
type, collected and recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
d. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in addition to
compliance with all other recycling requirements, be required to recycle grease and/
or cooking oil created in the processing of food or food products, and maintain such
records as may be prescribed, for inspection by any Code Enforcement Officer.
a. Any application to the planning board of the Municipality of Moonachie, for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of
three or more units, single-family developments of 50 or more units or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain,
at a minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of solid waste
and recyclables generated at the proposed development and
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide for
convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and occupants. The
recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient location and contain other
attributes (signage, lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
b. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Municipality of
Moonachie, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional,
or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract with a
hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of source-separated
recyclable materials, in those instances where the municipality does not otherwise
provide this service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and pickup of
solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 14-4.6 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-4.8
14:13
§ 14-4.9. Enforcement. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.9]
The Code Enforcement Official, the Board of Health, the Recycling Coordinator, the
Property Maintenance Official, the Recycling Enforcement Officer, and the Bergen
County Department of Health are hereby individually and severally empowered to
enforce the provisions of this section. An inspection may consist of sorting through
containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of
any recyclable material.
§ 14-4.10. Schedule of Costs and Fees. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.10]
§ 14-4.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.11]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this section or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that is mixed
with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful
for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers of solid
waste which visibly display a warning notice sticker or some other device
indicating that the load of solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly segregate the
uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling. Allowing such unseparated
solid waste and recyclables to accumulate will be considered a violation of this
section and the local sanitary code.
c. Once placed in the location identified by this section, or any rules or regulations
promulgated pursuant to this section, no person, other than those authorized by the
municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle designated
recyclable materials.
a. Disposal of refrigerators and air conditions shall require the payment to the
Borough Clerk of a disposal fee, which may be set from time to time by resolution
of the Mayor and Council. Disposal of other recyclable materials that require a
payment to the Borough Clerk of a disposal fee, which may be set from time to time
by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
b. Compostable paper bags for grass and leaf disposal can be purchased, if available,
by Borough residents at the Borough Hall, at a cost which may be set from time to
time by resolution of the Mayor and Council, which may limit the number of said
bags which can be purchased by each resident household.
c. Recycling containers can be purchased, if available, by the Borough residents at the
Borough Hall, at a cost which may be set from time to time by resolution of the
Mayor and Council, which may limit the number of said containers which can be
purchased by each resident household.
d. Replacement lids can be purchased, if available, by Borough residents, at the
Borough Hall, at a cost which may be set from time to time by resolution of the
Mayor and Council, which may limit the number of said lids which can be
purchased by each resident household.
§ 14-4.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-4.11
14:14
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000. Each day for which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be immediately
deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or equivalent). Monies in the
Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for the expenses of the municipal
recycling program.
§ 14-4.12. Severability, Effective Date. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-4.12]
§ 14-5. CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
RECOVERY.
§ 14-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.1]
COVERED PROJECT — Shall mean a construction, renovation, or demolition project
for which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which a dumpster
or roll-off container shall be placed on premises for the purpose of placement of solid
waste materials.
§ 14-5.2. Construction, Renovation and Demolition Debris Recovery Plan —
Contents. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.1]
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator prior
to the commencement of any activity for which municipal approval as further identified
above. The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and estimated quantities of
construction and demolition debris to be generated from the project, how each material
will be managed, and the name of each facility or service provider that the entity will use
to manage each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall ensure that
a minimum of 50% of the materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.
§ 14-5.3. Review of Debris Recovery Plan. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.2]
a. In the event that it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, that any
provision or section of this section is unconstitutional, all other sections and
provisions shall remain in effect. This section shall take effect immediately, unless
otherwise provided by resolution of the Governing Body.
a. Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator, and approved if it provides for all of the information required by this
section. An approved debris recovery plan shall be marked "Approved" and
returned to the owner of the entity which submitted the plan.
b. Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not provide all of the
information required by this section. If a debris recovery plan is not approved, the
owner of the entity which submitted the plan shall be notified in writing that the
plan has been rejected, including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the
building or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity which will carry out
the construction, renovation, or demolition project shall make the required changes
and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 14-4.11 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-5.4
14:15
§ 14-5.4. Diversion Requirement Adjustment. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.3]
§ 14-5.5. Debris Recovery Plan Reporting Requirements. [Ord. #2009-12,
§ 14-5.4]
§ 14-5.6. Compliance with Diversion Requirement. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.5]
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information submitted pursuant
to this section and determine whether the owner of the entity carrying out the covered
project has complied, or failed to comply with the diversion requirement. The
a. Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project experiences
circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement
cited in this section, the owner of the entity may apply for an adjustment. The owner
shall indicate in writing why it is infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being
generated from the covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could
be achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered
project will not be an acceptable justification for an adjustment.
b. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
supplied by the owner. If warranted the Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall
attempt to contact the owner to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion
requirement.
c. Granting of an Adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator determines that
it is feasible for the entity carrying out a covered project to divert 50% of the
generated C&D debris from the covered project, the percent of diversion required
shall be adjusted. The owner shall be notified in writing of the adjusted diversion
requirement. The owner of the entity carrying out the covered project shall be
required to divert the percent of C&D debris required by the adjustment.
d. Denial of Adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator determines that it is
feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project to meet the
diversion requirement cited in this section, the owner shall be notified in writing of
the denial of the diversion requirement adjustment.
a. Documentation. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the final
inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project shall submit in
person or by certified mail to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the
documentation required to demonstrate that the applicant has met the diversion
requirement. The required documentation shall include the following:
1. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity carrying
out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material generated during
the covered project diverted or disposed,
2. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and dispose
materials generated during the covered project, and
3. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 14-5.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 14-5.6
14:16
determination regarding compliance will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying
out the covered project in writing.
§ 14-5.7. Appeal. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.6]
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a determination of
failure to comply under this section to the municipality within 30 days of the decision or
determination. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state the facts and basis for the
appeal. A decision by the (department where appeal is to be filed) shall be final.
§ 14-5.8. Enforcement. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.7]
The Code Enforcement Official, the Police Department, the Board of Health, the
Recycling Coordinator, and the Property Maintenance Official, are hereby individually
and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this section. The respective
enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning stickers for a first offense.
An inspection may consist of dumping and opening of solid waste bags of containers to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 14-5.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.8]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this section or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not less than $250 nor more than
$1,000.
§ 14-5.10. Severability; Effective Date. [Ord. #2009-12, § 14-5.9]
If it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, that any provision or section of
this section is unconstitutional, all other sections and provisions shall remain in effect.
This section shall take effect immediately.
§ 14-5.6 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION § 14-5.10
14:17

Chapter 15
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
Editor's Note: The power to regulate soil removal is included within the general
police power granted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
§ 15-1. FINDINGS. [Ord. #120; 1970 Code § 14-1; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-1]
The Borough Council finds that the land in the Borough has a low water table; and the
removal of top soil, earth and other soil results in continued dampness in the ground
and in the formation of areas of stagnant water; and such areas are conductive to insect
breeding and other unhealthy and unsanitary conditions detrimental to the general health,
safety and welfare of the people.
§ 15-2. DEFINITIONS. [1970 Code § 14-2; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-2]
As used in this Chapter:
CLEAN FILL — Shall mean soil free of any man-made objects such as cement,
concrete, asphalt, metal of any kind, plastic chemical contamination, etc.
REDISTRIBUTION—Shall mean any change or alteration in the grade of any property.
SOIL — Shall mean earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without regard
to the presence or absence of organic matter.
SOIL IMPORT — Shall mean the importation from any site in or out of the Borough of
Moonachie of soil.
SOIL TEST — Shall mean a written certification by a recognized professional soil
testing laboratory.
§ 15-3. PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. #120, § 1; 1970 Code § 14-3; Ord. #2004-6,
§ 15-3]
No person shall excavate or import any soil or change or alter the grade of any property
within the Borough of Moonachie that involves 25 or more cubic yards of fill without
having first obtained approval by the Borough Engineer and a soil permit issued from
the Construction Department. The following situations are exempt from soil permits:
§ 15-4. APPLICATIONS. [1970 Code § 14-4; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-4]
All soil importation, redistribution and/or excavation shall be first reviewed by the
Construction Department of the Borough of Moonachie. If in the opinion of the
a. The excavation of soil during the normal course of construction for footings and
foundation on additions and new structures. When this soil is used as backfill
against the new foundation wall and when in the opinion of the Construction
Official there is no substantial change in grade topography of the premises from the
unused portion of excavated soil.
b. The importation from off site and subsequent redistribution of soil of less than 25
cubic yards on any single lot or site within the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 14-5.10 SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL § 15-4
15:1
Construction Official an application must be reviewed by the Borough Engineer, the
applicant shall submit an application (as provided by the Construction Official's Office)
for soil movement and shall be regulated by the following:
a. Two sets of signed and sealed New Jersey as-built drawings by a New Jersey
licensed engineer showing the existing and new topography elevations on the lot or
site. Proper contour lines with invert elevations shall be indicated as well as the area
for temporary storage of all soil and soil silt fencing.
b. A completed soil review application and as-built drawings with appropriate fees
shall be submitted.
c. The proposed dates of excavation, soil importation and/or redistribution shall be
provided.
d. Certification that any soil imported to the lot or site shall be free of any man-made
materials, contaminates, etc.
e. The truck route for all soil importation deliveries. This information shall also
include the time of day the soil will be imported through the Borough of
Moonachie. This information shall be reviewed by the Moonachie Police
Department prior to any soil permit being issued for approved delivery/export route
through the Borough of Moonachie.
f. All additional information that the Borough Engineer may require to perform a
proper review of the application and drawings. The Borough Engineer shall, in the
process of the review, insure that the following has been considered: soil erosion by
wind and water, flood zone requirements, drainage, slope and grades of abutting
streets, the general welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Moonachie and the
State Land Use Act.
g. To insure that any and all road, sidewalk or curb damage created by the soil
importation or redistribution operation or delivery is properly repaired or replaced,
a bond or cashier's check in the amount of $250 to $5,000 shall be submitted to the
Borough Clerk. This bond is to be held until the Borough Engineer has conducted
an inspection of the site, roads, sidewalks and curbs at the completion of the project.
The Borough Engineer shall then issue a written release of the bond or portion
thereof to the Borough Clerk.
h. A permit fee in the amount of $0.10 per cubic yard (minimum fee shall be $150) to
be imported and/or redistributed on each separate lot, site or shall be submitted to
the Construction Department upon approval for the permit by the Borough
Engineer. In addition an escrow amount for Engineer field inspections shall be
deposited with the Borough Clerk in the amount of $250 per inspection required or
a fee designated by the Borough Engineer to cover all inspections and reviews. The
number of field inspections shall be determined by the Borough Engineer at the
time of application.
i. Notification to all property owners within 200 feet of lot or site to have soil
movement. The notification may be done by certified mail on the notification form
provided in the application package.
§ 15-4 MOONACHIE CODE § 15-4
15:2
§ 15-5. CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION. [1970 Code § 14-5; Ord.
#2004-6, § 15-5]
In considering the application, the Construction Official shall be guided by the following
factors:
§ 15-6. APPEAL. [1970 Code § 14-6; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-6]
If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Construction
Official to the Borough Council by filing a notice in writing to that effect with the
Borough Clerk within 10 days after receiving notice of the decision of the Construction
Official. The Council shall set a time and place for a hearing and shall so notify the
applicant. The decision of the Council rendered after a hearing shall be final.
§ 15-7. LAWN SOD. [Ord. #120, §§ 1, 2; 1970 Code § 14-7; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-7]
The removal of lawn sod shall be permitted on the condition that the owner or lessee
of the land from which the lawn sod is removed shall replace any soil which has been
removed with the sod within two months.
§ 15-8. BOND REQUIREMENTS. [1970 Code § 14-8; New; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-8]
Before a permit is issued the applicant shall file with the Borough Clerk a bond executed
by the applicant as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey as surety. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Construction
Official, but in no event shall be less than $1,000, and shall be conditioned as follows:
j. No Certificate of Occupancy or approval will be issued on any project involving the
movement of soil until the Borough Engineer conducts a final inspection on the site
and issues a written release to the Construction Department.
a. Soil erosion by water and wind.
b. Drainage.
c. Soil fertility.
d. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
e. Land values and uses.
Any other factor which is relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
development of the Borough.
If, after considering the above factors, the Construction Official determines that
the proposed removal or redistribution of soil will not be detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the Borough or its inhabitants, he shall issue the necessary
permit. Otherwise, he shall deny the application and so notify the applicant. Notice
of the grant or denial of the application shall be given to the applicant within a
reasonable time after the application is filed.
a. That the permittee will complete the work authorized by the permit in conformity
with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this section on or before the date
§ 15-4 SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL § 15-8
15:3
§ 15-9. REGULATIONS. [1970 Code § 14-9; Ord. #2004-6, § 15-9]
Soil removal or redistribution conducted under a permit issued under this section shall
be in accordance with the following regulations:
of completion set forth in the application.
b. That the applicant will repair any public street, structure or land which may be
damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
a. Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or
depressions.
b. Lands shall be graded so as to conform to the approved contour lines and grades
and shall be cleared of debris.
c. The top layer of soil to a depth of six inches shall not be removed from the premises,
but shall be set aside and respread over the premises when the remainder of the soil
has been removed.
d. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or the depositing of soil upon
surrounding lands, streets or municipal facilities.
§ 15-8 MOONACHIE CODE § 15-9
15:4
Chapter 16
TREES AND SHRUBS
Editor's Note: The power to regulate the planting and protection of shade trees is
contained in N.J.S.A. 40:88-4.
§ 16-1. PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTS. [Ord. #262, § 1; 1970 Code
§ 15-1]
No person shall do or cause to be done, any of the following acts affecting the trees,
shrubbery, or ornamental material planted or growing naturally within the highways or
public places under the jurisdiction of the Borough, except with a written permit first
obtained from the Department of Public Works.
§ 16-2. WIRE, CABLE, ELECTRIC CURRENT. [Ord. #262, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 15-2]
Every person having control over any wire for the transmission of an electric current
along a public highway shall at all times guard all trees through which or near which
such wire passes, against any injury from the wire or cable or from the electric current
carried by it. The device or means used shall in every case be subject to approval by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 16-3. GUY WIRES, BRACES PROHIBITED. [Ord. #262, § 2; 1970 Code
§ 15-3]
No person shall place any guy wire, brace or other device on any tree in such a manner
as to injure it.
§ 16-4. INJURY BY ANIMALS. [Ord. #262, § 3; 1970 Code § 15-4]
No person shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub upon a public highway or
to any guard or support provided for the same, or permit an animal to bite or otherwise
a. Cut, trim, break, disturb the roots of, or spray with chemicals any living tree or
shrub; or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed to support or
protect any tree or shrub.
b. Plant, or remove any living tree or shrub, or climb with spikes any living tree or
shrub.
c. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachments, sign, or other device to a tree or shrub,
or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
d. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or shrub to
permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such tree or shrub.
e. Pile any building material, or make any mortar or cement within six feet of a tree or
shrub.
f. Change the grade of the soil within the limits of the lateral spread of the branches
of any such tree.
§ 15-9 TREES AND SHRUBS § 16-4
16:1
injure any tree or shrub.
§ 16-5. CHEMICAL DAMAGE. [Ord. #262, § 4; 1970 Code § 15-5]
No person shall permit any brine, gas or injurious chemical or liquid to come in contact
with the stump or roots of any tree or shrub upon a public highway.
§ 16-6. INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. [Ord.
#262, § 5; 1970 Code § 15-6]
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken by the
Department of Public Works or its authorized agent.
§ 16-7. DANGEROUS TREES AND SHRUBS. [Ord. #262, § 6; 1970 Code § 15-7]
In case any tree or shrub, or any part thereof, along the public highway shall become
dangerous to public safety, the owner of the property in front of which the tree or shrub
is located, shall remove the same, or the required part thereof, forthwith on receipt of
written notice to that effect from the Department of Public Works.
§ 16-8. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #262, § 8; 1970 Code § 15-8; Ord. #90-4]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the General Penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this Code.
If any person shall continue to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, after being
duly notified of such violation, or shall neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful
order of the Department of Public Works, the failure to comply with a second or each
of any subsequent notifications or orders, shall be construed as an additional violation
of this Chapter, and each such additional offense shall subject the offending party on
conviction, to the same penalty as provided for the first offense.
§ 16-4 MOONACHIE CODE § 16-8
16:2
Chapter 17
CABLE TELEVISION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1970 Code §§ 18-1 —
18-24 and Ordinance Nos. 79-12, 94-19 and 2007-11.
§ 17-1. PURPOSE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The Borough of Moonachie ("Borough") hereby grants to Spectrum New Jersey, LLC
("company") its nonexclusive consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the
Borough poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Borough of a cable television
system and cable communications system.
§ 17-2. DEFINITIONS. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or definition of terms is
supplemental to those definitions given under federal law, including, but not limited to,
those of the Federal Communications Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations, 47 CFR
76.1 et seq., and the Communication Act of 1934 at 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended
and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed
to broaden, alter, or conflict with federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of NJ, and
subsequent amendment thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Moonachie, County of Bergen, State of NJ.
COMPANY — Spectrum New Jersey, LLC, an indirect subsidiary of Charter
Communications, Inc., the grantee of rights under this chapter.
§ 17-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company was held after
proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act. Said hearing having
been held and fully open to the public, and the Borough having received all comments
regarding the qualification of the company to receive this consent, the Borough hereby
finds the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and
other qualifications and that the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ 17-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date of expiration of the
certificate of approval issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 17-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act, the company shall,
during each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the Borough 3.5%
§ 16-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 17-5
17:1
of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid
by subscribers for its cable television reception service in the Borough.
§ 17-6. TERRITORY. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the Borough and
any property hereafter annexed by the Borough by law.
§ 17-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public right-of-way to any
person's residence or business located in those areas of the franchise territory described
herein, in accordance with the proposal for the provision of services as described in the
company's application for municipal consent. Any additional extension of the system
will be made in accordance with the company's line extension policy.
§ 17-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 17-8.1. Restoration. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement, street, surfaces,
sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in the natural topography, the company shall,
at its sole expense, restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
§ 17-8.2. Relocation. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
If at any time during the period of this consent, the Borough shall alter or change the
grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice
by the Borough, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company.
§ 17-8.3. Temporary Removal of Cables. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its facilities to
allow for the moving of buildings, and machinery, or in other similar circumstances. The
expense shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except when requested by the
Borough, in which case the company shall bear the cost.
§ 17-8.4. Removal or Trimming of Trees. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the company shall
have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public places of the Borough so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the
extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the company's facilities.
§ 17-9. LOCAL OFFICE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company shall maintain a
local business office (or agent) for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving
§ 17-5 MOONACHIE CODE § 17-9
17:2
all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. Such local business office shall be open during normal business hours, and in
no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 17-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No.
2021-6]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
Borough, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b) and amendments thereto. All complaints
shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5 and amendments
thereto.
§ 17-11. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
During the franchise, the company shall provide a surety bond to the Borough, which
bond shall be in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its application of
municipal consent.
§ 17-12. RATES. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as appropriate in accordance with
federal and state laws.
§ 17-13. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect, at its sole expense
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance naming the
Borough as an insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death
per occurrence, and $500,000 for property damage per occurrence.
§ 17-14. EMERGENCY USES. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The company shall be required to abide by applicable federal requirements regarding
the Emergency Alert System (EAS). The company shall in no way be held liable for
any injury suffered by the Borough or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the Borough is unable to make full use of the system as contemplated herein.
§ 17-15. FORCE MAJEURE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the company shall not be liable for
any delay in the performance of, or failure to perform, in whole or in part, its obligations
pursuant to this chapter due to strike, unavailability of materials or equipment, war or
act of war (whether an actual declaration of war is made or not), insurrection, riot, civil
disturbance, sabotage or vandalism, customer tampering or interference, act of public
enemy, accident, fire, flood or other events, to the extent that such causes or other events
are beyond the control of company.
§ 17-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 17-16
17:3
§ 17-16. SEVERABILITY. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or federal or state agency of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 17-17. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
The company hereby agrees to indemnify and hold the Borough, including its agents and
employees, harmless from any claims or damages resulting from the negligent actions of
the company in constructing, operating or maintaining the cable system. The Borough
agrees to give the company written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Borough
within 10 days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the company shall not be obligated to indemnify the Borough for any
damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the
Borough or for the Borough's use of the cable system.
§ 17-18. INCORPORTATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Added 8-25-2021 by
Ord. No. 2021-6]
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted, in writing, to the Borough by the company, except as modified herein,
are binding upon the company as terms and conditions of this consent. The application
and any other relevant writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and
made a part hereof by reference as long as they do not conflict with state or federal law.
§ 17-19. COMPLIMENTARY CABLE SERVICE. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No.
2021-6]
Subject to applicable law, the company shall provide, without charge, standard
installation and one outlet and equipment of basic cable service to the locations
identified below. The basic cable service provided pursuant to this section shall not be
used for commercial purposes. The Borough shall take reasonable precautions to prevent
any inappropriate use or loss or damage to the company's cable system.
Moonachie Police Department
70 Moonachie Road
Moonachie, NJ 07074
§ 17-20. SUBJECT TO LAW. [Added 8-25-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-6]
This consent shall be subject to applicable state and federal laws.
§ 17-16 MOONACHIE CODE § 17-20
17:4
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
§ 17-20 (RESERVED) § 17-20
18:1

Chapter 19
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 82-6,
87-8, 91-1, 95-13 and prior 1970 Code §§ 20-1 — 20-5.
§ 19-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE,
OBJECTIVES.
§ 19-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. #95-16, § 1.0]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated
the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Moonachie, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, does
ordain as follows.
§ 19-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. #95-16, § 1.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
§ 19-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. #95-16, § 1.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare,
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas, by
provisions designed to:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Moonachie are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of
special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when
inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately
floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to
the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges, located in areas of special
flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
§ 17-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-1.3
19:1
§ 19-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. #95-16, § 1.0; 8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #95-16, § 2.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow flooding
(usually areas of ponding), where average depths are between one and three feet. Base
flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow flooding
(usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), where average depths are between one and three
feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official/Zoning Officer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING—A designated AO or AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map, with a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average
depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard; and
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or
in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase
flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
§ 19-1.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-2
19:2
given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)—The flood elevation shown on a published Flood
Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). For Zones AE,
AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents the water surface elevation resulting from
a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
For Zones VE and V1-30, the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT—Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA—The most-recent available flood risk
guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may be depicted on,
but not limited to, Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps, Work Maps or Preliminary FIS
and FIRM.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — The most-recent
available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data
elevation may be depicted on an Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map, Work Map or
Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under specific
lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION—A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the
top of the elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
1.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
2.
a.
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
b.
§ 19-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-2
19:3
the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Insurance
Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as
a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above a flood level,
for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated
for a selected size flood conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE—The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed or existing walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
d.
§ 19-2 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-2
19:4
LOWEST FLOOR—The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION —
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by a community, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (PRE-FIRM)—The draft version
of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and adoption.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
1.
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
a. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections;
b.
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
d.
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal
Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
a.
§ 19-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-2
19:5
STRUCTURE—A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 19-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. #95-16, § 3.0; ]8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Moonachie, County of Bergen, New Jersey.
§ 19-3.2. Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard. [Ord. #95-16,
§ 3.0; Ord. #2005-7; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
b.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure."
b.
§ 19-2 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-3.2
19:6
§ 19-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. #95-16, § 3.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended, converted,
or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Construction Official of the Borough
of Moonachie from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 19-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. #95-16, § 3.0; 8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the morestringent
restrictions shall prevail.
§ 19-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. #95-16, § 3.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Moonachie, Community No.
340053, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, County of Bergen,
New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated September 30, 2005.
2. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions),
as shown on Index 34003CINDOB and Panels 34003C0256H and
34003C0258H, whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
3. Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take precedence over
effective panels and FIS in construction and development regulations only.
Where the effective mapping or base flood elevation conflict or overlap with
the best available flood hazard data, whichever imposes the more-stringent
requirement shall prevail.
b. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at Borough of Moonachie, 70
Moonachie Road, Moonachie, New Jersey.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
§ 19-3.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-3.5
19:7
§ 19-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. #95-16, § 3.0; 8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
§ 19-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 19-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. #95-16, § 4.0; 8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins,
including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard
established in Subsection 19-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the Borough Construction Official and may include, but not be
limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage
of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the
following information is required:
§ 19-4.2. Designation of Local Administrator. [Ord. #95-16, § 4.0; 8-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-3]
The Borough Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
§ 19-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of Borough Construction Official. [Ord.
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
a. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the
area of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
b. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Moonachie, any
officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
a. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all structures;
b. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria in Subsection 19-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development.
§ 19-3.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-4.3
19:8
#95-16, § 4.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
Duties of the Borough Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit review:
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required.
b. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided
in accordance with Subsection 19-3.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of Special
Flood Hazard, the Borough Construction Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer Subsection 19-5.2a, Specific Standards,
Residential construction, and Subsection 19-5.2b, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential construction.
c. Information to be obtained and maintained:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Subsection 19-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter.
d. Alteration of watercourses:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control, and the Land Use
Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
e. Substantial damage review:
1. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to structures
due to flood and nonflood causes.
2. Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial damage
structures and provide a letter of substantial damage determination to the
owner and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau
of Flood Control.
§ 19-4.3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-4.3
19:9
§ 19-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. #95-16, § 4.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
3. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of Subsections
19-5.2a, Specific Standards, Residential construction, 19-5.2b, Specific
Standards, Nonresidential construction, and 19-5.2c, Specific Standards,
Manufactured homes.
f. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Subsection
19-4.4.
a. Appeal board.
1. The Planning Board (Joint Land Use Board) as established by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Moonachie shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning Board (Joint Land Use Board) shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Borough Construction Official/Zoning Official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board (Joint Land Use
Board), or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board (Joint Land Use Board),
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program of that area;
§ 19-4.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-4.4
19:10
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection 19-4.4a4 and the purposes of
this chapter, the Planning Board (Joint Land use Board) may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
6. The Borough Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that the items in Subsection a4(a) through (k) have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures
upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in Subsection 19-4.4a4, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
5. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that
§ 19-4.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-4.4
19:11
§ 19-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 19-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. #95-16, § 5.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the following standards, whichever is
more restrictive, is required:
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction materials and methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding; and
4. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
§ 19-4.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-5.1
19:12
§ 19-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. #95-16, § 5.0; 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as
set forth in Subsection 19-3.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or
in Subsection 19-4.3b, Use of other base flood data, the following standards are required:
2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development which contains at least 50 lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
e. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial improvements having
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of each enclosed area,
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
together with the attendant utilities (including all electrical, heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment) and sanitary
facilities, elevated at or above the more-restrictive: base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard data
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
2. Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the attendant utilities
and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard data
elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive, and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
b. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction
§ 19-5.1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-5.2
19:13
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, as well as all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment, either:
1. Elevated at or above the more-restrictive: base flood elevation (published FIS/
FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one
foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
2. Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM to elevate
above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot, above the highest
adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is specified) or at or
above the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever
is more restrictive, and require adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
3. Be floodproofed so that below the more-restrictive: base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard data
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Subsection
19-4.3c2(b).
c. Manufactured homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Subsection
19-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area
of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest
floor is at or above the more-restrictive: base flood elevation (published
FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard data elevation
plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
§ 19-5.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-5.2
19:14
§ 19-5.3. Encroachments. [Ord. #95-16, § 5.0]
The cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than 0.2 foot any point.
§ 19-5.4. Severability. [Added 8-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-3]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be
declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of the chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose,
the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 19-6. STORMWATER CONTROL.
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2021-4 repealed former § 19-6, Stormwater Control. Prior
history includes Ord. Nos. 2006-1 and 2007-8
§ 19-6.1. Scope and Purpose. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
a. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction
shall be achieved through the use of stormwater management measures, including
green infrastructure Best Management Practices (GI BMPs) and nonstructural
stormwater management strategies. GI BMPs and low-impact development (LID)
should be utilized to meet the goal of maintaining natural hydrology to reduce
stormwater runoff volume, reduce erosion, encourage infiltration and groundwater
recharge, and reduce pollution. GI BMPs and LID should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated quantity, or
amount, of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water quality,
quantity, and groundwater recharge.
b. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for major development, as defined below in
§ 19-6.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to the following major developments:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted by the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by
the Borough of Moonachie.
d. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. Development
approvals issued pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
§ 19-5.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.1
19:15
§ 19-6.2. Definitions. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas with boundaries incorporated
by reference or revised by the Department in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.16.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The map used by the Department to identify the location
of Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA centers, CAFRA cores, and CAFRA nodes. The
CAFRA Planning Map is available on the Department's Geographic Information System
(GIS).
COMMUNITY BASIN — An infiltration system, sand filter designed to infiltrate,
standard constructed wetland, or wet pond, established in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-4.2(c)14, that is designed and constructed in accordance with the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, or an alternate design, approved in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(g), for an infiltration system, sand filter designed
to infiltrate, standard constructed wetland, or wet pond and that complies with the
requirements of this section.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CONTRIBUTORY DRAINAGE AREA — The area from which stormwater runoff
drains to a stormwater management measure, not including the area of the stormwater
management measure itself.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the
surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board of
Commissioners to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing
ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
development approvals and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable
code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute,
or other provision of law except that, where any provision of this section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall
control.
a. A county planning agency; or
§ 19-6.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.2
19:16
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as
designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in
the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
In the case of development of agricultural land, development means any activity that
requires a state permit, any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB)
and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of
any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DISTURBANCE — The placement or reconstruction of impervious surface or motor
vehicle surface, or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation. Milling and repaving is not considered disturbance for the
purposes of this definition.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a particular point
along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOODS — Neighborhoods designated by the Urban
Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSTRAINED AREA — The following areas where the
physical alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through regulation,
easement, deed restriction or ownership, such as wetlands, floodplains, threatened and
endangered species sites or designated habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of
endangered or threatened species are identified using the Department's Landscape
Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including, but not limited to, stream corridors, natural
heritage priority sites, habitats of endangered or threatened species, large areas of
contiguous open space or upland forest, steep slopes, and wellhead protection and
groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified
using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered
and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind,
ice, or gravity.
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
b.
§ 19-6.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.2
19:17
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — A stormwater management measure that manages
stormwater close to its source by:
HUC 14 or HYDROLOGIC UNIT CODE 14 — An area within which water drains
to a particular receiving surface water body, also known as a "subwatershed," which is
identified by a fourteen-digit hydrologic unit boundary designation, delineated within
New Jersey by the United States Geological Survey.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of material
so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation.
LEAD PLANNING AGENCY — One or more public entities having stormwater
management planning authority designated by the regional stormwater management
planning committee pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-3.2, that serves as the primary
representative of the committee.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT —
MOTOR VEHICLE — Land vehicles propelled other than by muscular power, such
as automobiles, motorcycles, autocycles, and low-speed vehicles. For the purposes of
this definition, motor vehicle does not include farm equipment, snowmobiles, all-terrain
vehicles, motorized wheelchairs, go-carts, gas buggies, golf carts, ski-slope grooming
machines, or vehicles that run only on rails or tracks.
MOTOR VEHICLE SURFACE — Any pervious or impervious surface that is intended
to be used by motor vehicles and/or aircraft, and is directly exposed to precipitation,
a. Treating stormwater runoff through infiltration into subsoil;
b. Treating stormwater runoff through filtration by vegetation or soil; or
c. Storing stormwater runoff for reuse.
An individual development, as well as multiple developments that individually or
collectively result in:
1. The disturbance of one or more acres of land since February 2, 2004;
The creation of 1/4 acre or more of regulated impervious surface since
February 2, 2004;
2.
The creation of 1/4 acre or more of regulated motor vehicle surface since
March 2, 2021; or
3.
A combination of Subsection a2 and 3 above that totals an area of 1/4 acre or
more. The same surface shall not be counted twice when determining if the
combination area equals 1/4 acre or more.
4.
a.
Major development includes all developments that are part of a common plan of
development or sale (for example, phased residential development) that collectively
or individually meet any one or more of Subsection a1, 2, 3, or 4 above. Projects
undertaken by any government agency that otherwise meet the definition of "major
development" but which do not require approval under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., are also considered major development.
b.
§ 19-6.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.2
19:18
including, but not limited to, driveways, parking areas, parking garages, roads,
racetracks, and runways.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP)
MANUAL or BMP MANUAL—The manual maintained by the Department providing,
in part, design specifications, removal rates, calculation methods, and soil testing
procedures approved by the Department as being capable of contributing to the
achievement of the stormwater management standards specified in this section. The
BMP Manual is periodically amended by the Department as necessary to provide design
specifications on additional best management practices and new information on already
included practices reflecting the best available current information regarding the
particular practice and the Department's determination as to the ability of that best
management practice to contribute to compliance with the standards contained in this
section. Alternative stormwater management measures, removal rates, or calculation
methods may be utilized, subject to any limitations specified in this section, provided the
design engineer demonstrates to the municipality, in accordance with § 19-6.4f of this
section and N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(g), that the proposed measure and its design will contribute
to achievement of the design and performance standards established by this section.
NODE—An area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities
and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
political subdivision of this state and any state, interstate or federal agency.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance [except those regulated under
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
REGULATED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any of the following, alone or in
combination:
a. A net increase of impervious surface;
The total area of impervious surface collected by a new stormwater conveyance
system (for the purpose of this definition, a "new stormwater conveyance system"
is a stormwater conveyance system that is constructed where one did not exist
immediately prior to its construction or an existing system for which a new
discharge location is created);
b.
The total area of impervious surface proposed to be newly collected by an existing
stormwater conveyance system; and/or
c.
§ 19-6.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.2
19:19
REGULATED MOTOR VEHICLE SURFACE — Any of the following, alone or in
combination:
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product
of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and
adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of
the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State Development
and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these
goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMP—An excavation or embankment and related
areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management BMP may either
be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration system), retain water in a
permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any practice, technology, process,
program, or other method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater
or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANNING AGENCY — A public body
authorized by legislation to prepare stormwater management plans.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANNING AREA — The geographic area for
which a stormwater management planning agency is authorized to prepare stormwater
management plans, or a specific portion of that area identified in a stormwater
management plan prepared by that agency.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm
sewers, resulting from precipitation.
The total area of impervious surface collected by an existing stormwater
conveyance system where the capacity of that conveyance system is increased.
d.
a. The total area of motor vehicle surface that is currently receiving water;
b. A net increase in motor vehicle surface; and/or
Quality treatment either by vegetation or soil, by an existing stormwater
management measure, or by treatment at a wastewater treatment plant, where the
water quality treatment will be modified or removed.
c.
§ 19-6.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.2
19:20
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area in which the flood elevation
resulting from the two-, ten-, or 100-year storm, as applicable, is governed by tidal
flooding from the Atlantic Ocean. Flooding in a tidal flood hazard area may be
contributed to, or influenced by, stormwater runoff from inland areas, but the depth of
flooding generated by the tidal rise and fall of the Atlantic Ocean is greater than flooding
from any fluvial sources. In some situations, depending upon the extent of the storm
surge from a particular storm event, a flood hazard area may be tidal in the 100-year
storm, but fluvial in more frequent storm events.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD —
A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise
Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of areas:
WATER CONTROL STRUCTURE—A structure within, or adjacent to, a water, which
intentionally or coincidentally alters the hydraulic capacity, the flood elevation resulting
from the two-, ten-, or 100-year storm, flood hazard area limit, and/or floodway limit
of the water. Examples of a water control structure may include a bridge, culvert, dam,
embankment, ford (if above grade), retaining wall, and weir.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 19-6.3. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning Area
(PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
a.
b. Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes;
c. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
d. Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
a. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be designed to
provide erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity control,
and stormwater runoff quality treatment as follows:
1. The minimum standards for erosion control are those established under the
Soil and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing
rules at N.J.A.C. 2:90.
2. The minimum standards for groundwater recharge, stormwater quality, and
§ 19-6.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.3
19:21
§ 19-6.3A. Nonstructural Stormwater Strategies. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No.
2021-4]
stormwater runoff quantity shall be met by incorporating green infrastructure.
b. The standards in this section apply only to new major development and are intended
to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not
apply to new major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
a. Standards for nonstructural management measures are as follows:
1. Buffers. Buffer areas are required along all lot and street lines separating
residential uses from arterial and collector streets, separating a nonresidential
use from either a residential use or residential zoning district line, and along
all street lines where loading and storage areas can be seen from the street. The
buffer area shall use native vegetation, which requires less fertilization and
watering than nonnative species. Buffer areas may be used for stormwater
management by disconnecting impervious surfaces and treating runoff from
these impervious surfaces. Preservation of natural wood tracts and limiting
land disturbance for new construction shall be incorporated where practical.
2. Curbs and gutters. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are encouraged
where practical to allow vegetated swales to be used for stormwater
conveyance and to allow the disconnection of impervious areas where
practical.
3. Drainage systems. An existing ordinance may require that all streets be
provided with inlets and pipes where the same are necessary for proper
drainage. The use of natural vegetated swales in lieu of inlets and pipes are
encouraged where practical.
4. Driveways and accessways. The use of pervious paving materials to minimize
stormwater runoff and promote groundwater recharge should be considered
for driveways and access ways where practical. Consideration should be given
for subsurface soil conditions. The use of crowned driveways is also
encouraged to promote disconnectivity between impervious surfaces and grass
areas to promote groundwater recharge.
5. Natural features. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops, and
views, are to be preserved whenever possible, and that care be taken to
preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and landscaped treatment of
the area. In addition, forested areas shall be maintained to ensure that leaf litter
and other beneficial aspects of the forest are maintained in addition to the trees.
6. Nonconforming uses, structures or lots. The existing ordinance may allow an
applicant/owner of an existing use to propose additions or alterations that
exceed the permitted building and/or lot coverage percentages. The applicant
should mitigate the impact of the additional impervious surfaces unless the
§ 19-6.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.3A
19:22
stormwater management plan for the development provided for these increases
in impervious surfaces. This mitigation effort must address water quality,
flooding and groundwater recharge.
7. Off-Site and Off-Tract Improvements. Any off-site and off-tract stormwater
management and drainage improvements must conform to the design and
performance standards described.
8. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking lots with more than 10 spaces and all
loading areas should allow for flush curb with curb stop, or curbing with curb
cuts to encourage developers to allow for the discharge of impervious areas
into landscaped areas for stormwater management. The use of natural
vegetated swales for the water quality design storm, with overflow for larger
storm events into storm sewers, should be utilized where practical. A
developer may demonstrate that fewer spaces would be required, provided
area is set aside for additional spaces if necessary. Pervious paving could be
provided for overflow parking areas.
9. Performance standards. This section can provide for pollution source control
and must be evaluated in order to prohibit materials or wastes from being
deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they can be transferred off
the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation,
evaporation or wind. Materials and wastes that might create a pollutant or a
hazard shall be enclosed in appropriate containers.
10. Shade trees. The existing ordinance may require a minimum of shade trees per
lot to be planted in the front yard. In addition to this subsection, the Borough
may have a tree preservation ordinance that restricts and otherwise controls the
removal of mature trees throughout the Borough. This section should
recognize that the preservation of mature trees and forested areas must be
considered in the management of environmental resources, particularly
watershed management, air quality, and ambient heating and cooling. A
critical disturbance area that extends beyond the driveway and building
footprint where clearing of trees cannot occur shall be depicted on the plan
minimizing land disturbance. Identification of forested areas and the
percentage of wooded areas to be protected from disturbance shall also be
provided.
11. Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be designed to discharge stormwater to
neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these impervious surfaces or
use permeable paving materials where appropriate.
12. Soil erosion and sediment control. The applicant shall comply with the New
Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and should incorporate
signs to retain and protect natural vegetation; minimize and retain water runoff
to facilitate groundwater recharge; and install diversions, sediment basins, and
similar required structures prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
b. Further guidance on the implementation of these strategies can be found in the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, April 2004, as amended.
§ 19-6.3A FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:23
§ 19-6.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development.
[Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in
accordance with § 19-6.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated
flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the
Department's Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under
N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quality, and stormwater runoff quantity requirements
of § 19-6.4p, q and r:
1. The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the disturbed
areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with
a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of permeable
material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the green infrastructure, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quality, and stormwater runoff quantity requirements
of § 19-6.4o, p, q and r may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public
roadway or railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian
access, provided that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the
use of stormwater management measures, the option selected complies with
the requirements of § 19-6.4o, p, q and r to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of § 19-
6.4o, p, q and r, existing structures currently in use, such as homes and
buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas,
including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not falling under
§ 19-6.4d3 above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 19-6.4o, p, q and r that were not achievable on-site.
e. Tables 1 through 3 below summarize the ability of stormwater best management
practices identified and described in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual to satisfy the green infrastructure, groundwater recharge,
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:24
stormwater runoff quality and stormwater runoff quantity standards specified in
§ 19-6.4o, p, q and r. When designed in accordance with the most current version
of the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, the stormwater
management measures found at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(f), Tables 5-1, 5-2 and 5-3, and
listed below in Tables 1, 2 and 3 are presumed to be capable of providing
stormwater controls for the design and performance standards as outlined in the
tables below. Upon amendments of the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices to reflect additions or deletions of BMPs meeting these standards, or
changes in the presumed performance of BMPs designed in accordance with the
New Jersey Stormwater BMP Manual, the Department shall publish in the New
Jersey Registers a notice of administrative change revising the applicable table. The
most current version of the BMP Manual can be found on the Department's website
at: https://njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.
f. Where the BMP tables in the NJ Stormwater Management Rule are different due to
updates or amendments with the tables in this section, the BMP Tables in the
Stormwater Management rule at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(f) shall take precedence.
Table 1
Green Infrastructure BMPs for Groundwater Recharge, Stormwater Runoff
Quality, and/or Stormwater Runoff
Best
Management
Practice
Stormwater
Runoff
Quality TSS
Removal Rate
Stormwater
Runoff
Quantity
Groundwater
Recharge
Minimum
Separation
from Seasonal
High-Water
Table
(feet)
Cistern 0% Yes No —
Dry well(a) 0% No Yes 2
Grass swale 50% or less No No 2(e)
1(f)
Green roof 0% Yes No —
Manufactured
treatment
device(a)(g)
50% or 80% No No Dependent
upon the
device
Pervious
paving
system(a)
80% Yes Yes(b)
No(c)
2(b)
1(c)
Small-scale
bioretention
basin(a)
80% or 90% Yes Yes(b)
No(c)
2(b)
1(c)
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:25
Table 1
Green Infrastructure BMPs for Groundwater Recharge, Stormwater Runoff
Quality, and/or Stormwater Runoff
Best
Management
Practice
Stormwater
Runoff
Quality TSS
Removal Rate
Stormwater
Runoff
Quantity
Groundwater
Recharge
Minimum
Separation
from Seasonal
High-Water
Table
(feet)
Small-scale
infiltration
basin(a)
80% Yes Yes 2
Small-scale
sand filter
80% Yes Yes 2
Vegetative
filter strip
60% to 80% No No —
(Notes corresponding to annotations (a) through (g) are found under Table 3.)
Table 2
Green Infrastructure BMPs for Stormwater Runoff Quantity
(or for Groundwater Recharge and/or Stormwater Runoff Quality)
Best
Management
Practice
Stormwater
Runoff
Quality TSS
Removal Rate
Stormwater
Runoff
Quantity
Groundwater
Recharge
Minimum
Separation
from Seasonal
High-Water
Table
(feet)
Bioretention
system
80% or 90% Yes Yes(b)
No(c)
2(b)
1(c)
Infiltration
basin
80% Yes Yes 2
Sand filter(b) 80% Yes Yes 2
Standard
constructed
wetland
90% Yes No N/A
Wet pond(d) 50% to 90% Yes No N/A
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:26
(Notes corresponding to annotations (b) through (d) are found under Table 3.)
Table 3
BMPs for Groundwater Recharge, Stormwater Runoff Quality, and/or
Stormwater Runoff Quantity
only with a Waiver or Variance from N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.3
Best
Management
Practice
Stormwater
Runoff
Quality TSS
Removal Rate
Stormwater
Runoff
Quantity
Groundwater
Recharge
Minimum
Separation
from Seasonal
High-Water
Table
(feet)
Blue roof 0% Yes No N/A
Extended
detention basin
40% to 60% Yes No 1
Manufactured
treatment
device(h)
50% or 80% No No Dependent
upon the
device
Sand filter(c) 80% Yes No 1
Subsurface
gravel wetland
90% No No 1
Wet pond 50% to 90% Yes No N/A
Notes to Tables 1, 2, and 3:
(a) Subject to the applicable contributory drainage area limitation specified at
§ 19-6.4o2;
(b) Designed to infiltrate into the subsoil;
(c) Designed with underdrains;
(d) Designed to maintain at least ten-foot-wide area of native vegetation along
at least 50% of the shoreline and to include a stormwater runoff retention
component designed to capture stormwater runoff for beneficial reuse, such as
irrigation;
(e) Designed with a slope of less than 2%;
(f) Designed with a slope of equal to or greater than 2%;
(g) Manufactured treatment devices that meet the definition of "green
infrastructure" at § 19-6.2;
(h) Manufactured treatment devices that do not meet the definition of "green
infrastructure" at § 19-6.2.
g. An alternative stormwater management measure, alternative removal rate, and/or
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:27
alternative method to calculate the removal rate may be used if the design engineer
demonstrates the capability of the proposed alternative stormwater management
measure and/or the validity of the alternative rate or method to the municipality.
A copy of any approved alternative stormwater management measure, alternative
removal rate, and/or alternative method to calculate the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department in accordance with § 19-6.6b. Alternative stormwater
management measures may be used to satisfy the requirements at § 19-6.4o only if
the measures meet the definition of "green infrastructure" at § 19-6.2. Alternative
stormwater management measures that function in a similar manner to a BMP listed
at Subsection o2 are subject to the contributory drainage area limitation specified
at Subsection o2 for that similarly functioning BMP. Alternative stormwater
management measures approved in accordance with this subsection that do not
function in a similar manner to any BMP listed at Subsection o2 shall have a
contributory drainage area less than or equal to 2.5 acres, except for alternative
stormwater management measures that function similarly to cisterns, grass swales,
green roofs, standard constructed wetlands, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds,
which are not subject to a contributory drainage area limitation. Alternative
measures that function similarly to standard constructed wetlands or wet ponds
shall not be used for compliance with the stormwater runoff quality standard unless
a variance in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.6 or a waiver from strict compliance
in accordance with § 19-6.4d is granted from § 19-6.4o.
h. Whenever the stormwater management design includes one or more BMPs that will
infiltrate stormwater into subsoil, the design engineer shall assess the hydraulic
impact on the groundwater table and design the site, so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited
to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high-water table, so as to cause surficial
ponding, flooding of basements, or interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems or other subsurface structures within the zone
of influence of the groundwater mound, or interference with the proper functioning
of the stormwater management measure itself.
i. Design standards for stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into account the
existing site conditions, including, but not limited to, environmentally critical
areas; wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high-water table;
soil type, permeability, and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone);
2. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize
maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper
functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure,
as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or
1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one inch
and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition, the design of
trash racks must comply with the requirements of § 19-6.8c;
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:28
3. Stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed, and
installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are
consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet
this requirement;
4. Stormwater management BMPs shall be designed to meet the minimum safety
standards for stormwater management BMPs at § 19-6.8; and
5. The size of the orifice at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management BMP shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
j. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of this
section, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey
Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
Manufactured treatment devices that do not meet the definition of "green
infrastructure" at § 19-6.2 may be used only under the circumstances described at
§ 19-6.4o4.
k. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of
"major development" at § 19-6.2 shall be submitted to the Soil Conservation
District for review and approval in accordance with the requirements at § 19-6.4o,
p, q and R and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For purposes of this subsection, "agricultural
development" means land uses normally associated with the production of food,
fiber, and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for
the processing or sale of food and the manufacture of agriculturally related
products.
l. If there is more than one drainage area, the groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quality, and stormwater runoff quantity standards at § 19-6.4p, q and r shall
be met in each drainage area, unless the runoff from the drainage areas converge
on-site and no adverse environmental impact would occur as a result of compliance
with any one or more of the individual standards being determined utilizing a
weighted average of the results achieved for that individual standard across the
affected drainage areas.
m. Any stormwater management measure authorized under the municipal stormwater
management plan or ordinance shall be reflected in a deed notice recorded in the
Bergen County Clerk's office located at: 1 Bergen County Plaza, Hackensack, NJ
07601. A form of deed notice shall be submitted to the municipality for approval
prior to filing. The deed notice shall contain a description of the stormwater
management measure(s) used to meet the green infrastructure, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quality, and stormwater runoff quantity standards at
§ 19-6.4o, p, q and r and shall identify the location of the stormwater management
measure(s) in NAD 1983 State Plane New Jersey FIPS 2900 US feet or latitude and
longitude in decimal degrees. The deed notice shall also reference the maintenance
plan required to be recorded upon the deed pursuant to § 19-6.10b5. Prior to the
commencement of construction, proof that the above required deed notice has been
filed shall be submitted to the municipality. Proof that the required information has
been recorded on the deed shall be in the form of either a copy of the complete
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:29
recorded document or a receipt from the Clerk or other proof of recordation
provided by the recording office. However, if the initial proof provided to the
municipality is not a copy of the complete recorded document, a copy of the
complete recorded document shall be provided to the municipality within 180
calendar days of the authorization granted by the municipality.
n. A stormwater management measure approved under the municipal stormwater
management plan or ordinance may be altered or replaced with the approval of the
municipality, if the municipality determines that the proposed alteration or
replacement meets the design and performance standards pursuant to § 19-6.4 of
this section and provides the same level of stormwater management as the
previously approved stormwater management measure that is being altered or
replaced. If an alteration or replacement is approved, a revised deed notice shall be
submitted to the municipality for approval and subsequently recorded with the
office of the Clerk of the County of Bergen and shall contain a description and
location of the stormwater management measure, as well as reference to the
maintenance plan, in accordance with Subsection M above. Prior to the
commencement of construction, proof that the above required deed notice has been
filed shall be submitted to the municipality in accordance with SubsectionMabove.
o. Green infrastructure standards.
1. This subsection specifies the types of green infrastructure BMPs that may be
used to satisfy the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quality, and
stormwater runoff quantity standards.
2. To satisfy the groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff quality standards
at § 19-6.4p and q, the design engineer shall utilize green infrastructure BMPs
identified in Table 1 at § 19-6.4f and/or an alternative stormwater management
measure approved in accordance with § 19-6.4g. The following green
infrastructure BMPs are subject to the following maximum contributory
drainage area limitations:
Best Management Practice
Maximum Contributory Drainage
Area
(acres)
Dry well 1
Manufactured treatment device 2.5
Pervious pavement systems Area of additional inflow cannot
exceed 3 times the area occupied by
the BMP
Small-scale bioretention systems 2.5
Small-scale infiltration basin 2.5
Small-scale sand filter 2.5
3. To satisfy the stormwater runoff quantity standards at § 19-6.4r, the design
engineer shall utilize BMPs from Table 1 or from Table 2 and/or an alternative
stormwater management measure approved in accordance with § 19-6.4g.
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:30
4. If a variance in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.6 or a waiver from strict
compliance in accordance with § 19-6.4d is granted from the requirements of
this subsection, then BMPs from Table 1, 2, or 3, and/or an alternative
stormwater management measure approved in accordance with § 19-6.4g may
be used to meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quality, and
stormwater runoff quantity standards at § 19-6.4p, q and r.
5. For separate or combined storm sewer improvement projects, such as sewer
separation, undertaken by a government agency or public utility (for example,
a sewerage company), the requirements of this subsection shall only apply to
areas owned in fee simple by the government agency or utility, and areas
within a right-of-way or easement held or controlled by the government
agency or utility; the entity shall not be required to obtain additional property
or property rights to fully satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
Regardless of the amount of area of a separate or combined storm sewer
improvement project subject to the green infrastructure requirements of this
subsection, each project shall fully comply with the applicable groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quality control, and stormwater runoff quantity
standards at § 19-6.4p, q and r, unless the project is granted a waiver from
strict compliance in accordance with § 19-6.4d.
p. Groundwater recharge standards.
1. This subsection contains the minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge as follows.
2. The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater
runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at § 19-6.5, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the site and
its stormwater management measures maintain 100% of the average
annual preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the increase
of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction to post-construction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
3. This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects within the
"urban redevelopment area," or to projects subject to Subsection p4 below.
4. The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(a) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High pollutant loading
areas are areas in industrial and commercial developments where solvents
and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied, areas
where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous
materials are expected to be present in greater than "reportable quantities"
as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan
and areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:31
(b) Industrial stormwater exposed to source material. "Source material"
means any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility, that
is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials
include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery and fuels,
and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
q. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
1. This subsection contains the minimum design and performance standards to
control stormwater runoff quality impacts of major development. Stormwater
runoff quality standards are applicable when the major development results in
an increase of 1/4 acre or more of regulated motor vehicle surface.
2. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction
load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff
generated from the water quality design storm as follows:
(a) Eighty percent TSS removal of the anticipated load, expressed as an
annual average, shall be achieved for the stormwater runoff from the net
increase of motor vehicle surface.
(b) If the surface is considered regulated motor vehicle surface because the
water quality treatment for an area of motor vehicle surface that is
currently receiving water quality treatment either by vegetation or soil, by
an existing stormwater management measure, or by treatment at a
wastewater treatment plant is to be modified or removed, the project shall
maintain or increase the existing TSS removal of the anticipated load
expressed as an annual average.
3. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a
discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under
the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. Every major development, including any that discharge
into a combined sewer system, shall comply with Subsection q2 above, unless
the major development is itself subject to a NJPDES permit with a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS or the NJPDES permit to which the major
development is subject exempts the development from a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS.
4. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water
quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 4, below. The calculation of
the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of stormwater
management measures.
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:32
Table 4
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
1 0.00166 41 0.1728 81 1.0906
2 0.00332 42 0.1796 82 1.0972
3 0.00498 43 0.1864 83 1.1038
4 0.00664 44 0.1932 84 1.1104
5 0.00830 45 0.2000 85 1.1170
6 0.00996 46 0.2117 86 1.1236
7 0.01162 47 0.2233 87 1.1302
8 0.01328 48 0.2350 88 1.1368
9 0.01494 49 0.2466 89 1.1434
10 0.01660 50 0.2583 90 1.1500
11 0.01828 51 0.2783 91 1.1550
12 0.01996 52 0.2983 92 1.1600
13 0.02164 53 0.3183 93 1.1650
14 0.02332 54 0.3383 94 1.1700
15 0.02500 55 0.3583 95 1.1750
16 0.03000 56 0.4116 96 1.1800
17 0.03500 57 0.4650 97 1.1850
18 0.04000 58 0.5183 98 1.1900
19 0.04500 59 0.5717 99 1.1950
20 0.05000 60 0.6250 100 1.2000
21 0.05500 61 0.6783 101 1.2050
22 0.06000 62 0.7317 102 1.2100
23 0.06500 63 0.7850 103 1.2150
24 0.07000 64 0.8384 104 1.2200
25 0.07500 65 0.8917 105 1.2250
26 0.08000 66 0.9117 106 1.2267
27 0.08500 67 0.9317 107 1.2284
28 0.09000 68 0.9517 108 1.2300
29 0.09500 69 0.9717 109 1.2317
30 0.10000 70 0.9917 110 1.2334
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:33
Table 4
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
31 0.10660 71 1.0034 111 1.2351
32 0.11320 72 1.0150 112 1.2367
33 0.11980 73 1.0267 113 1.2384
34 0.12640 74 1.0383 114 1.2400
35 0.13300 75 1.0500 115 1.2417
36 0.13960 76 1.0568 116 1.2434
37 0.14620 77 1.0636 117 1.2450
38 0.15280 78 1.0704 118 1.2467
39 0.15940 79 1.0772 119 1.2483
40 0.16600 80 1.0840 120 1.2500
5. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required 80% TSS
reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to
calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs.
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP.
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP.
6. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the
maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated
load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water
quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include green infrastructure BMPs
that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the performance standards
in § 19-6.4p, q and r.
7. In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4, stormwater
management measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater
runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. The Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-4.1(c)1 establish
300-foot riparian zones along Category One waters, as designated in the
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and certain upstream
tributaries to Category One waters. A person shall not undertake a major
development that is located within or discharges into a 300-foot riparian zone
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.4
19:34
without prior authorization from the Department under N.J.A.C. 7:13.
9. Pursuant to the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-11.2(j)3i, runoff from the water quality design storm that is discharged
within a 300-foot riparian zone shall be treated in accordance with this
subsection to reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids by
95% of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual
average.
10. This stormwater runoff quality standards do not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling, provided that it is not part of a larger
development or subdivision that has received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to December 3, 2018, and that the motor vehicle surfaces are
made of permeable material(s), such as gravel, dirt, and/or shells.
r. Stormwater runoff quantity standards.
1. This subsection contains the minimum design and performance standards to
control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
2. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design engineer
shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at
§ 19-6.5, complete one of the following:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for
stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for the
two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events do not exceed, at any point in time,
the preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm events;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no
increase, as compared to the preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff
rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and 100-year storm
events and that the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and
projected land uses assuming full development under existing zoning and
land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(c) Design stormwater management measures so that the post-construction
peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and 100-year storm events are 50%,
75% and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed development
or project is to be constructed; or
(d) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsection r2(a), (b) and (c) above is required unless the
design engineer demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increased volume, change in timing, or increased rate of the
stormwater runoff, or any combination of the three will not result in
additional flood damage below the point of discharge of the major
development. No analysis is required if the stormwater is discharged
§ 19-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.4
19:35
§ 19-6.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge. [Added
7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
directly into any ocean, bay, inlet, or the reach of any watercourse
between its confluence with an ocean, bay, or inlet and downstream of
the first water control structure.
3. The stormwater runoff quantity standards shall be applied at the site's
boundary to each abutting lot, roadway, watercourse, or receiving storm sewer
system.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless
Unit Hydrograph, as described in Chapters 7, 9, 10, 15 and 16, Part 630,
Hydrology National Engineering Handbook, incorporated herein by
reference as amended and supplemented. This methodology is
additionally described in Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds (TR-55), dated June 1986, incorporated herein by
reference as amended and supplemented. Information regarding the
methodology is available from the Natural Resources Conservation
Service website at: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/
FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb1044171.pdf or at United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, 220
Davison Avenue, Somerset, New Jersey 08873; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method
for hydrograph computations. The Rational and Modified Rational
Methods are described in "Appendix A-9 Modified Rational Method" in
the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,
January 2014. This document is available from the State Soil
Conservation Committee or any of the soil conservation districts listed at
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The location, address, and telephone number for
each soil conservation district is available from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, PO Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625. The
document is also available at: http://www.nj.gov/agriculture/divisions/
anr/pdf/2014NJSoilErosionControlStandardsComplete.pdf.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge,
there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition of a site or portion
thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff
coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology above at § 19-6.5a1(a) and
the Rational and Modified Rational Methods at § 19-6.5a1(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the
hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least
five years without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
§ 19-6.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.5
19:36
§ 19-6.6. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
§ 19-6.7. Solids and Floatable Materials Control Standards. [Added 7-22-2021 by
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall
be used for the computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the
site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or
park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall
account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds,
wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce
preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer
shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious
and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume
of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected
impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other
methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is
below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the
design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following: the
New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for Evaluating Ground-
Water-Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended
and supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available from the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at the New Jersey
Geological Survey website at https://www.nj.gov/dep/njgs/pricelst/gsreport/
gsr32.pdf or at New Jersey Geological and Water Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, PO
Box 420 Mail Code 29-01, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed below, which are available to download from the Department's
website at: http://www.nj.gov/dep/stormwater/bmp_manual2.htm.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended and
supplemented. Information is provided on stormwater management measures
such as, but not limited to, those listed in Tables 1, 2, and 3.
2. Additional maintenance guidance is available on the Department's website at:
https://www.njstormwater.org/maintenance_guidance.htm.
b. Submissions required for review by the Department should be mailed to: the
Division of Water Quality, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Mail Code 401-02B, PO Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420.
§ 19-6.5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.7
19:37
Ord. No. 2021-4]
a. Site design features identified under § 19-6.4f above, or alternative designs in
accordance with § 19-6.4g above, to prevent discharge of trash and debris from
drainage systems shall comply with the following standard to control passage of
solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
§ 19-6.7a2 below.
1. Design engineers shall use one of the following grates whenever they use a
grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that
surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle-safe
grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines; or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area
of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across
the smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion)
of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of
ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels,
and stormwater system floors used to collect stormwater from the surface
into a storm drain or surface water body.
(c) For curb-opening inlets, including curb-opening inlets in combination
inlets, the clear space in that curb opening, or each individual clear space
if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces, shall have an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the
smallest dimension.
2. The standard in Subsection a1 above does not apply:
(a) Where each individual clear space in the curb opening in existing curbopening
inlet does not have an area of more than 9.0 square inches;
(b) Where the municipality agrees that the standards would cause inadequate
hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using
additional or larger storm drain inlets;
(c) Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified in N.J.A.C.
7:8 are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at
a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through one of the following:
(1) A rectangular space 4.625 inches long and 1.5 inches wide (this
option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
§ 19-6.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.7
19:38
§ 19-6.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins. [Added 7-22-2021
by Ord. No. 2021-4]
(2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Note that these exemptions do not authorize any infringement of
requirements in the Residential Site Improvement Standards for
bicycle-safe grates in new residential development [N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.18(b)2 and 5:21-7.4(b)1].
(d) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with
one-inch spacing between the bars, to the elevation of the Water Quality
Design Storm as specified in N.J.A.C. 7:8; or
(e) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New
Jersey Register listed historic property.
a. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper
design and operation of stormwater management BMPs. This section applies to any
new stormwater management BMP.
b. The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more stringent municipal
or county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater management BMPs.
Municipal and county stormwater management plans and ordinances may, pursuant
to their authority, require existing stormwater management BMPs to be retrofitted
to meet one or more of the safety standards in § 19-6.8C1, 2, and 3 for trash racks,
overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
c. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the
outlet from the stormwater management BMP to ensure proper functioning of
the BMP outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six-inch
spacing between the bars;
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of the outlet pipe or structure;
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed
2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and discharge. Velocity
is to be computed on the basis of the net area of opening through the rack;
and
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed of rigid, durable, and corrosionresistant
material and designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading
of 300 pounds per square foot.
§ 19-6.7 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.8
19:39
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure.
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable
for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across the
smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable,
and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot.
3. Stormwater management BMPs shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management BMP has an outlet structure, escape
provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. Escape provisions
include the installation of permanent ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management BMPs. With the prior approval of the municipality pursuant
to § 19-6.8c, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement;
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater
management BMPs having a permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2
feet. Safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be
four feet to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See
§ 19-6.8e for an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management
BMP; and
(c) In new stormwater management BMPs, the maximum interior slope for
an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.
d. Variance or exemption from safety standard. A variance or exemption from the
safety standards for stormwater management BMPs may be granted only upon a
written finding by the municipality that the variance or exemption will not
constitute a threat to public safety.
e. Safety ledge illustration.
Elevation View - Basin Safety Ledge Configuration
§ 19-6.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.9
19:40
§ 19-6.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan. [Added
7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
a. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to
this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the
Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at § 19-6.9c below as part
of the submission of the application for approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth
in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit the requisite number of copies of the materials
listed in the Checklist for Site Development Stormwater Plans in accordance
with § 19-6.9c of this section.
b. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site development
project shall be reviewed as a part of the review process by the municipal board or
official from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official
shall consult the municipality's review engineer to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this section.
c. Submission of site development stormwater plan. The following information shall
be required:
1. Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream
tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended that the
topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of
200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures,
roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of the natural
and man-made features of the site and its surroundings should be submitted.
This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be
given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features and to those
that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project description and site plans. A map (or maps) at the scale of the
topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent structures. The
map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations will occur in the natural
§ 19-6.9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.9
19:41
§ 19-6.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification
for proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.
4. Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide a
demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 19-6.3 through 19-6.5 are
being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater management facilities map. The following information, illustrated
on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be disturbed, paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater management
facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed
plan to control and dispose of stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each
outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and post-development conditions for the design storms
specified in § 19-6.4 of this section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures depend on
the hydrologic properties of soils or require certain separation from the
seasonal high-water table, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils
report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure.
7. Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the stormwater
management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of § 19-6.10.
8. Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or board
reviewing an application under this section may, in consultation with the
municipality's review engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements
in § 19-6.9c1 through 6 of this section when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
a. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 19-6.1c of this section shall comply
§ 19-6.9 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.10
19:42
with the requirements of § 19-6.10b and c.
b. General maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks
and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or
trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). The plan shall contain information on BMP location, design,
ownership, maintenance tasks and frequencies, and other details as specified
in Chapter 8 of the NJ BMP Manual, as well as the tasks specific to the type
of BMP, as described in the applicable chapter containing design specifics.
3. If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the property owner (for
example, a developer, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having
the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of
such person's or entity's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
owner's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such
person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
4. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the
owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or
project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project. The individual property owner may be assigned
incidental tasks, such as weeding of a green infrastructure BMP, provided the
individual agrees to assume these tasks; however, the individual cannot be
legally responsible for all of the maintenance required.
5. If the party responsible for maintenance identified under § 19-6.10b3 above is
not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
§ 19-6.10b7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property
on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
6. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the
functional parameters (storage volume, infiltration rates, inflow/outflow
capacity, etc.) of the stormwater management measure, including, but not
limited to, repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris,
or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of
nonvegetated linings.
7. The party responsible for maintenance identified under § 19-6.10b3 above
shall perform all of the following requirements:
(a) Maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for
the structural stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections and
copies of all maintenance-related work orders;
§ 19-6.10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.10
19:43
§ 19-6.11. Violations and Penalties. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
§ 19-6.12. Enforcement. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Moonachie Construction Code
Official of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 19-6.13. Severability. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this section is declared to be an
independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding
of any such portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this section.
(b) Evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year
and adjust the plan and the deed as needed; and
(c) Retain and make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the site,
the maintenance plan and the documentation required by § 19-6.10b6 and
7 above.
8. The requirements of § 19-6.10b3 and 4 do not apply to stormwater
management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the municipality
or another governmental agency, subject to all applicable municipal
stormwater general permit conditions, as issued by the Department.
9. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to
public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the
municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of
that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend the
time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the
municipality or county may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the
cost thereof to the responsible person. Nonpayment of such bill may result in
a lien on the property.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the municipality in which the major
development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance
guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
a. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any
building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be subject to the
following penalties:
1. First offense, up to $1,000 fine or six months in jail.
2. Second offense or any subsequent offense, up to $1,250 fine or six months in
jail.
§ 19-6.10 MOONACHIE CODE § 19-6.14
19:44
§ 19-6.14. When Effective. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-4]
This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and any
publication as required by law.
§ 19-6.14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 19-6.14
19:45

Chapter 20
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 20-1. PLANNING BOARD.30
§ 20-1.1. Establishment. [Ord. #193, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #80-6, A I, § 1; 1970 Code
§ 19-1.1; Ord. #2014-7; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23]
There is hereby established pursuant to C. 291, P.L. 1975 in the Borough of Moonachie,
a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following four classes:
Class I. The Mayor.
Class II. One of the officials of the Borough other than a member of the governing body,
to be appointed by the Mayor.
Class III. A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
Class IV. Six other citizens of the Borough to be appointed by the Mayor. The members
of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that one member may be a
member of the Board of Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is
also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class
IV Planning Board member.
§ 20-1.2. Terms. [Ord. #193, § 3; Ord. #80-6, A I, § 2; 1970 Code § 19-1.2; Ord.
#2014-7]
a. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his official tenure.
The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission,
whichever comes first.
b. The term of Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
c. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this Chapter shall be
so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such terms
shall be evenly distributed over the first four years after their appointment as
determined by resolution of the governing body, provided however that no term of
any member shall exceed four years and further provided that nothing herein shall
affect any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in
30. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2014-7 establishes a combined nine-member Planning Board to exercise all powers of the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment. Wherever the term "Zoning Board"; "Zoning Board of
Adjustment", or "Board of Adjustment" appears in the Code, these terms shall be read as if the words "Planning
Board acting as the" were printed before them.
§ 19-6.14 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-1.2
20:1
§ 20-1.3. Alternate Members. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 2-1; 1970 Code § 19-1.3; Ord.
#2014-7]
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-55D-23.1 up to four alternate
members of the Planning Board. Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall meet qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members shall be designated at
the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1," Alternate No. 2," "Alternate
No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." The terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than two alternate members shall expire in any one year; provided
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote. If a second alternate member is to vote, then Alternate No. 2
shall vote. If a third alternate member is to vote, then Alternate No. 3 shall vote and so
on for Alternate No. 4.
§ 20-1.4. Vacancies. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 3; 1970 Code § 19-1.4]
If a vacancy of any class or alternate member shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 20-1.5. Organization of Board. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 4; 1970 Code § 19-1.5]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of
Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of the Planning Board or a
municipal employee designated by it.
§ 20-1.6. Planning Board Attorney. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 5; 1970 Code § 19-1.6]
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning Board may
annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney other than the Borough Attorney. The
Board shall not however exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for the position.
§ 20-1.7. Experts and Staff. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 6; 1970 Code § 19-1.7]
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts and other
staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not however exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
office until, the completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise
herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made, unless an appointment is made to fill an unexpired term.
§ 20-1.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-1.8
20:2
§ 20-1.8. Powers and Duties Generally. [Ord. #193, § 4; Ord. #80-6, A I, § 7; 1970
Code § 19-1.8; Ord. #2014-7]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt by-laws governing its procedural operation.
It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. To make and adopt and amend a Master Plan for the physical development of the
Borough including any areas outside its boundaries, which in the Board's judgment
bear essential relation to the planning of the Borough, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of Chapter 21, Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review, of the Code of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of those
ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
c. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 22, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
d. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by State
and Federal law or regulations.
e. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning process.
f. To consider and make reports to the governing body within 35 days after referral as
to any proposed development regulation submitted to it pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a), and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to
the Planning Board by the governing body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26(b).
g. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site plans or
conditional uses, to grant:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, as amended by L. 1979, c.216,
Section 23.
2. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public or public drainage
way, flood control basin or public are reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
3. Directions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuit to this subsection, notice of hearing on
the application for development shall include reference to the request for a
variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
h. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinances or
resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the governing body
or other agencies or officers.
i. Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the Master Plan,
the governing body or other public agency having jurisdiction over the subject
§ 20-1.8 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-1.8
20:3
§ 20-1.9. Minor Subdivision. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 8; 1970 Code § 19-1.9]
§ 20-1.10. Major Subdivision. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 9; 1970 Code § 19-1.10]
matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure of any public funds,
incidental to the location, character or extent of such project, shall refer the action
involving such specific project to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation in conjunction with such Master Plan and shall not act thereon,
without such recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed after such reference
without receiving such recommendation. This requirement shall apply to action
by a housing, parking, highway, special district, or other authority, redevelopment
agency, school board or other similar public agency, State, County or municipal.
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31, Section 22.)
j. At the request of the developer the Planning Board shall grant an informal review
of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and
submit an application for development. The developer shall not be required to
submit any fees for such an informal review. The developer shall not be bound by
any concept plan for which review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not
be bound by any such review.
k. Exercising, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions all the powers of
a Zoning Board of Adjustment; but the Class I and the Class III members shall not
participate in the consideration of applications for development which involve relief
pursuant to subsection d of Section 57 of P.L. 1975 c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
a. Minor subdivision shall be any subdivision of land which does not involve the
creation of more than three lots; which does not involve the planned development;
which does not involve any new street; and which does not involve the extension of
any off-tract improvements.
b. The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing of an application for
development if the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee of the Board find that
the application for development conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision"
set forth in paragraph a of this subsection.
c. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the subdivision
by the Board; provided that the Board or the subcommittee may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, 39, 40 and C. 40:55D-53 of Chapter 291, Laws of 1975.
a. Major subdivision is any subdivision of land which is not classified as a minor
subdivision.
b. For all major subdivisions, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing with
public notice given by publication in the official newspaper of the Borough, if there
be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough; and a notice of the
hearing shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the
subject of such hearing and to other persons as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 and
in following the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 20-1.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-1.10
20:4
§ 20-1.11. Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 10; 1970 Code § 19-1.11]
c. As a condition of subdivision or site plan approval, the approving authority may
require the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements; and the
regulations may require a developer to pay his pro-rata share of the cost of off-tract
improvements in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or denied within
45 days of the date of submission of a complete application to the Planning Board
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor
subdivision approval and a certificate of the administrative office as to the failure
of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall
be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for the purposes
of filing subdivision plats.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.3), the Borough Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning
Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such approval
and the provisions of the "Map Filing Law", or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such plat or
deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it
will be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional
or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded.
b. Preliminary Approval; Major Subdivisions. The developer shall submit to the
administrative officer a plat and such other information as is reasonably necessary
to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
preliminary approval have been met; provided that minor subdivisions shall not be
subject to this section. The plat and any other engineering documents to be
submitted shall be required in tentative form for discussion purposes for
preliminary approval. If the application for development is found to be incomplete,
the developer shall be notified within 45 days of submission of such application or
it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a hearing,
an amended application shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of
the original application for development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed
subdivision complies with the Chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law grant
§ 20-1.10 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-1.11
20:5
§ 20-1.12. Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 11; 1970 Code § 19-1.12; Ord.
#2014-7]
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more
than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may be consented
to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for the subdivision.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.3) the Borough Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to exercise its
ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set forth in subsection 20-1.8
of this Chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 95 days after submission by the developer of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
d. Final Subdivision Approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.3), the Borough Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing
of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer. The Planning Board may, for good
cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
a. Procedure for Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
1. The developer shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board and to the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment in the case of a use variance, a site plan
and such other information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for preliminary site plan
approval have been met. The site plan and any engineering documents to be
§ 20-1.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-1.12
20:6
submitted shall be required in tentative form for discussion purposes for
preliminary approval. If any architectural plans are required to be submitted
for site plan approval, the preliminary plans and elevations shall be sufficient.
If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the developer
shall be notified in writing of the determination of completeness within 45
days of deficiencies therein by the Board or the Board's designee for the
submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
2. If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a
hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for development. The
Planning Board shall, if the proposed development complies with the Chapter
and the Municipal Land Use Law, grant preliminary site plan approval.
3. Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board in the case of a
use variance, of a complete application for a site plan which involves 10 acres
of land or less, and 10 dwelling units or less, preliminary approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of
a complete application for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres or
more than 10 dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the
Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval.
4. If an application for development conforms to the definition of "minor site
plan" approval of same shall be deemed to be final approval of the site plan by
the Board provided that the Planning Board or Site Plan Subcommittee if any,
may condition such approval on terms insuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 39, 41, 53.
5. Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date
of submission of a complete application to the administrative officer, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor site
plan approval.
6. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board
is required by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.6), the Borough
Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt
of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within
the required time period.
7. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was granted,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor site plan
approval.
b. Procedure for Final Site Plan Approval.
§ 20-1.12 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-1.12
20:7
§ 20-1.13. Time for Application Requiring More Than One Approval. [Ord.
#80-6, A I, § 12; 1970 Code § 19-1.13]
The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision,
conditional use or site plan approval shall apply.
§ 20-1.14. Effect of Preliminary and Final Subdivision and Site Plan Approval.
[Ord. #80-6, A I, § 13; 1970 Code § 19-1.14]
1. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval conform to
the standards established by ordinance for final approval and provided the
conditions of preliminary approval are met.
2. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after submission of a
complete application, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the Secretary of the Planning
Board as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval herein required.
3. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board
is required, the Borough Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
a. Effect of Preliminary Approval of a Subdivision or Site Plan. Preliminary approval
of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall, except as provided in subparagraph 4
below, confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from
the date of the preliminary approval.
1. That the general terms and conditions of which preliminary approval was
granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements;
layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size; yard
dimensions and off-tract improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to C. 40:55D-41 of this
Act; except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration
date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the
preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be; and
3. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant extensions
on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year but not
to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards
have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
4. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
§ 20-1.12 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-1.14
20:8
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in subparagraphs 1, 2 and 3
above for such period of time, longer than three years as shall be determined
by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval; and
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the
design standards have been revised, such revised standards may
govern.
b. Effect of Final Approval of Subdivision or Site Plan.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted
and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of final approval; provided that in the case of
major subdivision all rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has
not been duly recorded within the time period provided. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and, in the case of a
subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the
Planning Board may extend such period or protection for extension of one year
but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval for the section granted final approval.
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development or
planned unit residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or more
or conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to in paragraph b of this subsection for
such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
§ 20-1.14 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-1.14
20:9
§ 20-1.15. Exception in Application of Subdivision or Site Plan Regulation;
Simultaneous Review and Approval. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 14; 1970 Code § 19-1.15]
§ 20-1.16. Applications; Procedure for Filing. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 15; 1970 Code
§ 19-1.16]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board pursuant to
the provisions of C. 291 P.L. 1975 shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Board. Applicant shall file at least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of
the Board an original and eight copies of a sketch plat; an original and eight copies of
applications for minor subdivision approval; an original and eight copies of application
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
The developer may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
(b) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development.
a. The Planning Board when acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision shall have the power to grant such exceptions from requirements for
subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for subdivision review and approval of an ordinance
adopted pursuant to this Chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of the ordinance is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
b. The Planning Board when acting upon applications for preliminary site plan
approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for
site plan approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the provisions for site plan review and approval of an ordinance adopted pursuant
to this Chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the ordinance
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question.
c. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny conditional
uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision approval without the
developer being required to make further application to the Planning Board or the
Planning Board being required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for
action by the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site
plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by
the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the hearing on the plat shall
include reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 20-1.14 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-1.16
20:10
for major subdivision approval or an original and eight copies of an application for site
plan review, conditional use approval, or planned development. At the time of filing
the application but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the
applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any
provision of this Chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary forms from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Planning
Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Board. The applicant shall pay any necessary filing fees
established by the governing body.
§ 20-1.17. Signing of Plats, Site Plans and Conditional Uses. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 16;
1970 Code § 19-1.17]
Approved plats for minor subdivision, preliminary major subdivisions and final major
subdivisions shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary. Approved
site plans and conditional uses shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairman and
Secretary.
§ 20-1.18. Advisory Committee. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 17; 1970 Code § 19-1.18]
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory Committee to assist
or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall
have no power to vote or take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 20-1.19. Site Plan Review Advisory Board. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 18; 1970 Code
§ 19-1.19]
The Mayor may appoint a Site Plan Review Advisory Board for the purpose of reviewing
all site plan applications and making recommendations to the Planning Board in regard
thereto.
§ 20-1.20. Environmental Commission. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 19; 1970 Code
§ 19-1.20; Ord. #2014-7]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to the Planning
Board an index of the natural resources of the Borough, the Planning Board shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of every application
for development to the Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational
copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
§ 20-1.21. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #80-6, A I, § 20; 1970 Code § 19-1.21]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect
the provisions and purposes of this Chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration
of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 20-1.16 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-2
20:11
§ 20-2. APPEALS. [Ord. #2014-7]
Decisions of the Planning Board may be appealed in the manner as available by law.
§ 20-3. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PLANNING BOARD.
§ 20-3.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 1; 1970 Code § 19-3.1; Ord.
#2014-7]
No member or alternate member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue
to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion
or decision relating thereto. Any member other than a Class I member of the Planning
Board, after a public hearing if he requests one may be removed by the governing body
for cause.
§ 20-3.2. Meetings. [Ord. #223, § 6-3; Ord. #80-6, A III, § 2; 1970 Code § 19-3.2;
Ord. #2014-7]
§ 20-3.3. Minutes. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 3; 1970 Code § 19-3.3; Ord. #2014-7]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the names
of persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the other persons appearing by
attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons
therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a
fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 20-3.4. Fees. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 4; 1970 Code § 19-3.4; Ord. #90-17, § 4; Ord.
a. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled no less often than once a month
and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack
of applications for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the chairman or on the request
of any two board members, which shall be held on notice to its members and the
public in accordance with all applicable legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the municipal agency
present at the meeting except as otherwise required by any provision of C. 291, P.L.
1975.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of
all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231, P.L. 1975. An executive session for the purpose
of discussion and studying any matters to come before the Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with these provisions.
§ 20-2 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-3.4
20:12
#2014-7]
Fees for application, appeals or for the rendering of any service by the Planning Board or
any member of their administrative staffs shall be provided for and adopted by ordinance
and shall be reasonable.31
§ 20-3.5. Hearings. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 5; 1970 Code § 19-3.5; Ord. #2014-7]
§ 20-3.6. Notice Requirements for Hearing. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 6; 1970 Code
§ 19-3.6]
Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be given except for
(a) conventional site plan review; (b) minor subdivisions; (c) final approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50; or (d) minor site plan approval; and further provided that public
notice shall be given in the event that relief is requested pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60,
76 or part of an application for development otherwise excepted herein from public
notice. The applicant should give notice thereof as follows:
a. Rules. The Planning Board shall make rules governing the conduct of hearings
before such bodies which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or of this Chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate shall
have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the "County and
Municipal Investigations Law" C. 38, P.L. 1953 (C. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer and
the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties through
their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and the reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the
Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by
either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at
his expense.
f. Transcripts. The municipal agency in furnishing a transcript of the proceedings to
an interested party at his expense shall not charge the interested party more than the
maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. The transcript shall be certified in writing
by the transcriber to be accurate.
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the Borough
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
31. Editor's Note: See subsection 22-7.1 for fee schedules.
§ 20-3.4 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-3.6
20:13
b. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice as above set forth shall be given to the
owners of all real property as shown on the current tax duplicates located in the
State and within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of
such hearing provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to
the (a) condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a
unit above or below it; a (b) horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner
whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Such notice shall be given by:
(a) serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his
agent in charge of the property; or (b) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president,
a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association,
horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners association, because
of its ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to
a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowner on
account of such common elements or areas.
c. Notice of hearings on applications for development involving property located
within 200 feet of an adjoining Municipality shall be given by personal service or
certified mail to the clerk of such Municipality, which notice shall be in addition to
the notice required to be given pursuant to subsection 20-3.6, paragraph b to the
owners of lands in such adjoining Municipality which are located within 200 feet
of the subject premises.
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of a hearing on an application for development of property adjacent to an
existing County road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other County land or situate within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Commissioner of
Transportation of a hearing on an application for development of property adjacent
to a State highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Director of the
Division of State and Regional Planning in the Department of Community Affairs
of a hearing on an application for development of property which exceeds 150 acres
or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Borough Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of C. 291, P.L.
1975.
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this subsection shall be given at least 10 days
prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof
of service with the Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be deemed to be
complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. Form of Notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this
§ 20-3.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-3.6
20:14
§ 20-3.7. List of Property Owners Furnished. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 7; 1970 Code
§ 19-3.7]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Borough Clerk shall within seven
days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee not to exceed
$0.25 per name or $10 whichever is greater, make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to subsection 20-3.6, paragraph b of this Chapter.
§ 20-3.8. Decisions. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 8; 1970 Code § 19-3.8]
Chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters
to be considered and identification of the property proposed for development by
street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the
current tax duplicate in the Borough Tax Assessor's office and the location and
times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available
as required by law.
j. Notice pursuant to paragraphs c, d, e, f, of this subsection shall not be deemed to be
required unless public notice as hereinabove set forth and notice pursuant to
paragraph b of this subsection are requested.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to writing and
shall include findings of facts and conclusions of law based thereon.
b. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive the
number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
c. The municipal agency may provide such written decision and findings and
conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency acts to
grant or deny approval, or, if the meeting at which the action is taken occurs within
the final 45 days of the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application for development, within 45 days of such meeting by the adoption of a
resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and the findings and
conclusions of the municipal agency thereon. An action resulting from the failure
of a motion to approve an application shall be memorialized by resolution as
provided above notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within the
applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application.
The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this subsection shall
not be construed to alter the applicable time period for rendering a decision on
the application for development. Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of
the majority of the members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
previously taken and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote on such
resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an action of the municipal
agency, and not to be an action of the municipal agency; except that failure to
adopt such resolution within the 45 days period shall result in the approval of the
application for development, notwithstanding any prior action taken thereon.
d. Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance with this
§ 20-3.6 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-3.8
20:15
§ 20-3.9. Publication of Decision. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 9; 1970 Code § 19-3.9; Ord.
#2014-7]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official newspaper
of the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning
Board without separate charge to the applicant. The notice shall be sent to the official
newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 20-3.10. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 10; 1970 Code § 19-3.10; Ord.
#2014-7]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, every
application for the development submitted to the Planning Board shall be accompanied
by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on
the property which is the subject of any such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or other relief granted by the
Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments,
or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the
Borough will be adequately protected.
§ 20-3.11. Eligibility of Member to Vote. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 11; 1970 Code
§ 19-3.11; Ord. #2014-7]
When any hearing before the Planning Board shall carry over two or more meetings, a
member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings, shall be eligible to
vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence
from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has
available to him a transcript or recording of the meetings from which he was absent,
and certified in writing to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
§ 20-3.12. (Reserved)32
section the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of the decision for
purposes of the mailings, filings, and publications required by subsections 20-3.8
and 20-3.9 of this Chapter.
e. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the date of
decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to all persons who have
requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by the Board for such service. A
copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall
make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment
of a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other public
documents in the Borough.
32. Editor's Note: Former subsection 20-3.12, Appeals to Governing Body, previously codified herein and containing
portions of 1970 Code § 19-3.1 and Ordinance Nos. 80-6 and 88-13 were repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 2014-7.
§ 20-3.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-3.13
20:16
§ 20-3.13. Permission to Subdue. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 13; 1970 Code § 19-3.13;
Ord. #2014-7]
A corporation or partnership applying to a Planning Board or to the governing body
of a Municipality for permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots or
applying for a variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or for
approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list the names and addresses
of all stockholders or individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or
at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a corporation, or
10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to disclosure pursuant to section 1.,
C. 291, P.L. 1975, that corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses
of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or 10% or greater interest in
the partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall be followed by every
corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of
the noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the 10% ownership
criterion established in this Act, have been listed.
No Planning Board or municipal governing body shall approve the application of any
corporation or partnership which does not comply with this Act.
Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names of the stockholders owning
10% or more of its stock, or of the individual partners owning a 10% or greater interest
in the partnership, as the case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000
which shall be recovered in the name of the Borough in any court of record in the State
in a summary manner pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement Law" (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.).
§ 20-4. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 20-4.1. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. #80-6, A IV, § 1; 1970 Code § 19-4.1]
Whenever a term is used in this Chapter which is defined in Chapter 291, P.L. 1975 as
amended, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such
term found in the statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context
of this Chapter.
§ 20-4.2. Pending Applications. [Ord. #80-6, AIV, § 3; 1970 Code § 19-4.3]
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this Chapter may be
continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on any such application shall
be governed by the provisions of subsections 20-2.15 and 20-2.16 of this Chapter.
§ 20-4.3. Short Title. [Ord. #80-6, AIV, § 4; 1970 Code § 19-4.4]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as The Land Use Procedures Chapter of
the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 20-3.13 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 20-4.4
20:17
§ 20-4.4. Copy to Be Filed with County Planning Board. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 5;
1970 Code § 19-4.5]
Immediately upon adoption of this Chapter the Borough Clerk shall file a copy of this
Chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also file
with the County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of the Borough relating
to land use, such as the subdivision, zoning and site plan review ordinances.
§ 20-4.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 6; 1970 Code § 19-4.6]
The governing body shall enforce this Chapter and any regulations made and adopted
hereunder. To that end, the governing body may require the issuance of specified
permits, certificates or authorizations as a condition precedent to:
§ 20-4.6. Tolling of Running of Period of Approval. [Ord. #80-6, A III, § 7; 1970
Code § 19-4.7]
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore granted to an application
for development, the developer is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal
action instituted by any State agency, political subdivision or other party to protect
the public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any State agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect health or welfare and
the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed with the development, the
running of the period of approval under this Chapter or under any ordinance repealed by
this Chapter as the case may be, shall be suspended for the period of time the legal action
is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
a. The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion, removal or
destruction of any building or structure;
b. The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land; and
c. The subdivision or resubdivision of any land; and shall establish an administrative
officer and offices for the purpose of issuing such permits, certificates or
authorizations; and may condition the issuance of such permits, certificates or
authorizations upon the submission of such data, materials, plans, plats and
information as is authorized hereunder and upon the express approval of the
appropriate State, County or municipal agencies; and may establish reasonable fees
to cover administrative costs for the issuance of such permits, certificates and
authorizations. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this Chapter or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby,
the proper local authorities of the Municipality or an interested party, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 20-4.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 20-4.6
20:18
Chapter 21
LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 21-1. TITLE. [Ord. #194, A I; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-1]
An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the subdivision
of land and site plan review within the Borough pursuant to the authority set forth in
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, and amendments and supplements thereto, setting
forth the procedure to be followed by the approving authority in applying and
administering these rules, regulations and standards and providing penalties for the
violations thereof.
§ 21-2. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. #194, AII; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-2]
This Chapter shall be known as the "Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review Chapter of
the Borough of Moonachie".
§ 21-3. PURPOSES. [Ord. #194, A III; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-3]
Such regulations are deemed necessary to protect the character, stability and orderly
development of all areas of the community; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other natural and man-made disasters and hazards; to encourage the proper location
and design of streets; to promote a desirable visual and aesthetic environment through
creative development techniques and good civic design and arrangements; to promote
the conservation of open space and valuable resources; to prevent degradation of the
environment through improper land use; to provide adequate light, air and open space;
and to provide rules, regulations and procedures which will guide the appropriate
development of lands within the community in order to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
§ 21-4. DEFINITIONS.
§ 21-4.1. General. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-4.1]
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be used in the
interpretation and construction of the Chapter. Words used in the present tense include
the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular;
the word "structure" shall include the word "building"; the word "person" includes a
corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"occupied" includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied"; the word "used"
shall include the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented,
leased, or intended to be used"; the word "may" is permissive.
§ 21-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #79-19; Ord. #80-7; 1970 Code § 16-4]
As used in this Chapter:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the Borough Clerk unless different
municipal official or officials are designated as such by statute.
§ 20-4.6 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-4.2
21:1
APPLICANT OR DEVELOPER — Shall mean a developer submitting an application
for development. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed
to be included in the proposed development including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in the land.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat, site
plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant
to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Borough Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be, as provided in Section 21-5.
BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board of the Borough.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment
of residents and owners of the development. Common open space may contain such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION—Shall mean an application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency, and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the application for
development, including where applicable, but not limited to, a site plan or subdivision
plat; provided that the municipal agency may require such additional information not
specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements
necessary for approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal agency.
An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon the meeting of all
requirements specified in the ordinance and in the rules and regulations of the municipal
agency, and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative
officer for purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the municipal
agency.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in the zoning ordinance,
and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean development other than planned
development.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the county planning board as defined
in Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (C. 40:27-6.1), of the county in which the land or
development is located.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any mining, excavation or landfill, any building or other structure and
§ 21-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-4.2
21:2
any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of
use of land, for which permission may be required.
DIVISION—Shall mean the Division of State and Regional Planning in the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — Shall mean the removal of surface water or ground water from land by
drains, grading or other means including the control of runoff to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development and means necessary for
water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the installation of
storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse
for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the
public against flood.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION—Shall mean a municipal advisory body created
pursuant to P.L. 1968 C. 245 (C. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the approving authority taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion,
or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees, which in the case of
subdivision, shall be filed with the proper County Recording Officer. Final approval
may also encompass preliminary approval at the simultaneous time if in the opinion of
the approving authority both final approval and preliminary approval may be granted in
accordance with the rules and standards required by law.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior walls in a building. "Floor area" shall
not include areas devoted to mechanical equipment serving the building, stairways and
elevators or areas devoted exclusively to off-street parking and loading space for motor
vehicles or to off-street parking and loading space for motor vehicles or to any space
where floor-to-ceiling height shall be less than seven feet.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough.
HISTORIC SITE — Shall mean any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architectures, archeology or culture of this State, its
communities or the nation and has been so designated.
INTERESTED PARTY — Shall mean (a) in a criminal or quasi- criminal proceeding,
any citizen of the State of New Jersey; and (b) in the case of a civil proceeding in any
court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether
residing within or without the Borough, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is
affected by any action taken under this Chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy
property under this Chapter or under any other law of this State or the United States have
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to act under this Code.
LAND — Shall mean and include improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
ground surface.
§ 21-4.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-4.2
21:3
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
Chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN—Shall mean a composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning
Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots which:
MINOR SUBDIVISION—Shall mean a subdivision of land for the creation of not more
than three lots fronting upon an existing street; provided that such subdivision does not
involve:
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFFICE BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 220 of the Laws of 1975
pertaining to physically handicapped persons, an "office building" shall mean a building
or structure of more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area wherein commercial or
business activity or service is performed or a profession is practiced, or wherein any
combination thereof is performed or practiced in all or the majority of such building or
structure.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map and accompanying ordinance adopted by the
governing body pursuant to law. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive with
respect to the location and width of streets and public drainage ways and the location and
extent of flood control basins and public areas, whether or not such streets, ways, basins
or areas are improved or unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
OFFSITE—Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the
property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a development application or
Proposes new development within the scope of development specifically permitted
by ordinance as a minor site plan;
a.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of any offtract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of this Act (C.
40:55D-42); and
b.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by ordinance for approval
of a minor site plan have been met.
c.
a. A planned unit development;
b. Any new street; or
The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to section 30 of the Land Use Act (C. 49:55D-42)
c.
§ 21-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-4.2
21:4
contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ONSITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
OPEN SPACE—Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or
for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring
such open space; provided that such areas may be improved with only those buildings,
structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Shall mean any application for
development, the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — Shall mean, for the purpose of this Chapter, one that
is submitted in a proper and complete form, including all required application forms,
maps and reviews prior to scheduling of a public hearing, where required, or formal
action being taken by the approving authority; all required fees are submitted and filed
within the appropriate time schedules; proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which approval is sought; and
all other governmental approvals are received by the approving authority within the
required time periods. This definition is to be read in pari materia with the definition of
"complete application".
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security which may be accepted
by the Borough, including cash; provided that the Borough shall not require more than
10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP—Shall mean a physical impairment which confines a person
to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity; affects the sight
or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed
to danger; causes faulty coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and
perceptiveness to the extent that facilities are needed for the safety of that person.
PLAT — Shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Shall mean the conferral of certain rights pursuant to
this Chapter prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have
been agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Shall mean architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project
illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to its site and immediate
environs.
PUBLIC AREAS — Shall mean and include:
a. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
b. Other public open spaces;
§ 21-4.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-4.2
21:5
PUBLIC BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 20 of the Laws of 1975
pertaining to physically handicapped persons, "public building" shall mean any building,
structure, facility or complex used by the general public, including, but not limited to,
theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools, libraries, recreational facilities,
public transportation terminals and stations, factories, office buildings, business
establishments, passenger vehicle service stations, shopping centers, hotels or motels,
and public eating places, constructed by any State, County or municipal government
agency or instrumentality or any private individual, partnership, association or
corporation, with the following exceptions: One to four family private residences;
warehouse storage areas; and all buildings classified as hazardous occupancies. As
used herein, "hazardous occupancy" shall mean the occupancy or use of a building or
structure or any portion thereof that involves highly combustible, highly flammable, or
explosive material, or which has inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire
hazard.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation, and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, State or County
agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Shall mean an area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a common or public
open space area as an appurtenance.
RESUBDIVISION — Shall mean the further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets within any
subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not
include conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
SEDIMENTATION — Shall mean the deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangle shaped easement established at the
intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a
height of three feet above the curb level of the street or driveway. The Borough shall
have the right of entry to remove any obstruction to vision within the sight area not
conforming to standards of this definition, following due notice to the property owner.
The triangle shall be determined along such street lot lines or edge of driveway 30 feet
distance from their joint intersection.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
c. Scenic and historic sites; and
d. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
a. The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
§ 21-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-4.2
21:6
SKETCH PLAT—Shall mean the sketch plat of a subdivision to be used for the purpose
of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements of Section 21-9 herein.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way (a) which is an existing State, County or municipal roadway; or (b) which
is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or (c) which is shown on a
plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas within
the street. For the purpose of this Chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of a
parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this Chapter if no
new streets are created or extension of utilities required:
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces,
walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices; and
b.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination pursuant to this Chapter.
c.
a. Arterial streets shall mean those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
Collector streets shall mean those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
b.
Marginal access streets shall mean streets which are parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
c.
Minor streets shall mean those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
d.
Divisions of land found by the approving authority to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
a.
b. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order and, including but not limited to judgments
of foreclosure;
c.
d. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned
by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the
e.
§ 21-4.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-4.2
21:7
TRANSCRIPT — Shall mean a typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
§ 21-5. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 21-5.1. Land Use Procedures Ordinance. [Ord. #194, A V, § 1; Ord. #69-2, §§ 1,
2; Ord. #79-19; Ord. #80-7; 1970 Code § 16-5.1]
The provisions and terms of the land use procedures ordinance of the Borough shall
apply herein for purposes of the administration and enforcement of this section
specifically and this Chapter generally.
§ 21-5.2. Board of Adjustment as Approving Authority. [Ord. #194, A V, § 2;
Ord. #69-2, § 3; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-5.2]
In accordance with Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, the Board of Adjustment shall act
as approving authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing such plats with the
County Recording Officer and for site plan approval as follows:
§ 21-5.3. Planning Board and Board of Adjustment Acting as Approving
Authority. [Ord. #69-2, § 4; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-5.3]
In the case of a variance request pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 from lot area, lot
dimension, setback and yard requirements where the relief sought from lot area
requirements exceeds one lot, an application for subdivision or site plan approval shall
proceed initially with the Planning Board, and if approved by the Board, the applicant
shall then proceed to the Board of Adjustment as to the lot area variances only.
§ 21-5.4. Exception in Application of Regulations. [Ord. #194, A V, § 4; Ord.
#79-19; 1970 Code § 16-5.4]
Except for public hearings, the approving authority, when acting upon applications for
minor, preliminary, and final subdivision approval and preliminary and final site plan
approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements of this
Chapter as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
of this Chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the Chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question.
§ 21-5.5. Simultaneous Review and Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-5.5]
Except as provided in subsection 21-5.3, the approving authority shall have the power to
review and approve one or more land use ordinance requirements simultaneously with
administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development
regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the
tax map or atlas of the Borough. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision".
a. Where a use variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) is requested in which a
subdivision and/or a site plan is a part of the application.
§ 21-4.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-5.5
21:8
review for subdivision and site plan approval without the applicant being required to
make further application to the approving authority, or the approving authority being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by the approving
authority, whether it be for subdivision conditional use, site plan approval, or variance
shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use or a use variance is requested by
the applicant, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include references to the request for
such conditional use or use variance.
§ 21-6. FEES.
§ 21-6.1. References to Zoning Ordinance. [Ord. #194, AVI, § 1; Ord. #79-19;
1970 Code § 16-6.1; Ord. #90-17, § 4]
The fee schedule set forth in subsection 22-7.1 of Chapter 22, Zoning, is hereby adopted
as part of this Chapter and the fees enumerated therein shall be applicable in proceedings
hereunder.
§ 21-7. PUBLIC HEARINGS.
§ 21-7.1. Land Use Procedures Ordinance. [Ord. #194, A VII, § 1; Ord. #79-19;
Ord. #80-7; 1970 Code § 16-7.1]
The provisions and terms of Chapter 20, Land Use Procedures, shall apply herein for
purposes of the administration and enforcement of this section specifically and this
Chapter generally.
§ 21-8. MINIMUM STANDARDS; WAIVER PROVISIONS.
§ 21-8.1. Relaxation of Rules. [Ord. #194, A VIII, § 1; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-8.1]
The rules, regulations and standards contained herein shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the Borough. Any action taken under the terms of this Chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire
community. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these
regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the approving authority may
permit such waivers as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of
the rules, regulations and standards established by this Chapter.
The waiver provisions of this section shall be applicable to the entire ordinance herein
except where specifically prohibited by law.
Any waiver provided hereunder by the approving authority shall be specified in the
written resolution of approval, whether conditional or otherwise, with the reasons
granting such waiver also specified.
§ 21-9. SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION.
§ 21-5.5 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-9.1
21:9
§ 21-9.1. Copies of Sketch. [Ord. #194, A XI, § 1; Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-9.1]
Any application for land subdivision shall submit six copies of a sketch plat of the
proposed subdivision for the purpose of classification and preliminary discussion. The
sketch plat shall be submitted to the administrative officer at least two weeks prior to the
regular meeting of the approving authority.
§ 21-9.2. Major Classification. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-9.2]
If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on
the plat, which shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with the procedures in
Sections 21-11 and 21-12.
§ 21-9.3. Sketch Plat Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-9.3]
The sketch plat shall be based on tax map information or other similarly accurate base,
at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch. The entire tract shall be shown on one sheet.
It shall show or include the following information:
§ 21-10. SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION; MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 21-10.1. Submission. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-10.1]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing, in triplicate,
on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an application for minor
subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date
of the approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 21-6, shall be submitted
with the application form.
§ 21-10.2. Map Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-10.2]
The application shall be accompanied by six copies of the proposed subdivision
accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet certified by a licensed
land surveyor. The minor subdivision plat may be in conformance with the "Map Filing
Act", P.L. 1960 c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) and shall indicate:
a. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the entire tract.
b. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be subdivided.
c. The names of the owners and of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the
most recent municipal tax records.
d. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
e. All streets, roads, railroads and streams within 500 feet of a subdivision.
a. The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
b. All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and within 200 feet
thereof.
§ 21-9.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-10.2
21:10
§ 21-10.3. Approving Authority Action. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-10.3]
The approving authority shall grant or deny approval within 45 days of submission of
a complete and perfected application, or within such time as may be consented to, in
writing, by the applicant.
Failure to the approving authority to act within the time period shall constitute minor
subdivision approval. A certificate by the administrative office as to the failure of the
approving authority shall be issued on request of the applicant whose signature shall be
sufficient in lieu of the chairman and secretary of the approving authority and shall be so
accepted by the County Recording Officer for the purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Whenever review or approval is required by the County Planning Board or a State
agency, the approving authority shall not accept an application as perfected unless
receipt of approval is received from said County or State agency. Under appropriate
circumstances, the approving authority may condition its approval upon a timely receipt
of a favorable report from the County or State agency.
§ 21-10.4. Minor Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-10.4]
Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the subdivision
subject to subsection 21-10.5.
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of approval by
the approving authority unless within such a period a plat in conformance with the
"Map Filing Act", P.L. 1960 c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing
the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer, the Borough Engineer, and the Borough Tax Assessor. In addition, copies shall
be submitted to the Borough Clerk, Construction Official, and the administrative officer.
Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the chairman
and the secretary of the approving authority.
c. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by the
most recent municipal tax records.
d. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
e. All street and streams within 200 feet of the subdivision.
f. The area in square feet of all lots to be created.
g. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to surrounding areas.
h. Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes,
rights-of-way, drainage easements, prior variances.
i. Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
j. History of any previous actions or restrictions on the property.
§ 21-10.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-10.5
21:11
§ 21-10.5. Effect of Minor Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-10.5]
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, shall not be changed or abridged for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval, provided the approved minor subdivision shall have been
duly recorded as provided herein.
§ 21-10.6. Required Guarantees. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-10.6]
Before recording a minor subdivision plat or deed in lieu thereof, the approving authority
may require the installation and maintenance of on and off-tract improvements. The
improvements may require the furnishing of performance and maintenance guarantees
in accordance with Section 21-18.
§ 21-11. MAJOR SUBDIVISION (PRELIMINARY APPROVAL).
§ 21-11.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-11.1]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing in triplicate
on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an application for preliminary
major subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular
meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 21-6 shall
be submitted with the application form.
§ 21-11.2. Preliminary Plat Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-11.2]
The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of the proposed subdivision
accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, certified by a licensed
land surveyor as to existing features and boundaries. The subdivision plat shall be in
conformance with the "Map Filing Act", P.L. 1960 c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq). All
design features shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
§ 21-11.3. Preliminary Plat Details. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-11.3]
The preliminary plat shall contain the following:
a. Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
b. Key map showing the location of the tract with reference to the surrounding
properties, existing streets, and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
c. Title of development; north arrow; scale; block and lot number; name and address
of record owner; name and address, license number and seal of person preparing
the subdivision. If the owner of the premises is a corporation, the name and address
of the president and secretary shall be submitted on the application.
d. All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall be given
to the nearest 10 seconds.
e. The names, as shown on current tax records, of all owners of property within 200
feet of the subdivision, together with the block and lot numbers of the property.
§ 21-10.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-11.3
21:12
f. The zoning district in which the parcel is located together with the zone boundaries
within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the property in question.
g. Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or setback lines, and lines
of existing and proposed streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated
to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way, to be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor.
h. Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions, exceptions or
variances covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such covenants, deed
restrictions, exceptions or variances shall be submitted with the application.
i. The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing streets abutting the
property, to the nearest intersections with other public streets.
j. Location of existing buildings, and all other structures, including walls, fences,
culverts and bridges; with spot elevations of such buildings and structures.
Structures to be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
k. Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures and utility lines
whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow,
locations and inlets, manholes or other appurtenances and appropriate invert and
other elevations. If any existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location
of the utility lines shall be shown.
l. Existing and proposed contours, referred to U.S. Coast and Geodetic datum, with a
contour interval of one foot for slopes of less than 3%; an interval of two feet for
slopes of more than 3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of
15% or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
m. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses, depressions, ponds,
marshes, wooded areas and other significant existing features including previous
flood elevations of watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
n. All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and cross-sections showing
width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks and location and size of utility
lines conforming to the Borough standards and specifications.
o. The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of sewerage and sewerage disposal and treatment.
p. Existing and proposed storm water drainage system. All plans shall be accompanied
by a separate sketch showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary,
and all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any other surface
areas contributing to the calculations and showing methods used in the drainage
calculations.
q. Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of tract to be subdivided and the area, in
square feet, of all lots.
r. Such other information or data as may be required by the approving authority, the
§ 21-11.3 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-11.3
21:13
§ 21-11.4. Preliminary Subdivision Plat Review. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-11.4]
The applicant shall submit the preliminary subdivision application and plat maps and
payment of all required fees to the administrative officer who shall submit copies of the
preliminary plat to the following:
§ 21-11.5. County Planning Board and Other Governmental Agency Approvals.
[Ord. #79-18; 1970 Code § 16-11.5]
Any subdivision application, requiring County Planning Board or other governmental
agency approvals, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Bergen County Planning
Board or other governmental agency for review and approval. The approving authority
may condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or other governmental agency
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
County Planning Board or other governmental agencies, for determination that the
details of the subdivision are in accordance with the standards of this Chapter,
Chapter 22, Zoning, and all other applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions.
a. Approving authority attorney.
b. Borough Engineer.
c. Planning consultant.
d. Construction Official.
e. Board of Health.
f. Fire Department.
g. Police Department.
h. Department of Public Works.
i. Other municipal, County or State officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
The persons and boards shall make recommendations to the approving authority
in writing within 35 days of the application submission. The approving authority
shall take the recommendation into account, but shall have the authority to proceed
in the absence of such recommendations if the approving authority finds such
recommendations not to be essential to its determination.
If the preliminary plat is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified by
certified mail within 45 days of the date of submission or it shall be deemed to be
perfected as to content.
Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission, the applicant
shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify as a perfected application for
public hearing purposes.
§ 21-11.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-11.5
21:14
A preliminary subdivision requiring County Planning Board or other governmental
agency approval which may or may not have been received at the time of the public
hearing in the Borough, shall require the public hearing to be continued until such time
as the required reports are received or by the failure to report thereon within the required
time period.
§ 21-11.6. Other Requirements. [Ord. #79-18; 1970 Code § 16-11.6]
§ 21-11.7. Public Hearings. [Ord. #79-18; 1970 Code § 16-11.7]
Upon submission of a perfected application, the administrative officer shall schedule
a public hearing for the applicant. The applicant shall meet all of the requirements
established in subsection 21-7.3 for public hearings.
§ 21-11.8. Time Period in Which to Act. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-11.8]
The approving authority shall grant, condition, or deny preliminary subdivision approval
within 45 days of a perfected application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant for subdivisions of 10 or fewer lots, or 95 days for subdivisions
containing more than 10 lots.
Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time periods or to obtain
an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall constitute a preliminary approval by the
approving authority.
§ 21-11.9. Effect of Preliminary Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-11.9]
If the approving authority acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit
six copies of a correct map to the administrative officer. The chairman and secretary
shall affix their signature to the plat with a notation that it has received preliminary
approval, and one such plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with final
approval requirements.
Except as provided herein, preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall confer the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of approval to the applicant:
a. The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which preliminary
approval is sought.
b. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving authority.
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted
shall not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements; layout and
design standards for streets, curb and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and offstreet
improvements; except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Borough from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety;
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary
§ 21-11.5 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-11.9
21:15
§ 21-12. MAJOR SUBDIVISION (FINAL APPROVAL).
§ 21-12.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.1]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing in triplicate on
forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an application for final subdivision
approval shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 21-6, shall be submitted with
the application form.
§ 21-12.2. Plat Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.2]
The application shall be accompanied by an original cloth tracing and eight black and
white prints of the proposed final subdivision. The plat shall not differ substantially from
subdivision plat, as the case may be;
c. That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may grant extensions
on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year but not to
exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have
been revised by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern beyond the threeyear
period.
d. In the case of a subdivision of 50 acres or more, the approving authority may grant
the rights referred to in paragraphs a, b, c above for such a period of time longer
than three years, as shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval;
2. Economic conditions; and
3. The comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the approving authority may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
(1) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval;
(2) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(3) Economic conditions; and
(4) The comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards shall govern
beyond the three-year period.
Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as herein
defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
§ 21-11.9 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-12.2
21:16
the approved preliminary plat.
§ 21-12.3. Final Plat Details. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.3]
The final plat for filing purposes shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of the
"Map Filing Act", P.L. 1960 c. (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The final plat shall show or be
accompanied by the following:
a. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic scale and
reference meridian.
b. Tract, boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names, easements and
other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and
other site lines; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves; area of each lot.
c. The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a distance of 200 feet.
d. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public use shall be
designated, and the proposed use of sites, other than residential shall be noted.
e. Lot, block, and street numbers as approved by the Borough Engineer including lot
and block numbers of abutting property.
f. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
g. Location and description of all monuments.
h. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
i. Certification by applicant's surveyor and engineer as to accuracy of details of plat.
j. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the owner has
given consent under an option agreement.
k. When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a municipality,
County or State, such approval shall be certified on the plat, or evidence shall be
submitted that an application has been made for such approval.
l. Final plat shall be accompanied by a statement of the Borough Engineer that he is
in receipt of maps showing the position of all storm water drains, sanitary sewer
mains and all utilities in exact location and elevation, together with any other data
required and indicating the estimated cost of the installation of all public
improvements required to be installed by the applicant.
m. Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one inch equals five
feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal, on sheets 22 inches by 35 inches
and drawings shall include both plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all
monuments referred to U.S.C. and G.S. level bench marks, and such elevations
shall be shown in feet and hundredths of feet.
n. Certificate from tax collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 21-12.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-12.3
21:17
§ 21-12.4. Final Subdivision Plat Review. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.4]
The applicant shall submit the completed application and maps, and the payment of all
required fees to the administrative officer, who shall submit copies of same to:
§ 21-12.5. Determination as to Compliance. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.5]
The Borough Engineer and planner and the approving authority attorney, where
appropriate, shall advise the approving authority of the following:
§ 21-12.6. Applicant's Responsibilities. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.6]
The applicant shall be required to submit the following for the approving authority
approval:
o. Written proof that the lands set aside or shown for easement, public use or streets
are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
a. Borough Engineer.
b. Board of Health.
c. Planning consultant.
d. Board of Public Works.
e. Approving authority attorney.
Those persons and boards shall make recommendations in writing to the approving
authority within 35 days of the application submission.
a. The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of final approval;
b. The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be installed;
c. The nature and amount of performance guarantees, if any, to be required as a
condition to final approval;
d. The provisions of open space reservation or dedication, and the standards for open
space organizations;
e. The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the approving authority and Borough for
costs incurred for legal, engineering, planning and other professional reviews and
work, for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the approving
agency, where applicable.
f. Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted or conditioned.
a. A developer's agreement, prepared by the approving authority attorney setting forth
the obligations of the applicant in connection with the final approval.
b. A performance guarantee, in a form satisfactory to the approving authority and
Borough complying with Section 21-13 of this Chapter, and guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
§ 21-12.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-12.6
21:18
§ 21-12.7. County Planning Board and Other Governmental Agency Approvals.
[Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.7]
Any final approval required for County subdivision approval or by other governmental
agencies, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Bergen County Planning Board
or other governmental agencies for review and approval. The approving authority may
condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable report
on the application by the County Planning Board or other governmental agency or by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§ 21-12.8. Approving Authority Action. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-12.8]
c. Maintenance guarantees, if any, for work completed prior to final approval.
d. Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way, or public lands in a form satisfactory to the
approving authority and Borough Attorneys.
e. Evidence of compliance with other conditions imposed by the approving authority.
f. Proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
g. Funds to be deposited to reimburse the approving agency and Borough for costs
incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering, planning, and other consultant
reports, for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the approving
authority.
a. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after submission of a
complete and perfected application to the administrative officer, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the approving
authority to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the approving authority
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, and shall be so accepted by
the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Unless the preliminary plat has been approved without changes, the final plat shall
incorporate all changes or modifications required by the approving authority.
The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of the Borough Engineer that
he is in receipt of a map which shows all utilities in exact location and elevation
and which identifies the utilities already installed and those to be installed. The
certificate shall also state:
1. That the applicant has installed all required improvements; or
2. That the applicant has posted a performance guarantee with the Borough Clerk
in sufficient amount and proper form to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
b. Upon final approval by the approving authority and the signature of the chairman
and secretary of the approving authority have been placed on the original tracing,
the administrative officer shall request the applicant to have one translucent tracing
cloth copy, three cloth prints and eight black and white prints of such final plat
§ 21-12.6 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-12.8
21:19
§ 21-12.9. Final Subdivision Approval Plats; Filing. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-12.9]
Final subdivision approval shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plat unless
within such period, the plat shall have been duly filed by the applicant with the County
Recording Officer.
The approving authority may for good and sufficient cause shown extend the period of
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing the
plat.
No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer until
it has been approved by the approving authority as indicated on the instrument by the
signature of the chairman and secretary of the approving authority or a certificate has
been issued pursuant to the laws of Chapter 291 of P.L. 1975. The signatures of the
chairman and secretary of the approving authority shall not be affixed until the developer
has posted the guarantees required pursuant to Section 21-18 of this Chapter, where
appropriate. If the County Recording Officer records any plat without such approval,
such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the Borough, the plat
shall be expunged from the official records.
It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the approving authority
in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its
title, date of filing, and official number.
§ 21-12.10. Effect of Final Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-12.10]
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary subdivision approval first granted
and all other rights conferred upon the applicant pursuant to subsection 21-11.9 of this
Chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval; provided that the rights conferred by this section
shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the required time period. If the
applicant has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and has duly recorded
the plat as required, the approving authority may extend such period of protection for
filing a copy thereof with each of the following:
1. Administrative officer.
2. Borough Engineer.
3. Construction Official.
4. Tax Assessor.
5. Borough Clerk.
6. Fire Department.
7. County Planning Board.
8. Other governmental units or municipal officials where required.
§ 21-12.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-12.10
21:20
extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time period
of preliminary approval pursuant to subsection 21-11.9 of this Chapter for the section
granted final approval.
In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development or planned residential
development or residential cluster of 50 acres or more or conventional subdivision for
150 acres or more, the approving authority may grant for such period of time longer than
two years, as shall be determined by the approving agency to be reasonable taking into
consideration:
§ 21-13. PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 21-13.1. Application of Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-13.1]
Except as provided herein, no building permit shall be issued for a building, structure, or
use, or any enlargement, expansion or change of use, unless a site plan is first submitted
and approved by the approving authority.
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be given unless all construction and conditions
conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally approved by the approving
authority as provided herein.
§ 21-13.2. Site Plan Approval; When Required. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-13.2]
Site plan review shall not be required for single and two-family detached dwellings or
for such accessory uses as a private garage, tool house, garden and private greenhouses,
swimming pools and other similar uses incidental to a single or two-family detached
dwelling or for similar improvements as accessory uses to a principal use.
Site plan approval shall not be required where:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval;
b. Economic conditions; and
c. The comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply thereafter, and the approving authority may thereafter
grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed;
b. Economic conditions; and
c. The comprehensiveness of the development.
a. Minor repairs to the interior of a building does not involve structural change or
enlargement of the building, as determined by the Construction Official.
§ 21-12.10 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-13.2
21:21
§ 21-13.3. Filing for Preliminary Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-13.3]
Any application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing in triplicate on
forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an application for preliminary site
plan approval shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 21-6 shall be submitted with
the application form.
The approving authority shall accept simultaneous applications for preliminary and final
site plan approval where so requested by the applicant provided that all of the conditions,
requirements and safeguards established for preliminary and final site plan approval are
adhered to.
§ 21-14. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN
APPROVAL.
§ 21-14.1. Preliminary Site Plan Review. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.1]
The applicant shall submit the preliminary site plan application and 10 copies of plat
maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative officer who shall submit
copies of the preliminary plat to the following:
b. Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a building or structure which
does not involve any enlargement of the building or major structural change, as
determined by the Construction Official.
However, the Construction Official at his discretion, may refer any application for
a building permit to the approving authority for site plan approval, anything herein
notwithstanding, where in the Official's judgment, the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or change of use will affect circulation, water supply, sewerage disposal,
drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading, or the lack
of any or all of these factors, environmental factors and other considerations as
specified in this Chapter.
Except as provided herein, all construction, reconstruction, alteration or
enlargement of a building, structure or use or a change of use or occupancy on or in
nonconforming structure, use or lot shall require site plan approval.
Any determination by the Construction Official that the site plan approval is not
required pursuant to this section shall be set forth in writing by the Construction
Official with copies of the letters filed with the applicant and the administrative
officer.
a. Approving authority attorney.
b. Borough Engineer.
c. Planning consultant.
d. Construction Official.
e. Board of Health.
§ 21-13.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-14.1
21:22
§ 21-14.2. County Planning Board and Other Governmental Agency Approvals.
[Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.2]
Any site plan application, requiring County Planning Board or other governmental
agency approvals, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Bergen County Planning
Board or other governmental agency for review and approval. The approving authority
may condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or other governmental agency
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
A preliminary site plan requiring County Planning Board or other governmental
approval which may not have been received at the time of the public hearing in the
community, shall require the public hearing to be continued until such time as the
required reports are received or by the failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
§ 21-14.3. Other Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.3]
§ 21-14.4. Public Hearings. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.4]
Upon submission of a perfected application, the administrative officer shall schedule
a public hearing for the applicant. The applicant shall meet all of the requirements
established in subsection 21-7.4 for public hearings.
f. Fire Department.
g. Police Department.
h. Department of Public Works.
i. Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the approving authority.
The professionals and boards shall make recommendation to the approving
authority in writing within 35 days of the application submission. The approving
authority shall take the recommendations into account, but shall have the authority
to proceed in the absence of such recommendations which are not essential to its
determination.
If the preliminary site plan is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified
thereof within 45 days of the date of submission or it shall be deemed to be
perfected as to content.
Where adjustments or changes are required in the site plan submission, the
applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify as a perfected
application as to content and for public hearing purposes.
a. The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which preliminary site
plan approval is sought.
b. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving authority.
§ 21-14.1 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-14.5
21:23
§ 21-14.5. Time Period in Which to Act. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.5]
The approving authority shall grant, condition, or deny preliminary site plan approval
within 45 days receipt of a perfected and complete site plan application for a site plan of
10 acres or less, or within 95 days of submission of a perfected and complete application
for a site plan of more than 10 acres, or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant for both classes of site plans.
Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time periods or to obtain
an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall constitute a preliminary approval by the
approving authority.
§ 21-14.6. Effect of Preliminary Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-14.6]
Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the following rights
for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted
shall not be changed, including but not limited to use requirements; lay-out and
design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and ontract
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the specific site
plan. The Borough may modify by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as they may relate to public health and safety provided such
modifications are in accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to
approval.
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
c. The applicant may apply for and the approving authority may grant extensions on
such preliminary approval for an additional period of one year but not to exceed a
total extension of two years provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
d. In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the approving authority
may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs a, b and c above for such a time
period, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the approving authority to
be reasonable taking into consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval;
2. Economic conditions; and
3. The comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the approving authority may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable
taking into consideration:
§ 21-14.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-14.6
21:24
§ 21-14.7. Filing for Final Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.7]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing in triplicate, on
forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an application for final approval
of a site plan shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 21-6, shall be submitted with
the application form.
§ 21-14.8. Final Site Plan Review. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.9]
The applicant shall submit the final site plan application and 10 copies of the plat maps
and payment of all required fees to the administrative officer who shall submit copies of
the plat to the following:
(1) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval;
(2) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of
the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(3) Economic conditions; and
(4) The comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as herein
defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
a. Borough Engineer.
b. Board of Health.
c. Planning consultant.
d. Department of Public Works.
e. Approving authority attorney.
The professionals and boards shall make recommendations to the approving
authority, in writing, within 45 days of the application submission. The approving
authority shall take the recommendations into account, but shall have the authority
to proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving authority finds
such recommendations not to be essential to its determination.
The approving authority shall review the application for final site plan approval
with or without conditions provided the following requirements have been met:
f. That the detailed drawings, specifications, and estimates meet all applicable codes
and ordinances;
g. That the final plans are substantially the same as the approved preliminary site plan
and conditions governing same;
h. That all improvements have been installed or bonds posted to ensure the installation
of improvements;
§ 21-14.6 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-14.8
21:25
§ 21-14.9. County Planning Board and Other Governmental Agency Approval.
[Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.9]
Whenever review or approval is required by the Bergen County Planning Board or by
other governmental agencies, a final site plan application shall be submitted by the
applicant for review and approval. The approving authority shall condition any approval
that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or other governmental agency or by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
§ 21-14.10. Time Period in Which to Act. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.10]
The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny final site plan approval within 45
days receipt of a perfected and complete site plan application, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time period or to obtain an
extension from the applicant, in writing, shall constitute final approval and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval.
§ 21-14.11. Final Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.11]
Upon approval of the site development plan and upon compliance with all conditions,
the engineer and the chairman and the secretary of the approving authority shall be
authorized to sign the plan and the secretary shall affix the seal of the Board. The tracing
shall be and remain a permanent record of the approving authority and the applicant
shall supply to the approving authority the number of prints reasonably required for its
records. A print shall be forwarded to each of the professionals identified in subsection
21-14.8 herein.
§ 21-14.12. Effect of Final Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-14.12]
Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval for the section
granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant that the zoning requirements
applicable to the preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
as part of preliminary approval which shall not be changed for a period of two years after
the date of final approval.
Approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval unless the applicant
i. That the applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final approval;
j. That proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent for which final site plan approval is sought.
k. All applicable fees have been paid prior to any final action by the approving
authority.
l. Requirements of other governmental units have been complied with.
§ 21-14.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-14.12
21:26
has secured a building permit to commence construction. The approving authority may
extend final approval, and the protection offered under subsection 21-14.6 for one year.
Up to three such extensions may be granted.
In the case of site plan for a planned development of 50 acres, or conventional site
plan for 150 acres or more, the approving authority may extend the rights granted under
final approval for such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined
by the approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration (a) the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; (b)
economic conditions; and (c) the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant
may apply for thereafter, and the approving authority may thereafter grant, an extension
of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
approving authority to be reasonable taking into consideration (a) the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; (b) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed; (c)
economic conditions; and (d) the comprehensiveness of the development.
The approving authority may, as a condition of final approval:
§ 21-14.13. Site Plan Amendments. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.13]
Amended site plan applications shall be filed with the approving authority and shall be
considered at the next regular meeting date of the approving authority provided that the
amended application is received no less than 14 days before the meeting date and the
amendments are minor in nature.
§ 21-14.14. Compliance. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.14]
All proposed improvements of development indicated on the approved site plan shall
meet the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and specifications of the
community, County, State or Federal governments and other agencies with jurisdiction
over matters pertaining to site development.
It shall be the joint responsibility of the Engineer and the Construction Official to enforce
their respective rules and regulations to insure compliance with the site plan approval
map and other specified conditions as may be imposed on the development.
a. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the development.
b. Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for final approval for
designated elements such as, but not limited to, landscaping, signs, street furniture,
etc., and require approval of these elements as a prerequisite for a Certificate of
Occupancy or zoning permit;
c. Condition the granting of a Certificate of Occupancy or zoning permit subject to the
applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or assignees meeting certain
requirements within a designated period of time, not to exceed one year from the
date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or zoning permit. This may
include, but is not limited to the installation of improvements, reevaluation of
circulation patterns, etc.
§ 21-14.12 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-14.15
21:27
§ 21-14.15. Site Plan Binding. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.15]
The site plan, as approved by the approving authority, shall be binding upon the
applicant. Any changes from the approved plan shall require resubmission and
reapproval by the approving authority.
§ 21-14.16. Revocation of Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord.
#79-19; 1970 Code § 16-14.16]
In the event of a failure to comply with any condition of site plan approval, the
Construction Official on his own initiative or upon recommendation from the Engineer,
may revoke the building permit or Certificate of Occupancy, as the case may be, and
seek to enjoin the violation, or take such other steps as permitted by law.
§ 21-15. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 21-15.1. General. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-15.1]
The applicant shall observe the following requirements and principles of land
subdivision in each subdivision or portion thereof.
The subdivision plat shall conform to the design standards that will encourage good
development patterns within the Borough. Where either an Official Map or Master Plan
or both have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions
shown thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, historic sites, public areas shown on
an adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision
plats.
§ 21-15.2. Streets. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-15.2]
The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such
as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets or with a minimum rightof-
way of 50 feet.
a. Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic
unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
b. Arterial Streets. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets may be required to provide a
marginal service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some
other means of separation of through and local traffic as the approving authority
may determine to be appropriate.
c. Pavement Width of Streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be minimum of
30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector and arterial streets.
d. Minimum Right-of-Way Width. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot
line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in any case; except when shown at
a greater width on the Master Plan or Official Map of the Borough or the street
constitutes an extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
e. Substandard Street Right-of-Way and Pavement Width. In connection with
subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths as
§ 21-14.15 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-15.2
21:28
§ 21-15.3. Block Patterns. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-15.3]
shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
Chapter, the applicant shall dedicate additional right-of-way or pavement width
along either one or both sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one side only,
one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
f. Street Grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades
on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum grade of less
than 1/2%.
g. Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections shall be
rounded at the curb line with a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
h. Street Jogs. Street jogs shall have centerline offsets of not less than 125 feet.
i. Reverse Curve Tangents. A tangent at least 25 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial, collector and local streets.
j. Street Line Deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any
one point by more than 10°, and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for all streets.
k. Change in Grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
l. Cul-de-sac Streets. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet
and shall provide a turn-around at the end with a property line radius of not less
than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street and a paved
surface radius of not less than 40 feet.
If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turn-around shall be provided
and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess
right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
m. Street Names. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of
an existing street shall have the same name.
n. Sidewalks. Where sidewalks are required, there shall be provided a minimum
walkway width of five feet constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Borough Engineer.
a. Block length and width, or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to
accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning ordinance and to
provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks of 1,000 or more feet in length, pedestrian crosswalks may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the approving authority. Such walkways shall be at
least 10 feet wide in right-of-way with a four feet wide improved pavement surface.
The walkway may also include other improvements including street lighting.
§ 21-15.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-15.3
21:29
§ 21-15.4. Lots. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-15.4]
§ 21-15.5. Public Use; Service Areas; Floodways. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-15.5]
§ 21-15.6. Water Mains, Culverts and Storm Sewers. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-15.6]
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm sewers shall be connected with
an approved system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
developments.
§ 21-15.7. Underground Utilities. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-15.7]
c. For all uses including commercial, industrial and planned development group areas,
block size shall be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses, and to permit
reasonable access, circulation and firefighting and emergency services.
a. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of the zoning
ordinance.
b. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and
radial to curved streets.
c. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a right-of-way
width of at least 50 feet in width except as provided herein.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall
begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use
due to such factors such as rock formations, drainage conditions, watercourses,
historic sites, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the approving agency, may,
after adequate investigation withhold approval of such lots.
a. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses and such further width
or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Any and all open
ditches are to be piped in accordance with the Planning Board Engineer's
requirements.
b. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops, and views shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
c. Any public use or areas shall be suitable size, shape and location under the
provision of reservation contained herein.
d. In a large development, easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility
installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and shall
be located in consultation with the utility companies or municipal departments
concerned.
§ 21-15.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-15.7
21:30
§ 21-15.8. Top Soil Protection, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. [Ord. #79-19;
1970 Code § 16-15.8]
No top soil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the
course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover
to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
All applications for subdivision shall be in accordance with the soil erosion and sediment
control ordinance or where same has not been adopted, the applicant shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 251, Laws of 1975, the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act.
§ 21-16. SITE PLAN DETAILS.
§ 21-16.1. Information to be Indicated on Site Plan. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-16.1]
All applications for site plan approval shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or architect. It shall bear the signature and seal of a licensed land
surveyor as to topographic and boundary survey data.
a. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving utility for
the underground installation of all utility distribution supply lines and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and
conditions incorporated as a part of its tariffs as the same are on file with the State
of New Jersey, Board of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the
approving authority prior to the granting of final approval a written instrument from
each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this
paragraph; provided, however, that lots in such subdivisions which abut existing
streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines have
theretofore been installed on any portion of the streets involved, may be supplied
with electric and telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service
connections from the utilities overhead lines shall be installed underground. The
location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed subdivision shall
be developed in conjunction with and as a part of the complete subdivision plan.
b. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an appropriate utility
easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided.
c. The approving authority of the Borough may in its discretion waive the installation
of the underground utilities where such installation will result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the
applicant by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the lands in such
subdivision.
d. Whenever underground utilities are installed in accordance with the provisions
hereof, fire alarm systems servicing the development may be required to be
installed in an appropriate subsurface distribution system connecting the necessary
alarm stations. The manner of installation, number and location of alarm stations
shall be in a manner approved by the Fire Department.
§ 21-15.7 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-16.1
21:31
All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth and shall contain
the following information and data where applicable:
a. A title block shall be indicated in the lower right hand corner of the plan and shall
include the name and address of the record owner, including the block and lot
number of the site; the title of the development; the name, address, license number
and seal of the person preparing the plan. If the owner is a corporation, the name
and address of the president and secretary shall be submitted with the application.
b. A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing the date of
preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and dated.
c. A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding areas and
existing street intersections within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject
premises.
d. A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used and a graphic representation
of the scale shall be displayed, and a north arrow. All distances and dimensions
shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall be given to the nearest
10 seconds.
e. The names of all owners of adjacent property within 200 feet of the subject
premises together with the block and lot numbers of the property, as shown on the
current municipal tax records.
f. Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the parcel. Adjacent
zone districts within 200 feet shall also be indicated. Such features may be shown
on a separate map or as a key on the detail map itself.
g. Survey data showing boundaries of the property, required building or set-back lines,
and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas
dedicated to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
h. Reference to any existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements or exceptions that
are in effect or are intended to cover all or any of the tract. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions, easement or exception shall be submitted with the
application. If there are no known covenants, deed restrictions, easements or
exceptions affecting the site, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the site
plan map.
i. Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all other structures
such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc., with spot elevations of such
structures. Structures to be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to
remain shall be indicated by solid lines.
j. All distances as measured along the right-of-way lines of existing streets abutting
the property to the nearest intersection with any other street.
k. Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other structures
including required yard and setback areas, building height in feet and stories and lot
coverage calculations.
l. Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs either free-standing or affixed
§ 21-16.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-16.1
21:32
to a building. Where signs are not to be provided, a notation to that effect shall be
indicated on the site plan.
m. Location of all storm drainage structures, soil erosion and sediment control devices
and utility lines whether publicly or privately owned with pipe sizes, grades and
direction of flow, and if any existing utility lines are underground, the estimated
location of the already underground utility lines shall be shown.
n. Existing and proposed contours, referred to U.S. Coast and Geodetic datum, with a
contour interval of one foot for slopes of 3% or less; an interval of two feet for
slopes of more than 3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of
15% or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
o. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses, depressions, ponds,
marshes, wooded areas and other significant existing features including previous
flood elevations of watercourses where available, ponds and marsh areas as may be
determined by survey.
p. All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading; and cross-sections showing
width roadway, location and width of sidewalk where required and location and
size of utility lines according to community standards and specifications.
q. The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed location of buildings
including proposed grades. Floor space of all buildings and estimated number of
employees, housing units, or other capacity measurements where required, shall
also be indicated. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time of
application, an amendment plan showing the proposed use shall be required prior to
a Certificate of Occupancy.
r. All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto public or private
streets showing the size and location of driveways and curb cuts including the
possible organization of traffic channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes,
additional width and other traffic controls which may be required. Improvements
such as roads, curbs, sidewalks and other design detail shall be indicated including
dimensions of parking stalls, access aisles, curb radii, direction of traffic flow, and
other conditions as may be required in the zoning ordinance or this Code.
s. The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading areas showing
size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
t. The location of all proposed water lines, valves and hydrants and all sewer lines or
alternative means of water supply or sewage disposal and treatment in conformance
with the applicable municipal standards and appropriate utility companies, where
applicable.
u. The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of proposed
outdoor lighting in conformance with applicable standards of the community
including type of standards to be employed, radius of light and intensity of
footcandles.
v. The proposed screening and landscaping and a planting plan indicating natural
§ 21-16.1 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-16.1
21:33
§ 21-16.2. Legend to be Indicated on Site Plan. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-16.2]
The following legends shall be indicated on the site plan.
vegetation to remain and areas to be planted and type of vegetation to be utilized.
w. The proposed storm water drainage system as to conform with design based on a
100-year storm. All site plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch showing all
existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary, and all areas such as paved areas,
grassed areas, wooded areas and any other surface areas contributing to the
calculations and other methods used in the determinations.
x. Such other information or data as may be required by the approving authority in
order to determine that the details on the site plan are in accordance with the
standards of a zoning ordinance or standards contained herein, and other municipal,
County or State ordinances and regulations.
a. To be signed before submission:
I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN WITH THE
____________________ OF THE BOROUGH OF MOONACHIE.
_______________________________________________________
Applicant Date
b. To be completed before submission:
SITE PLAN OF _______________________________________________
LOT_______________ BLOCK_______________ ZONE______________
DATE_______________ SCALE_________________________________
APPLICANT _________________________________________________
ADDRESS ___________________________________________________
c. To be signed before submission:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I HAVE PREPARED THIS SITE PLAN AND
THAT ALL DIMENSIONS AND INFORMATION ARE CORRECT.
_____________________________________________________
Name
_____________________________________________________
Title and License Number
d. To be signed before the issuance of a building permit:
APPROVED BY THE ______________________________ OF THE
BOROUGH OF MOONACHIE.
Date Chairperson
§ 21-16.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-16.2
21:34
§ 21-17. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 21-17.1. General. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.1]
In reviewing any application for site plan approval, conditional use approval, or
combinations thereof, the approving authority, advisory boards, professional advisers
and the applicant shall be guided by the general and specific requirements contained
herein.
§ 21-17.2. Number of Parking Spaces Required. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.2]
The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as set forth in Table I below.
If determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space,
the fraction shall require one additional parking space.
e. To be signed before __________ approval is given:
I HAVE REVIEWED THIS SITE PLAN AND CERTIFY THAT IT MEETS
ALL CODES AND ORDINANCES UNDER MY JURISDICTION.
Date Engineer
f. To be signed before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS HAVE
BEEN INSTALLED OR THAT A PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE HAS
BEEN POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION __________ OF THE
SITE PLAN ORDINANCE.
____________________________________
Construction Official
_____________________________________
Engineer
g. To be signed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OF
THIS SITE PLAN HAVE BEEN INSTALLED IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL
APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES.
Date Engineer
Date Construction Official
OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUED
Date
§ 21-16.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.2
21:35
Table I
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Automobile service station 4 parking spaces for each bay plus 1 for
each employee in the maximum working
shift
Bank and saving institution 1 parking space for each 300 square feet
of floor area, or 8 spaces for each teller
window, whichever is greater
Bowling lanes 5 parking spaces for each lane
Churches and other places of worship 1 for each 3 seats, or 1 for each 72 inches
of seating space when benches rather than
seats are used
Community buildings, social halls and
clubs
1 parking space for each 4 seats, except
where a specific amount of seating is
undetermined, then 1 parking space shall
be required for each 8 members
Funeral homes, mortuaries 5 parking spaces for each chapel or
slumber room
Industrial, manufacturing uses and
warehouse
1 space for every 1 1/2 employees on the
largest shift, or a total of 1/2 the building
area, whichever is greater
Laboratory and research uses 1 parking space for every 400 square feet
of floor area
Medical or dental clinics or offices 4 spaces for each doctor or dentist, plus 1
space for each 100 square feet of floor
area
Mixed land uses Mixed land uses in the same building shall
be calculated as the sum of the individual
uses unless the applicant can demonstrate
to the approving authority that the parking
characteristics of the individual uses are
such that the total needs of the
development are less than the sum of the
parts and the number of spaces to be
provided will satisfy the lesser need
Mobile homes Each mobile home shall have 1 and onequarter
parking spaces per home
§ 21-17.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.2
21:36
Table I
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Motels, hotels, motor lodges 1 for each rental unit, and in addition
compliance with the requirements for each
particular additional use located on the
property, such as restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments, retail stores and
meeting rooms
Nursing homes, hospitals, convalescing
homes
1 space for every 2 beds plus 1 space per
staff member and employee in the
maximum work shift
Offices, business and professional (other
than medical and dental)
1 space for every 250 square feet of floor
area
Public and government buildings 1 space for every 800 square feet of gross
floor area
Public and private (including religious)
schools
2 parking spaces for each classroom or 1
space for each 4 seats in the room with the
largest seating capacity, whichever is the
greater number
Residential dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
Restaurants, eating and drinking
establishments and catering halls
1 parking space for every 3 seats plus 1
space for each 2 employees
Restaurants, fast food 1 parking space for each 2 seats plus 1
parking space for each 2 employees in the
maximum work shift or a minimum of 40
parking spaces whichever is greater
Retail stores, store groups, shops,
shopping centers
1 for each 150 square feet of floor area
where the floor area shall not exceed
2,000 square feet; 1 for each 175 square
feet of floor area where the floor area shall
exceed 2,000 square feet
Theaters 1 parking space for every 3 seats
Other uses not provided herein To be determined by the approving
authority
§ 21-17.3. Location of Parking Spaces. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.3]
The approving authority shall approve the location of all proposed parking spaces on
the site and shall take into consideration the size and topography of the site, sight safety
conditions, and the elimination of nuisance factors including glare, noise, dust and other
similar considerations.
Subject to other considerations as specified herein, off-street parking shall not be located
§ 21-17.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.3
21:37
in a required front yard except where the required front yard exceeds 20 feet. Parking
shall not be permitted in an area located 20 feet or more from the street right-of-way line.
Any parking area located between the principal building and the minimum front yard
setback shall be landscaped or screened. No off-street parking area shall be located
closer than five feet from any side or rear lot line. These conditions shall apply to all
surface and above grade parking facilities.
All parking facilities shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any two intersecting
streets, or within the sight triangle of any driveway and the street right-of-way.
§ 21-17.4. Parking Aisle Width. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.4]
Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate circulation of pedestrians and
vehicles within and adjoining the subject property. The width of all aisles providing
direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards
established in Table II.
Table II
Minimum Aisle Width (feet)
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle
One-way
Width (feet)
Two-way
0° (Parallel Parking) 12 18
30° 15 18
45° 18 20
60° 18 20
90° (Perpendicular) 25 25
§ 21-17.5. Size of Parking Stalls. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.5]
Parking stalls for churches, community buildings, manufacturing, and industrial and
warehouse uses, business and professional offices shall have a minimum area of 180
square feet of space which shall measure nine feet in width and 20 feet in length.
For all other uses, there shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of space exclusive of
aisles which shall measure 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length.
§ 21-17.6. Circulation Within Parking Area. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.6]
Except for attendant parking, all parking spaces shall be designed free and clear of any
obstruction to individual parking stalls. Such parking spaces shall be located in such a
fashion as to permit all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under no condition
shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a parking lot driveway, or otherwise block the
free movement of traffic within the parking area or specific points of safety control, such
as fire hydrants, doorways, elevators, or other similar locations. Parking and loading
areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking
or loading space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
§ 21-17.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.6
21:38
Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to permit emergency and service
vehicles such as delivery trucks, solid waste collection vehicles and the like to have
reasonable access to and space for their intended functions.
Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as great an extent as possible,
separated from vehicular traffic. Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas where
warranted, shall be provided.
The use of pedestrian carts or other similar accessory vehicles shall not be permitted to
be retained within the driving area of the parking facility.
§ 21-17.7. Parallel Parking Stalls. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.7]
The parallel parking stalls shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum
length of 22 feet. In addition, the minimum aisle width shall be 12 feet.
§ 21-17.8. Location of Driveways. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.8]
a. All entrance and exit driveways to a public or private street shall be so located to
afford maximum safety to the roadway and to provide for safe and convenient
ingress and egress and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic.
In no case shall there be permitted unrestricted access along the length of the street
or streets upon which the parking area abuts.
b. Sight Distances. The minimum sight distance established in Table III shall be
adhered to between a driveway and the adjoining street in accordance with the
definition of a sight triangle. The driveway shall be designed in profile and grading
which shall be reviewed by the Borough Engineer.
For purposes of this Chapter, sight distance measurement shall be measured from
the drivers seat of a standard vehicle located on that portion of the exit driveway
that is immediately contiguous to the traveled way with the front of the vehicle 10
feet behind the right-of-way line of the road; with the height of the eye 3.75 feet to
the top of the object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
Table III
Minimum Sight Distance
From a Driveway and Adjoining Street
Allowable Maximum Speed on
Roadway
(miles/hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(in feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
§ 21-17.6 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.8
21:39
Table III
Minimum Sight Distance
From a Driveway and Adjoining Street
Allowable Maximum Speed on
Roadway
(miles/hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(in feet)
50 or more 500
c. Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no driveway entrance or
exit shall be located within 50 feet of the point where the curb return of the street
intersection and the curb line meet.
d. No part of any driveway shall be closer than 25 feet from any other driveway on an
adjoining parcel nor shall more than one driveway be located closer than 75 feet to
another driveway on the same site as measured from the closest edge of any two
driveways along the same right-of-way line.
e. No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle or on a ramp of an
interchange or within 50 feet of the beginning of any ramp or other portion of an
interchange.
f. Continuous open driveways in excess of the requirements of Table IV without
curbing, shall be prohibited.
Table IV
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs, and Curb Return Radius Standards
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Driveway
Width
(in feet)
Depressed Curb
(in feet)
Curb Return
Radius
(in feet)
Driveway
Width
(in feet)
Depressed Curb
(in feet)
Curb Return
Radius
(in feet)
3-10 Family
Residence
12-15 32-35 20 min.
30 max.
22-26 44-50 20 min.
30 max.
Over 10 Family
Residence
15-16 35-38 20 min.
30 max.
24-30 46-52 25 min.
35 max.
Commercial and
Industrial
15-30 35-50 35 min.
45 max.
30-50 50-70 35 min.
45 max.
Service Stations 20-30 35-50 20 min.
35 Max.
40-50 50-60 20 min.
35 max.
NOTE: Driveways connecting to a public or private street at an angle shall have the same widths as shown on Table IV. The width of
depressed curb and the radius of curb returns shall provide for the sharpest turning radii of vehicles using the driveway, keeping the
vehicles within their prescribed lanes.
§ 21-17.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.9
21:40
§ 21-17.9. Geometric Design. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.8]
The geometric design of a driveway connection to a public or private street shall be
governed by sound traffic engineering principals. The following guidelines are utilized
in preparing a geometric design, but some deviation may be necessitated due to the many
variables encountered in the course of preparing a design. The applicant should be aware,
therefore, that although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines, conditions
may dictate deviations from them and requirements of the Borough Engineer shall be
final.
§ 21-17.10. Guard Rails, Wheel Stops and Parking Lot Stripping. [Ord. #79-19;
1970 Code § 16-17.9]
Guard rails shall be provided in appropriate locations where required for safety purposes.
Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be required in appropriate
locations. Parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an
additional sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to accommodate such overhang.
Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked and delineated. The
approving authority may require certain areas to be maintained for fire-fighting purposes
or other emergency purposes. These areas as well as other pavement signage shall be
appropriately designated.
§ 21-17.11. Minimum and Maximum Grades in Parking Areas. [Ord. #79-19;
a. Two-way Operation. Driveways used for two-way operation will intersect a public
or private street at an angle to as near 90° as site conditions will permit and in no
case will be less than 60°.
b. One-way Operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one direction of travel (right
turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than 45° with a public street.
c. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the
volume and character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The required maximum and
minimum dimensions for driveways connecting to a public or private street at 90°
are indicated in Table IV. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic
over 25% of which is truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions. Driveways serving low daily traffic volumes or traffic less than 25%
of which is truck traffic shall be permitted to use low to minimum dimensions.
d. Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of
any vehicle undercarriage.
e. Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed curb driveway as to cause
the ramp to be too steep and be likely to cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk
shall be appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
The surface of any driveway shall be constructed with a permanent pavement of
a type specified by standards set by the Borough Engineer. Such pavement shall
extend to the paved portion of the public or private street pavement.
§ 21-17.9 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.11
21:41
1970 Code § 16-17.10]
The minimum and maximum parking grades shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
Parking stalls and service aisles 6 1/2
Main approach walk-ways to
buildings
4 1/2
Collector or other service walkways 8 1/2
Swales 10 2
Principal circulation aisles 8 1/2
Driveways; entrances and exits 6* 1/2*
*For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line. Driveway intersections
with any roadway within a distance of 35 feet from the curb line, as measured along the
centerline of the driveway, shall not exceed a grade of 1.5%.
§ 21-17.12. Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Loading Area. [Ord. #79-19;
1970 Code § 16-17.11]
Every parcel of land used as a public or private off-street parking or loading area shall
be maintained in good condition, free of hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas,
sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers, guard rails, markings, signs,
landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good
condition.
§ 21-17.13. Waiver of Parking Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.12]
If any applicant can clearly demonstrate to the approving authority that, because of the
nature of the operation or use, the parking requirements of this section are unnecessary
or excessive, the approving authority shall have the power to approve a site plan
showing less paved parking area than required by this section; provided, however, that a
landscaped area of sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved
for the purpose of meeting future off-street parking requirements in the event that a
change of use of the premises shall make additional off-street parking spaces necessary.
§ 21-17.14. Other Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.13]
a. Limitations as to Use. All off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the
parking of passenger automobiles and no commercial repair work or service of any
kind shall be conducted on such parking lot.
b. Non-Availability. At any time that the required off-street parking facilities cease to
be available as required, the Certificate of Occupancy for the building or buildings
built in conjunction with such parking areas shall be cancelled and become null and
§ 21-17.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.14
21:42
§ 21-17.15. Off-Street Parking Construction. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.14]
void.
c. Charges. There shall be no charge made of the use of off-street parking facilities
and no cars other than self-propelled passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use
any of the off-street parking facilities herein required, and no service of any kind
shall be extended to the vehicle occupying such off-street parking facilities except
for emergency purposes.
d. Traffic Markers; Paint Stripping. The side perimeter of each parking space shall be
delineated by painted lines on the pavement for the length of the parking space. The
width of all lines shall not be less than four inches, nor more than six inches, and
shall be uniform in the entire parking area. A second set of lines shall also be
painted on the ground for each space, which lines shall be parallel to the perimeter
lines.
One-way aisles shall be marked with directional arrows on the ground not less than
eight feet long with directional arrows at each end of the aisle. Two-way aisles
shall be marked with two directional arrows on the ground, each not less than eight
feet long. Two-way aisles shall also be marked with a center line not less than
four inches wide. Parking aisles that lead to private roadways or driveways on the
property shall be marked "STOP" signs in every case where there are more than
20 parking spaces provided off any aisle that leads into another interior roadway or
driveway.
All traffic markers, traffic signs, traffic signals and traffic control devices shall be
constructed, erected, delineated and maintained in accordance with the standards,
regulations and requirements set forth in "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" prepared by the United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration (1971), as the same now exists and as the same may be
interpreted and amended. Copies of this publication are on file in the approving
authority office and the office of the Traffic Bureau of the Police Department.
All traffic markers and traffic signs, traffic signals, directional arrows, parking
space delineation lines and traffic control devices shown on an approved site plan
are required to be installed and maintained in good condition sufficient to serve
their intended purpose.
a. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all
surface water in a manner so as not to unreasonably impair the surroundings.
b. All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
bituminous or cement binder pavement according to specifications established for
this purpose by the Borough Engineer.
c. All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a concrete curb or Belgium
block as set forth herein.
§ 21-17.14 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.16
21:43
§ 21-17.16. Off-Street Loading Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.15]
In any district, in connection with every building or buildings group or part thereof,
hereinafter erected, which are to be utilized by industrial and commercial uses or
requires the distribution of vehicles of material or merchandise and for any residential
development containing 30 or more dwelling units and for large scale public and quasipublic
uses, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same zone lot with such
building, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the requirements of Table V.
Each such loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 35 feet or more in
length, depending upon the functions to be performed. The overall floor to ceiling height
or clear height distance shall not be less than 12 feet which may be increased where
required.
Table V
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Floor Area (in square feet)
Land Use**
At Which First Berth is
Required
At Which Second Berth is
Required*
Industrial
Manufacturing 0 to 5,000 40,000
Warehouse 0 to 5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research 0 to 5,000 40,000
Commercial
Wholesale 0 to 5,000 40,000
Retail 0 to 5,000 20,000
Service establishments 0 to 5,000 40,000
Commercial recreation 0 to 5,000 100,000
Restaurants 0 to 2,000 25,000
Office buildings 0 to 5,000 100,000
Hotel 0 to 10,000 100,000
Funeral home 0 to 10,000 100,000
Institutional, Public
Schools 0 to 10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing homes 0 to 10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 0 to 10,000 100,000
§ 21-17.16 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.16
21:44
*An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount of square feet as
indicated as required between the need for one and two berth intervals.
**In the case of a multiple use building, the amount of off-street loading required shall
be equal to the sum of the parts unless same can be demonstrated to be in excess as shall
be subject to determination by the approving authority.
Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy any required
side or rear yard but shall not be located in the required front yard. When adjoining
a residential use, institutional use or place of general assembly a suitably screened or
landscaped buffer shall be provided.
Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention zone, within 25
feet of any fire hydrant, or within 10 feet of any stairway, doorway, elevator or other
general means of entry to and from a building for the general public, nor shall it block
or in any way interfere with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress
or egress nor shall it interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicles. All such
loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by sign or other visual communication
as to the location.
All loading and unloading operations shall be conducted entirely within the boundaries
of the lot concerned, and no vehicle or conveyance shall in any manner use public
streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or unloading operations other than
ingress or egress to the lot.
§ 21-17.17. Lighting. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.16]
In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans for all proposed
exterior lighting. These plans shall include the location, type of light, radius of light,
and height and intensity in footcandles. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street
parking and loading areas shall be shielded and so arranged as to reflect the light away
from residential premises and streets.
Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or intermittent illumination.
Lighting which requires change in color, intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited.
Lighting shall in no way interfere with, detract from or diminish in any way from the
effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning device.
§ 21-17.18. Signs. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.17]
Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the specific design, location,
size, construction and illumination.
If the applicant is unable to provide said details for signs, the approving authority shall
condition its approval upon receipt of same prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
§ 21-17.19. Landscaping. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.18]
A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan application. The plan shall
identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, bushes, plant material, ground cover and
natural features such as boulders and rock outcroppings.
§ 21-17.16 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.20
21:45
§ 21-17.20. Buffer Areas. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.19]
Buffers including fences, landscaping, berms and mounds shall be used to minimize any
adverse impacts or nuisances from the site to adjacent areas.
Screen planting of a dense evergreen material not less than four feet nor more than
six feet in height shall be provided around the outside boundary of off-street parking
and loading areas for more than six vehicles and any loading area. In lieu of screen
planting, a decorative masonry wall with a maximum of three-quarter inch spacing may
be provided not less than four feet or more than six feet in height, maintained in good
condition and without advertising. No parking or loading area shall be visible from the
street.
§ 21-17.21. Gas, Electric and Telephone Services. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.20]
Gas, electric and telephone services shall be provided by the applicant in concert with
the appropriate public utility providing such service. Service on the site shall be provided
as a part of an underground system.
If such facilities cannot be reasonably provided due to topographic or geologic condition
of the land, or due to technological circumstances, and where the applicant can
adequately demonstrate the lack of feasibility of same to the satisfaction of the approving
authority, a waiver of this requirement may be granted.
Where existing utility lines, such as electric, and telephone poles exist off-tract, and
require relocation as a result of the proposed development, the approving authority shall
be assured that the relocation will not create or maintain any hazardous or dangerous
conditions.
§ 21-17.22. Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Disposal. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.21]
Adequate provisions for water supply and sanitary sewage disposal shall be indicated.
Facilities shall include and not be limited to approvals, where appropriate, of the
engineer of the serving utility company, Department of Health and Fire Department. The
locations of all proposed fire hydrants or similar facilities shall be indicated on the plan
and the areas shall provide for appropriate fire lanes or protective areas which shall not
be impeded by parking areas or standing vehicles or other obstructions, particularly in
commercial centers.
§ 21-17.23. Storm Water Drainage. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.22]
Provisions shall be made for the drainage of surface runoff waters in and from the
premises so that flooding and erosion of the property and the property of others will
be prevented. Each site plan submitted to the approving authority shall be reviewed by
the engineer to establish requirements to prevent adverse drainage conditions both on
and off the site. All open ditches shall be piped in accordance with the Planning Board
Engineer's specifications.
The drainage systems shall be designed in conformance to accepted engineering
standards. To facilitate the review of proposed drainage facilities for development,
§ 21-17.20 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.23
21:46
design calculations prepared by the applicant's engineer shall accompany the application.
The design considerations shall include and not be limited to drainage areas, runoff
calculations, storm drain pipelines, inlet designs and manholes. Unless otherwise
stipulated by the Borough Engineer, drainage facilities shall be designed on the basis of
a 100-year storm.
§ 21-17.24. Sewer and Drainage Easements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.23]
The approving authority may require as a part of the site plan approval that the applicant
or owner dedicate to the Borough an easement not greater than 25 feet wide from each
side of the bank of the stream or drainage facility or sewer or drainage pipe for access to
any lot under consideration for site plan approval. Such easements shall not be less than
a minimum width of 15 feet.
§ 21-17.25. Curbing. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.24]
§ 21-17.26. Street Widening. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.25]
The right-of-way width, measured from lot line to lot line shall not be less than 50 feet
in width, except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street constitutes an extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
In connection with site plans that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Official Map or Master Plan or are less than 50 feet in width,
the applicant shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of the road. If
the site plan is along one side only, one-half of the required difference in roadway width
shall be dedicated.
§ 21-17.27. Sidewalks. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.26]
Each land development requiring site plan approval may be required to provide a
sidewalk within the street right-of-way.
Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks may also be required for any development of 50 or
more parking spaces within the parking area to provide convenient and safe access for
a. Where curbing is lacking, an applicant for site plan approval shall install curbing
along the extent of all property fronting public and private streets in accordance
with municipal standards and specifications.
The Borough Engineer may require curbing within parking areas in order to
facilitate drainage and provide separation between pedestrian and vehicular
movement.
b. Curb grading and alignment is to be determined as established in the area unless
otherwise required by the Borough Engineer.
c. Where a proposed driveway is to serve any land development of 50 or more parking
spaces, curbing need not be carried across the driveway opening as a depressed
curb, but rather may be swept back as curb returns. Where the driveway serves a
facility having less than 50 parking spaces, a depressed curb driveway shall be
utilized.
§ 21-17.23 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.27
21:47
pedestrian circulation.
Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, brick or other similar material and shall be
at least four feet in width.
Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along aisles and driveways
and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur shall be raised six inches or more above the
parking area except when crossing streets or driveways. Sidewalks, when constructed
along the building, shall be located not less than three feet from the building.
§ 21-17.28. Refuse Collection and Storage. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.27]
Provisions shall be made for the proper storage and collection of refuse. All such storage
shall be maintained within the confines of an enclosed building or structure and shall
be reasonably accessible for vehicular collection on the site, or shall be appropriately
screened and landscaped where outdoor storage is necessary.
The Board of Health shall approve the location and method of collection on the site.
§ 21-17.29. Retaining Walls. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.28]
Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for the purpose intended.
Walls shall not detract from the aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed, and to this
end shall be fenced or landscaped in accordance with the plans to be approved by the
approving authority.
§ 21-17.30. Outdoor Storage. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.29]
Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be suitably located and approved by the
approving authority which shall consider the relationship of such areas to adjacent
properties and roadways, provided however, that in all such cases, where storage is
permitted, such areas be suitably screened, as provided in subsection 21-17.36.
§ 21-17.31. Design Standards for Physically Handicapped Persons. [Ord. #79-19;
1970 Code § 16-17.30]
In accordance with Chapter 220, 221 and 224 of the Laws of 1975, all plans and
specifications for the construction or remodeling of any public building, as defined
herein, shall provide facilities for the physically handicapped.
§ 21-17.32. Design Facilities; Buildings. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.31]
a. All public buildings shall contain at least one principal entrance accessible to and
usable by physically handicapped persons, which shall be either ramped or at
ground level.
b. On each floor open to the public at least one water closet shall be provided for each
sex. In general, toilet facilities shall be provided to accommodate wheelchair
occupants which shall include adequate stall door width, grab rails, sufficient space
and appropriate height;
c. A drinking fountain of suitable height and extension for wheelchair occupants on
§ 21-17.27 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-17.32
21:48
§ 21-17.33. Parking Lot Design. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.32]
§ 21-17.34. Sidewalks. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-17.33]
A sidewalk hereafter constructed or reconstructed on public or private property for
public use shall be constructed in a manner that will facilitate use by physically
handicapped persons. At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines
of travel, and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt changes in grade, a
sidewalk shall slope gradually to street level so as to provide an uninterrupted line of
travel.
§ 21-17.35. Architectural Screening of Mechanical Equipment. [Ord. #79-19; 1970
Code § 16-17.34]
Architectural screening of any mechanical equipment on the roof or outside of any
building shall be installed so as to screen the mechanical equipment from view.
Architectural screening for purposes of this section shall be deemed to mean the use
of metal, stone or other relatively maintenance free material in slats or other design
so as to screen and prevent the direct view of the mechanical equipment. The term
mechanical equipment includes any fans, air conditioning equipment, elevator housing,
water towers, compressors, heating equipment and any other equipment of any kind.
every floor open to the public shall be provided;
d. In any multi-story building an elevator sufficient in size to accommodate a
wheelchair shall be provided;
e. At least one public telephone at a height accessible to wheelchair occupants shall
be provided.
a. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but not less than two
parking spaces shall be designed and designated for physically handicapped
persons. Spaces shall be most accessible and approximate to the building or
buildings which the parking spaces serve.
b. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible sign
displaying the International Symbol of Access along with the following wording:
"These spaces reserved for physically handicapped drivers".
c. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in wheelchairs or on
braces or crutches to get in and out of either side of an automobile onto level, paved
surface suitable for wheeling and walking;
d. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in wheelchairs or using
braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars; and
e. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped people
access from parking area to sidewalk.
§ 21-17.32 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-17.36
21:49
§ 21-17.36. Screening and Confinement of Materials. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-17.35]
Any materials left or kept outside of a building shall be screened and kept within limited
confines. Any material, trash or refuse or any combination kept or left outside of a
building and any containers for the material shall either be:
§ 21-18. ON-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 21-18.1. General Requirements. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-18.1]
Before recording final subdivision plats or approving site plan plats, the approving
authority shall require that the applicant shall have installed or shall have furnished
performance guarantees for the installation of on-tract improvements in accordance with
Borough specifications as follows:
Streets, street signs, grading, pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, walkways, street
lighting, shade trees, water mains, fire hydrants, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and surveyor's
monuments as required by the "Map Filing Law", (P.L. 1960 c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et
seq.)).
All such required improvements shall be certified by the Borough Engineer unless the
applicant shall have filed a performance guarantee sufficient in amount to cover the cost
of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Borough
Engineer.
§ 21-18.2. Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. [Ord. #79-19; Ord. #80-7;
1970 Code §§ 16-18.2&16-18.3]
Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site plan approval
or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit, the approving authority may require
a. Finished and screened in a manner shown on the proposed site plan designed to
meet the applicable requirements herein;
b. Enclosed on all four sides with the same material that is used for the outer surface
of the exterior walls of the building adjacent thereto except for entry gates; or
c. Enclosed and screened in any other manner approved by the approving authority
provided the same is designed to effectively confine the material within the
enclosed area and screen the same from other areas outside the building, and is a
material that is not likely to create problems of maintenance, sanitation and
nuisance.
d. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the storage of any material
in any zone where such use of the property is not otherwise permitted by the zoning
ordinance and all applicable laws and regulations. If the applicant does not propose
any outside storage of the materials, the plan shall so indicate. The applicant shall
not thereafter store any of the materials outside of the building unless a plan is
submitted to and approved by the approving authority for that purpose.
§ 21-17.36 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-18.2
21:50
and shall accept for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements:
a. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Borough in an amount
not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for improvement, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final
map and required by the "Map Filing Law", P.L. 1960, c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.),
water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices,
public improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site
improvements and landscaping.
b. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the governing body for a
period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of improvement. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or
improvements.
c. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance
guarantee has been provided may be extended by the governing body by resolution.
As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of any performance
guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as determined as of the time of the
passage of the resolution.
d. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance with the
performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the
Borough for the reasonable costs of the improvements not completed or corrected
and the Borough may either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof
complete such improvements.
e. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may notify the governing
body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Borough Clerk of the
completion or substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect all
improvements of which such notice has been given and shall file a detailed report,
in writing, with the governing body, indicating either approval, partial approval or
rejection of such improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The
costs of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
f. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements, on the basis of the report of the Borough Engineer and shall notify
the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of the report and the action
of the approving authority with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt
of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
§ 21-18.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-18.2
21:51
§ 21-18.3. Other Governmental Agencies or Public Utilities. [Ord. #79-19; 1970
Code § 16-18.4]
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own
the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or a
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 21-18.4. Inspection and Approval. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-18.5]
All improvements listed in Sections 21-18 and 21-19 shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall be notified by the applicant at least 24
hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved.
§ 21-19. OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC AREAS.
§ 21-19.1. Standards for the Establishment of Open Space Organizations. [Ord.
#79-19; 1970 Code § 16-19.1]
Under the provisions of this Chapter and State statutes, the Borough, other governmental
agencies, the Board of Education, State, County and other public bodies can be
designated to maintain and accept public open space for recreational or conservational
uses. These public agencies can accept and maintain such open spaces provided the
dedication is not conditioned upon the same being made available to public use.
Where a subdivision or site plan is required, this Chapter shall require that the applicant
provision of the improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount
of the performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the governing body to send or provide such notification
to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability
pursuant to such performance guarantee for such improvements.
g. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving authority
may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section, shall be followed.
h. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to
contest by legal proceedings any determination of the governing body or the
Borough Engineer.
i. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable inspection fees paid to
the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements; provided that
the Borough may require of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the Borough Engineer for such inspection.
j. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
§ 21-18.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-19.1
21:52
provide for an organization for the ownership and maintenance of any open space for
the benefit of owners or residents of the development, if the open space is not dedicated
to the Borough or other governmental agency. Such organizations shall not be dissolved
and shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any
of its open space without first offering to dedicate the same to the Borough wherein the
land is located.
In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space in reasonable
order and condition, the administrative officer designated by resolution to administer
this subsection may serve written notice upon the owners of the development setting
forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the open space in
reasonable condition, and the notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing,
the designated municipal body or administrative officer, may modify the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of time not to
exceed 65 days within which they may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the
original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be cured within the 35 days or
any permitted extension thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve the open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year may enter upon and maintain such land.
The entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open space
except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the
expiration of the year, the designated municipal body or officer, as the case may be,
shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible
for the maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice
to such organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by such municipal
body or officer, at which hearing such organization and the owners of the development
shall show cause why such maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the election of the
Borough, continue for a succeeding year. If the designated municipal body or officer
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain the open space in
reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to maintain the open space at the end
of the year. If the municipal body or officer shall determine such organization is not
ready and able to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, the Borough may,
in its discretion, continue to maintain the open space during the next succeeding year,
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The decision of the
municipal body or officer in any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision
subject to judicial review.
If a municipal body or officer is not designated by resolution to administer this
subsection, the governing body shall have the same powers and be subject to the same
restrictions as provided in this subsection.
The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro-rata against the
properties within the development that have a right of enjoyment of the open space in
accordance with assessed values at the time of imposition of the lien, and shall become
a lien and tax on the properties and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied
and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and
in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 21-19.1 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-19.2
21:53
§ 21-19.2. Reservation of Public Areas. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-19.2]
If the land use plan or Master Plan of the Borough or if the Official Map of the Borough
provides for the reservation of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control
basins, or public areas within the proposed development, before approving a subdivision
or site plan, the approving authority may further require that such streets, ways, basins
or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The
approving authority may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas to be shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The
approving authority may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat or
within such further time as may be agreed to by the developer.
Unless during such a period or extension thereof the government entity having
jurisdiction shall have entered into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such
streets, ways, basins or areas, the applicant shall not be bound by such reservations
shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in accordance with
applicable development regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
streets and roadways, flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the
subdivision or land development and required for final approval.
§ 21-19.3. Compensation to Applicant. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-19.3]
The applicant shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss found to be caused
by such temporary reservation and deprivation of use. In such instances, unless a lesser
amount has previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed
to be fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period of
reservation; provided that determination of such fair market value shall include, but
not be limited to, consideration of real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved
and pro-rated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall be compensated for the
reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering, or other professional services incurred in
connection with obtaining subdivision or site plan approval caused by the reservation.
§ 21-20. PENALTIES.
§ 21-20.1. Premature Sale. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-20.1; Ord. #90-4]
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final
subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for
which Borough approval is required, such person shall be subject to the General Penalty
established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this Code. Each lot disposition shall be deemed
a separate violation.
§ 21-20.2. Civil Action. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-20.2]
In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may institute and maintain a civil action:
a. For injunctive relief, and
§ 21-19.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-20.2
21:54
§ 21-20.3. Effect of Transferee, Purchaser or Grantee. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-20.3]
In any action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee is entitled to a lien upon the portion
of the land, from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of
the developer or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposits made or
purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of the land or within six years,
if unrecorded.
§ 21-20.4. Other Penalties. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-20.4; Ord. #90-4]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the General Penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5
of this Code.
§ 21-21. INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY.
§ 21-21.1. Governing Body May Amend. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-21.1]
All amendments of this Chapter shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of
New Jersey Law.
§ 21-21.2. Interpretation. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-21.2]
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this Chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals
and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules,
regulations or ordinances, provided that where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this Chapter shall apply.
§ 21-21.3. Copy to be Filed with County Planning Board. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code
§ 16-21.6]
Immediately upon adoption of this Chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a copy of this
Chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also file
with the County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of the Borough relating
to land use such as the zoning ordinance of the Borough.
§ 21-21.4. Definition of Terms. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-21.7]
Whenever a term is used in this Chapter which is defined in Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, such
term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in the
statute unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this Chapter.
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale
if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with law by the
Borough.
§ 21-20.2 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW § 21-21.5
21:55
§ 21-21.5. Pending Applications. [Ord. #79-19; 1970 Code § 16-21.8]
All applications for development made and filed prior to the effective date of this
Chapter may be construed in accordance with a prior law but any appeals arising out of
decisions made on any such application shall be governed by this Chapter.
§ 21-21.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 21-21.5
21:56
Chapter 22
ZONING
§ 22-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 22-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-1.1]
The short form by which this chapter shall be known shall be the Zoning Chapter of the
Borough of Moonachie.
§ 22-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; Ord. #80-8; 1970 Code § 17-1.2]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a pattern for the use of land and buildings in
the Borough based on the Master Plan for the Borough and enacted in order to promote
the following:
a. To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or development of all
lands in this State, in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare;
b. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters;
c. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
d. To ensure that the development of individual municipalities does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the County and
the State as a whole;
e. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods,
communities and regions and preservation of the environment;
f. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the
coordination of public development with land use policies;
g. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of agricultural,
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both
public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens;
h. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote
the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes
which result in congestion or blight;
i. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
j. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and to
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land;
k. To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best features of
§ 21-21.5 ZONING § 22-1.2
22:1
§ 22-1.3. Interpretation of Standards. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-1.3]
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of
law or by other rules or regulations or resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Where other laws, rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions
than is imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such laws, rules,
regulations, or resolutions shall control.
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
§ 22-2.1. Word Usage. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-2]
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be used in the
interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in the present tense include
the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural, the singular; the
word "structure" shall include the word "building": the word "person" shall include a
corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" shall include the word "plot"; the
word "occupies" shall include the words "designed or intended to be occupied"; the word
"used" shall include the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted,
rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional,
and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 22-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. #79-20; Ord. #80-8; Ord. #81-1, § 1; 1970 Code § 17-2;
New; Ord. #2009-2]
As used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE—A use or structure subordinate to the principal
use of a building or structure on the same zone lot and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the principal use of the principal building. It is intended but not by way of
limitation to include permanent and/or temporary swimming pools as accessory uses to
residential structures for the purposes of this definition.
ACT — The New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, P.L. 2009, c. 307
(approved January 18, 2010), codified at N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.[Added 10-24-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-4]
AISLE —The vehicular access to a parking space.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
design and relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial
and recreational development to the particular site;
l. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction; and
m. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such
development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 22-1.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-2.2
22:2
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form for all accompanying
documents required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned
development, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to law.
BASEMENT — A story having more than 25% of its clear height below the average
level of the adjoining ground.
BILLBOARD—Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered or pictorial matter is
displayed for advertising purposes other than that on a building or its grounds giving the
name and occupation of the user of the premises, the nature of the business conducted
therein, or the products primarily sold or manufactured therein.
BUFFER STRIP — An area of specified width adjacent to a lot line which may include
but be limited to an area planted with trees, shrubs, ground covers or other vegetation
which is designed to screen the view, noise and glare of cars or buildings from adjacent
properties or roads. Buffer strips in all nonresidential districts shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection 22-5.11a.
BUILDING—A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent,
temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING CODE — The State Uniform Construction Code.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement by which
a primary or accessory building or structure occupies the land as measured at the grade
line around the foundation.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the finished grade five feet away from the front of the building to the top of the roof
surface for mansard and flat roofs and to the vertical mid-point between the base of the
roof and its peak for peaked roofs.
BUILDING, COMMUNITY — A public building for civic, social, education, cultural
or recreational activities of a neighborhood or community not operated primarily for
monetary gain.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the
site on which it is situated.
CELLAR — A story having more than 25% of its clear height below the average level
of the adjoining ground.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A licensed motor vehicle which meets any one of the
following criteria:
a. The vehicle is licensed for commercial purposes.
The vehicle contains a sign, advertisement or other graphics indicating that its use
is for commercial purposes.
b.
c. The vehicle has a capacity in excess of 3/4 ton.
d. The vehicle has a gross weight in excess of 3 1/2 tons.
§ 22-2.2 ZONING § 22-2.2
22:3
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified by
ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and all accompanying
documents required by ordinance for approval of the application for development,
including where applicable but not limited to, a site plan or subdivision plat; provided
that the municipal agency may require such additional information not specified in
the ordinance or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for the
approval of the application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any revisions in the
accompanying documents so required by the municipal agency. An application shall be
certified as complete immediately upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the
ordinance and in the rules and regulations of the municipal agency, and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer for purposes of
commencement of the time period for action by the municipal agency.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The county planning board as defined in Section 1
of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1) of the county in which the land or development
is located.
CURB LEVEL — The elevation, established by existing curbs or Borough Code of the
street grade at the point that is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the
street line. Where a building is on a corner lot the curb level is the average of such
elevations on the two intersecting streets.
DEPARTMENT —The Department of Health and Senior Services.[Added 10-24-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-4]
DISTRICT — Any part of the territory of the Borough defined on the Zoning Map
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements of this chapter apply.
DWELLING — A building which is designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
for one or more families.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended to be occupied for
residence purposes by one family. A mobile home shall not be considered as a onefamily
dwelling.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two dwelling
units and intended for residential occupancy by not more than two families living
independent of the other and each with its own separate sleeping, cooking and sanitary
facilities, but not including mobile homes.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group
of not more than three persons not so related who are living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. A
family may also include foster children placed by the New Jersey State Board of Child
Welfare or a duly incorporated child care agency. This definition is intended to be
construed in accordance with the developing concepts enunciated by the public policies
of this state.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building used for the parking and storage of motor
vehicles.
The design of the vehicle clearly indicates that its primary purpose is the transport
of goods or produce.
e.
§ 22-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-2.2
22:4
GARAGE, PRIVATE—A detached accessory building or portion of a main residential
building for the parking of vehicles of the occupants of the main building to which the
garage is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private garage, used for
the sale, lease, storage, service or repair of motor vehicles and automotive accessories.
GROSS FLOOR AREA —The sum of the horizontal areas formed by using the outside
dimensions of the building, excluding, in dwellings, the area of an attached garage, open
porch or patio and further excluding the area used as a cellar. Only those floor areas
which have a ceiling height of seven feet or more shall be eligible for inclusion in the
gross floor area. The gross floor area shall include kitchens, closets, bathrooms, and
hallways within the dwelling unit in addition to the area of all other rooms within the
dwelling unit.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — One or more buildings erected within an area or tract as part
of an integrated and comprehensively planned total unit whether or not the buildings are
erected simultaneously or over a period of time.
JUNKYARD — Any area of open land, with or without buildings, regardless of size,
devoted to the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or debris. It shall include but not
be limited by, abandoned automobiles, tires, automobile parts, paper, rags, metal, glass
or plastic containers, old household appliances, wood, lumber, brush, and any stumps or
any other debris of any material whatsoever.
LIVABLE FLOOR AREA—The floor area within a residential structure to be used for
habitation excluding cellars, attics, utility (heating and cooling) rooms, and garages and
open porches.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading material.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot but shall not include any
portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
from the mid-point of the front line to the mid-point of the rear lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding the lot.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135°.
a.
b. LOT, INTERIOR — A parcel of land other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A parcel of land which extends through from one street to
another.
c.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating the lot from the street right-of-way;
also referred to as a "street line."
a.
b. LOT LINE, REAR—The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
§ 22-2.2 ZONING § 22-2.2
22:5
LOT WIDTH—The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the required
front yard setback line.
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant genus Cannabis L., whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant or its seeds, except those containing resin extracted from the
plant; but shall not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination as defined by the
New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, P.L. 1970, c. 226 (N.J.S.A.
24:21-2).[Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER or
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER — An organization approved by the
Department to perform activities necessary to provide registered qualifying patients with
usable marijuana and related paraphernalia in accordance with the provisions of the New
Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, P.L. 2009, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1
et seq.). This term shall include the organization's officers, directors, board members,
and employees.[Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CENTER — An entity permitted by a state agency to sell
marijuana and marijuana products to registered qualifying patients directly or through
the patients' registered primary caregivers pursuant to the New Jersey Compassionate
Use Medical Marijuana Act, P.L. 2009, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.).[Added
10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A commercial entity
licensed under the New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A.
24:6I-1 et seq., that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures marijuana for sale to marijuana
product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not
to consumers. This entity shall hold all required state licenses and permits.[Added
10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING FACILITY — A commercial facility
licensed under a commercial entity licensed under the New Jersey Compassionate Use
Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A.24:6I-1 et seq., that receives marijuana from a licensed
cultivation facility and extracts resin from the marijuana or creates a marijuana-infused
product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a medical marijuana center. This
entity shall hold all required state licenses and permits.[Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-4]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY — A commercial
facility licensed under the New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act,
N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq., that receives marijuana from a licensed cultivation facility,
licensed processing facility, or licensed caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for
tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
NOTE: With corner lots, there shall be two front lot lines. The rear lot line shall be
opposite the shorter front lot line, and the side lot line shall be opposite the longer
front lot line.
c.
§ 22-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-2.2
22:6
marijuana to the marijuana facility.[Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA — The acquisition, possession, transport, or use
of marijuana or paraphernalia by a registered qualifying patient as authorized by the
New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, P.L. 1970, c. 226 (N.J.S.A.
24:21-2).[Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
MOBILE HOME — Any commercially manufactured vehicle, or combination thereof,
used, designed or intended for use, for permanent occupancy as living quarters for onefamily,
designed to be moved occasionally from one location to another by means of
wheels affixed to an axle or carriage affixed to the vehicle, propelled by the power of
another vehicle to which it may be attached, whether the axle or carriage to which the
wheels may be affixed is detachable or detached.
MOBILE HOME PARK — One or more parcels of land under single ownership which
have been planned for the placement of two or more mobile homes, appurtenant
structures or additions provided that mobile homes shall not be stacked one on top of the
other.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings providing guest rooms, and may have
outside entrances, a public lobby, and one or more public dining rooms.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements to the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
OWNER — The owner or tenant of a single lot in the Borough of Moonachie;
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Any area including parking stalls and maneuvering
aisles used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles for the private
use solely by the occupants thereof to which such use is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Any area other than a street or other public way
used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles and available to the
public, whether for a fee or without compensation, or as an accommodation for clients,
customers or employees.
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than nine feet wide by 20 feet in length
either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of motor vehicles, exclusive of
driveways, access drives, fire lanes and public rights-of-way, except that nothing shall
prohibit private driveways for one family dwellings from being considered off-street
parking areas provided that no portion of the private driveway within the right-of-way
line of the street intersected by the driveway shall be considered off-street parking space.
The nine feet by 20 feet area is intended to be sufficient area to accommodate the exterior
§ 22-2.2 ZONING § 22-2.2
22:7
extremities of the vehicle, whether in addition thereto wheel blocks are installed within
this area to prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking space.
PARKING SPACE, ENCLOSED—An area not less than 12 feet wide and 20 feet long
for the parking of one motor vehicle. A minimum width of 22 feet is required for the
parking of two motor vehicles.
PODS® — Portable on-site demand storage.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The offices of a dentist, physician, artist, planner,
surgeon, teacher, attorney, clergyman, accountant, engineer, architect, insurance or real
estate agent or any other recognized professional licensed as such by the State of New
Jersey.
RESTAURANT — An enclosed building designed primarily for service of food and
beverages for consumption by customers within the building, and the term restaurant
shall not be interpreted to include, and is defined to exclude, any facility where
customers can purchase food or beverages without physically entering a fully enclosed
building, and any facility which serves food or beverages without adequate seating
facilities for consumption thereof within the confines of the building in which the
business is conducted; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to
prohibit a restaurant as hereinabove defined, from providing an ancillary or accessory
function, which is not its primary function, of "take out" or delivery service of food or
beverages for consumption at some other location away from the restaurant premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant whose primary, normal and usual
method of operation consists of the sale (over the counter or in a similar manner) of
food or beverages wrapped in paper or other disposable container, to a customer who is
required to carry such wrapped or packaged food or beverage from the place where he
or she receives same to some other location for consumption.
SERVICE STATION — Land and building designated and used for providing for
the sale of fuel, lubricants and automotive accessories and for providing maintenance
and minor repairs for motor vehicles, but not including body repairs or, under any
circumstances, the storage of inoperable or wrecked vehicles.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and drawn through
the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line. The term "required front yard
setback" shall mean a line that is established a minimum distance from the existing or the
future street right-of-way or front lot line within which a building or part of a building is
not permitted to extend toward the street in order to provide the required yards.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — The accessory use of a dwelling unit for occupancy by
someone other than the unit's owner or permanent resident for a period of less than 180
consecutive days.[Added 5-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards:
Adopted by ordinance pursuant to law regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or
sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters,
explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge,
screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may
be reasonably required by the Borough; or
a.
b. Required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal ordinances.
§ 22-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-2.2
22:8
STORAGE CONTAINER —A receptacle or container that is less than 1,500 cubic feet
or any aggregate of that total (if multiple PODS®), that is suitable for the depositing of
household furnishing, clothing and similar materials for the purpose of storage of same
by the owner on a temporary basis when moving, construction or renovation is on-going
by the owner on his/her lot in the Borough. PODS®, a registered trademark, are included
within this definition of a storage container, of which the POD or storage container must
also be in good condition.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it. The first story of any building shall be where more
than 75% of the story is above the average level of the adjoining ground.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way:
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the existing or future street right-of-way
and a lot. Where title to land extends into or to the center of a street, the edge of the
present right-of-way of the street including any drainage ditch shall nevertheless be
deemed to be the street line.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy,
use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of
land including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, tanks, towers, signs and advertising
devices.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter and are those pools which are not otherwise permanently
installed, do not require water filtration, circulation and purification, do not exceed two
feet of water depth, do not exceed a water surface area of 80 square feet, and do not
require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Includes artificially constructed
swimming pools or tanks, plastic or otherwise permanently established or maintained
upon any premises by any individual for his own or his family's use or guests of his
household.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CLUB — Includes either outdoor or
indoor pools which are artificially constructed to provide recreational facilities for
swimming, bathing, or wading.
SWIMMING POOLS, WADING—Includes artificially constructed pools not designed
or used for swimming and having a maximum depth of two feet.
a. Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
b. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
c. Which is approved by official action as provided by statute; or
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to
such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
d.
§ 22-2.2 ZONING § 22-2.2
22:9
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of proceedings or reproduction
thereof.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — The Board of Adjustment's or Planning Board's authorized departure
from the literal requirements and terms of this chapter in accordance with the procedures
contained herein.
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal or accessory building or
buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as herein permitted.
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map of the Borough, dated May 10, 1979, together with
all amendments subsequently adopted.
§ 22-3. ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP.
§ 22-3.1. Zoning Districts. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-3.1]
For the purpose of this chapter the Borough is hereby divided into use districts as
follows:
R-1 One-Family Residential
R-2 Two-Family Residential
MHP Mobile Home Park
B-1 General Business
B-2 Limited Business
M Manufacturing
YARD, STREET — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
a principal building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as may be specified elsewhere in this chapter. The depth of
the street yard shall be measured horizontally and shall be the minimum distance
between the front lot line and the building.
a.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building. The
depth of the rear yard shall be measured horizontally and shall be the minimum
distance between the rear lot line and the building.
b.
YARD, SIDE—An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot and the
nearest line of the principal building and extending from the front to the rear yard.
The width of the side yard shall be measured horizontally and shall be the minimum
distance between the side lot line and the building.
c.
§ 22-2.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-3.2
22:10
§ 22-3.2. Zoning Map.33 [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-3.2]
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of the Borough of Moonachie" dated May 10, 1979, and prepared by
Malcolm Kasler & Associates which accompanies and is hereby made a part of this
chapter.
§ 22-3.3. Interpretation of Boundaries. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-3.3]
District boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines, streams and lot or
property lines as they exist on May 10, 1979, unless otherwise indicated by dimensions
on the Zoning Map. The exact location of any disputed district boundary line shall be
determined by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 22-3.4. Vacation of Street or Other Public Ways. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20;
1970 Code § 17-3.4]
Where a vacated street is bounded on either side by different districts, the former center
line of the vacated right-of-way shall be considered the district boundary line.
§ 22-4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 22-4.1. General Regulations Schedule.34 [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-4.1; Ord. #2004-18]
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate construction and use of buildings in
each zoning district are set forth in the attached "Schedule of District Use Regulations"
and "2003 Schedule of Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements" is hereby declared to be a
part of this chapter.
§ 22-4.2. Conformity With Regulations. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-4.2]
No building shall hereafter be erected, altered, converted, enlarged, or reduced wholly
or in part, except in conformity with this chapter.
§ 22-4.3. Lot Dimensions. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-4.3]
Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building, such
subdivisions shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements
of this chapter with respect to the existing building and all yards and other open space in
connection therewith and so that all resulting lots have adequate dimensions consistent
with the requirements of the zone wherein it is located and so that all lots have frontage
on a street.
33. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map referred to herein can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
34. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 22-3.2 ZONING § 22-4.4
22:11
§ 22-4.4. Water Supply; Waste Disposal; Board of Health Approval Required.
[Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-4.4]
In particular, water supply and waste disposal regulations of the Borough Board of
Health and the State Department of Environmental Protection shall be adhered to.
Further, no building permit shall be issued until approval is obtained from the local
Board of Health and from the Department of Environmental Protection where required
or requested.
§ 22-4.5. General Use Restrictions. [Ord. 2003-2, §§ 1, 2]
a. Sexually Oriented Adult Entertainment.
1. Location Conditions. No such use shall be located or operate upon premises
the outside boundary of which is within 1,000 feet of the outside boundary of
any premises upon which there is located a place of worship, school,
playground, park, recreational facility, residence, hotel, motel, mobile home
parks or other premises upon which there is conducted sexually oriented adult
entertainment or any carnival like businesses.
2. Sexually Oriented Entertainment as an Accessory to Permitted Uses. There is
hereby prohibited the conduct or operation or portion thereof providing
sexually oriented adult entertainment as an accessory to an otherwise
permitted use in all zones except where otherwise permitted.
(a) Location Conditions. No such accessory use shall be located or operated
upon premises from outside a boundary of which is within 1,000 feet of
the outside boundary of any other premises upon which that use is
conducted as a principal or accessory use.
3. Designated Area. The Borough specifically designates as the area in which
sexually oriented adult entertainment or carnival like business can be
conducted as an accessory use to be as follows:
(a) From the intersection of Empire Boulevard and State Street, west to the
intersection of Empire Boulevard and Terminal Lane.
b. Medical marijuana uses. [Added 10-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
1. Location conditions:
(a) All facilities must be designed and operated to minimize the amount of
pesticides, fertilizers, nutrients, marijuana, and other potential
contaminants discharged into the public wastewater and/or stormwater
systems.
(b) A list of all pesticides, fertilizers, and any other hazardous materials that
are expected to be used in the cultivation process.
(c) All facilities must be designed to minimize odors emanating from the
marijuana plants.
(d) All facilities must submit an odor management plan.
§ 22-4.4 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-4.5
22:12
(e) All facilities must maintain a secure, closed, clean environment in the
room where marijuana is to be stored, grown, processed, or tested, in
order to prevent outside contamination and prevent the inadvertent and/
or unauthorized removal of marijuana from the facility. All facilities must
provide shower and locker room facilities for employees to ensure the
provision of a clean environment.
(f) All facilities must have adequate security to prevent access to the
marijuana by nonauthorized personnel, including unauthorized removal.
All rooms that contain marijuana, in any form, must be individually
locked and accessible only to authorized personnel.
(g) All drying, soil mixing, testing, processing, and other nongrowing
activities must take place in a separate room from any growing activities.
2. Designated area.
(a) No medical marijuana center, medical marijuana alternative treatment
center (ATC), medical marijuana safety compliance center, medical
marijuana manufacturing facility or medical marijuana cultivation facility
shall be located within the following distances from the specified land
uses listed below:
(1) One thousand feet from a place of worship, school, playground,
park, recreational facility, residence, or mobile home park.
(2) One thousand feet from any premises serving alcohol.
c. Recreational cannabis businesses. [Added 7-22-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-2]
1. Permitted uses.
(a) Class 1 cannabis cultivator license, for facilities involved in growing and
cultivating cannabis;
(b) Class 2 cannabis manufacturer license, for facilities involved in the
manufacturing, preparation, and packaging of cannabis items;
(c) Class 3 cannabis wholesaler license, for facilities involved in obtaining
and selling cannabis items for later resale by other licensees;
(d) Class 4 cannabis distributer license, for businesses involved in
transporting cannabis plants in bulk from one licensed cultivator to
another licensed cultivator, or cannabis items in bulk from any type of
licensed cannabis business to another;
2. Location condition.
(a) All facilities must be designed and operated to minimize the amount of
pesticides, fertilizers, nutrients, marijuana, and other potential
contaminants discharged into the public wastewater and/or stormwater
systems.
(b) A list of all pesticides, fertilizers, and any other hazardous materials that
§ 22-4.5 ZONING § 22-4.5
22:13
§ 22-5. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 22-5.1. Accessory Buildings in Residence Districts. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20;
1970 Code § 17-5.1]
are expected to be used in the cultivation process.
(c) All facilities must be designed to minimize odors emanating from the
marijuana plants.
(d) All facilities must submit an odor management plan.
(e) All facilities must maintain a secure, closed, clean environment in the
room where marijuana is to be stored, grown, processed, or tested, in
order to prevent outside contamination and prevent the inadvertent and/
or unauthorized removal of marijuana from the facility. All facilities must
provide shower and locker room facilities for employees to ensure the
provision of a clean environment.
(f) All facilities must have adequate licensed security and/or twenty-fourhour
security to prevent access to the marijuana by nonauthorized
personnel, including unauthorized removal. All rooms that contain
marijuana, in any form, must be individually locked and accessible only
to authorized personal.
(g) All drying, soil mixing, testing, processing, and other nongrowing
activities must take place in a separate room from any growing activities.
(h) This section shall not be in conflict of any provisions of P.L. 2021, c. 16
(C. 24:6I-31 et. al.)
3. Designated area.
(a) No licensed cannabis cultivator (Class 1), cannabis manufacturer (Class
2), cannabis wholesaler (Class 3), or cannabis distributer (Class 4) shall
be located within the following distances from the specified land uses
listed below:
(1) One thousand feet from place of worship, schools, playgrounds,
parks, recreational facility, residence, mobile home parks.
(2) One thousand feet from any premises serving alcohol.
a. Accessory Buildings as Part of Principal Buildings. Any accessory building
attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the principal building
and the total structure shall adhere to the yard requirements for the principal
building regardless of the technique of connecting the principal and accessory
buildings.
b. Accessory Buildings Not to Be Constructed Prior to Principal Buildings. No
building permit shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building prior
to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of the main building upon
the same premises. If construction of the main building does not proceed or
§ 22-4.5 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.1
22:14
§ 22-5.2. Appearance of Residential Buildings. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970
Code § 17-5.2; Ord. #90-4]
coincide with the construction of the accessory building, the Construction Official
shall revoke the building permit for the accessory building until construction of the
main building has proceeded substantially toward completion.
c. Distance from Adjacent Buildings. The minimum distance of portion of the
accessory building from an adjacent building on the same lot shall be 20 feet.
d. Height and Area of Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not exceed one
story or 15 feet in height and may not occupy more than 25% of the yard in which
located or a maximum of 900 square feet, whichever is smaller.
e. Location. A detached accessory building shall comply with all street yard
requirements. Such accessory building shall be permitted to have a minimum rear
yard setback of five feet and a minimum side yard setback of five feet.
f. Second Dwelling Prohibited. In no case shall there be permitted more than one
residential structure on a lot.
a. Purposes. The purposes for relating the exterior appearance of residential buildings
shall be to:
1. Reduce the adverse effect which uniformity in the exterior design and
appearance of dwellings in the same neighborhood would have on the
desirability of the immediate and neighboring areas for existing and future
residential and business purposes.
2. Enhance the value of both improved and unimproved real property in such
areas and lessen the deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety and
morals of the inhabitants thereof and the community at large.
3. Prevent the loss of tax revenue and the destruction of a proper balance between
the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal
services provided therefor.
b. Residential Standards. The following standards shall apply to residential buildings:
1. Except as provided in this chapter not more than one building permit shall
hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be erected in a housing development
consisting of two or more houses if it is substantially alike in exterior design
and appearance with any neighborhood dwelling situated on the same side of
the street within 200 feet of a dwelling then in existence or for which a
building permit has been issued or is pending. The distance herein specified
shall be construed to mean the distance between the street property lines of the
respective properties.
2. Houses within a specified distance from each other shall be considered
uniform in exterior design and appearance if:
(a) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without substantial
differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
§ 22-5.1 ZONING § 22-5.2
22:15
§ 22-5.3. Building Identification. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.3]
All principal buildings in all districts shall be clearly identified as to street number or
other identification, such as post office box number, by means of a small unobstructed
sign clearly visible and legible from the main abutting street.
§ 22-5.4. Building Permits Pending. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code 17-5.4]
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or
designated use of any building, structure, or part thereof, for which any building permit
has been granted before November 20, 1979, provided that construction from such plans
shall have been started within 60 days after November 20, 1979, and shall be diligently
pursued to completion.
§ 22-5.5. Existing Uses. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.5]
Except as specified in subsection 17-5.8, any use, building or structure existing on
(b) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without substantial
change in orientation of the houses.
(c) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change in
design and appearance.
(d) The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are without
substantial differentiation.
(e) Materials used on front exteriors are not substantially different.
3. In addition to the requirements specified in paragraph b there shall be not less
than two separate basic house designs in every housing development
consisting of six or less houses; not less than three basic house designs in every
housing development consisting of seven to 15 houses; not less than five basic
house designs in every housing development consisting of 16 to 40 houses;
and not less than six basic designs in every development consisting of 40 or
more houses.
4. To insure conformity with the provisions of this chapter, no building permit
shall hereafter be issued for more than one dwelling in any housing
development, until the builder shall post or cause to be posted, on each specific
lot on the subdivision's map filed with the Construction Official, the type and
model of each house for which a building permit has been or is being issued.
5. To further insure conformity with the provisions of this chapter in respect to
new subdivisions for the purpose of a housing development, the Planning
Board shall require an affidavit approved as to form by the Borough Attorney,
that the subdivision will be developed as a whole so that the intent and purpose
of the chapter is satisfied. The Construction Official is also hereby authorized
to require a similar affidavit before issuing more than one building permit in
any housing development or part thereof, in any subdivision heretofore
approved by the Planning Board, prior to November 20, 1979, or on any land
area not required to be subdivided.
§ 22-5.2 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.5
22:16
November 20, 1979, may be continued, even though such use, building or structure may
not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located.
§ 22-5.6. Fences and Walls. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code 17-5.6; Ord.
#98-3, §§ 1 — 10; Ord. #2011-3; Ord. No. 2018-2]
a. Definitions.
1. FRONT YARD - Shall mean the area extending the full width of the lot
situated between a street line and the front line of the building and projected to
the side lines of the lot.
2. HEIGHT - Shall mean the distance measured from the normal ground level at
the point or points where the fence is to be erected.
3. WALL - Shall mean any fence which has more than 50% of its vertical
composition of solid material.
4. WALLS AND FENCES - For the purpose of this subsection walls and fences
shall be used interchangeably unless specifically distinguished.
5. ZONES - Shall mean the zones as defined in the Zoning Ordinances of the
Borough of Moonachie.
b. Fences and Walls in Industrial Zones.
1. There shall be no solid fences erected in the front yard unless required by the
Planning Board at the time of site plan approval to screen adjoining uses. Nonsolid
fences up to a height of six feet may be erected in the front yard, except
that on a corner lot, no fence may be erected within 25 feet of the point of
intersection of the front and corner side lot lines in order to maintain clear
visibility for traffic at the corner.
2. A solid or other type fence not to exceed eight feet in height may be erected to
enclose the rear yard of a property, including the area at the sides of the
building up to the front yard, except that on a corner lot or a lot running
through from one street to another, any yard abutting a street shall be subject
to the same regulations as a front yard.
3. No fence around Industrial Zones shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with
metal spikes or constructed of any material or in any manner which may be
dangerous to persons or animals.
c. Fences and Walls in Residential Zones.
1. Fences or walls up to and including four feet in height may be permitted in the
front yard of residential zones, except on corner properties where the line of
site would be affected at the street intersection; such fence or wall may only
be 30 inches in height.
2. Fences in residential zones shall not encroach onto property of neighbor and
shall be installed so that the finished sides of the fences face the street or the
neighboring property.
§ 22-5.5 ZONING § 22-5.6
22:17
3. On a corner lot, no fence may be erected within 25 feet of the point of
intersection of the front and corner side lot lines in order to maintain clear
visibility for traffic at the corner.
4. Fences which enclose swimming pools shall be subject to the regulations
contained in the Swimming Pool Ordinance.
5. No fence around residential property shall be erected of barbed wire, topped
with metal spikes or constructed of any material or in any manner which may
be dangerous to persons or animals.
6. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and in
accordance with the approved site plan on file with the Construction Official.
7. Fences up to six feet in height may be permitted in the rear yard of residential
zones except that on a corner lot or a lot running through from one street to
another, any yard abutting a street shall be subject to the same regulations as a
front yard.
8. Fences up to six feet in height may be permitted along the side yard line as
well as the rear yard line in residential zones where the property is contiguous
to a commercial property. Such fence may be erected up to the distance of the
ten-foot right-of-way setback of the residential property.
d. Fences and Walls in Business Zones.
1. There shall be no solid fences erected in the front yard, unless required by the
Planning Board at the time of site plan approval to screen adjoining uses.
Nonsolid fences up to a height of three feet may be erected in the front yard,
except that on a corner lot, no fence may be erected within 25 feet of the point
of intersection of the front and corner side lot lines in order to maintain clear
visibility for traffic at the corner.
2. A solid or other type fence not to exceed eight feet in height may be erected to
enclose the rear yard of a property, including the area at the side of the building
up to the front yard, except that on a corner lot or a lot running through from
one street to another, any yard abutting a street shall be subject to the same
regulations as a front yard.
3. No fence around residential property shall be erected of barbed wire, topped
with metal spikes or constructed of any material or in any manner which may
be dangerous to persons or animals.
4. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and in
accordance with the approved site plan on file with the Building Inspector.
e. Site Plan Approval Required. Type of Use. All fences in nonresidential zones shall
be subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board, and front yard fences in
residential zones shall be considered a conditional use.
f. Permit Requirements. Before any fence can be erected, altered or reconstructed, an
application must be made to the Construction Official for a permit and the
application shall include name, a description showing the position and property
§ 22-5.6 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.6
22:18
§ 22-5.7. Landfill. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.7]
All lots being filled shall be filled with clean fill or topsoil to allow complete surface
draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems or natural drainage rights-of-way.
No construction shall be permitted which creates or aggravates water stagnation or a
drainage problem on adjacent properties.
§ 22-5.8. Nonconforming Uses, Buildings or Lots. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970
Code § 17-5.8; Ord. #90-4]
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection the lawful use of land, buildings or
lines, location of the fence, a notice to all abutting neighbors, and a description of
the type of fence to be erected and the height of the fence, and the percentage of
openings.
g. General Instructions.
1. Finished surfaces of fences shall face adjacent properties, in the event that
there be none such, then to the street or property line closest to which the fence
is located.
2. Any portion of a fence intended or utilized for the support of the fence shall be
located on the inside of the fence, facing the principal portion of the tract of
land upon which the fence is erected.
3. Fences which are inferior in quality or not maintenance free (except for
painting or refinishing) are prohibited.
4. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and in
accordance with the approved plan on file with the Building Inspector.
h. Prohibited Materials. The following fences and fencing materials are specifically
prohibited:
1. Barbed wire fences.
2. Short pointed fences.
3. Canvas fences.
4. Cloth fences.
5. Electrically charged fences.
6. Poultry netting.
7. Temporary fences such as snow fences, expandable fences and collapsible
fences at any location on the lot upon which a dwelling or structure is situated,
except during construction on such property.
i. Violations and Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subsection shall, upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 22-5.6 ZONING § 22-5.8
22:19
structures existing on November 20, 1979, may be continued although such use does
not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which the land,
buildings or structures are located; provided that no existing building, structure, or lot
devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which the land, buildings
or structures are located, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed,
substituted, relocated, erected, converted to another use, or structurally altered except
in conformity with the regulations of this chapter for the district in which the land,
buildings or structures are located except as allowed in Section 21-6. Also, land on which
a nonconforming building is located shall not be reduced in size, nor shall any lot already
nonconforming be made more nonconforming in any manner.
§ 22-5.9. Off-Street Parking for One and Two-Family Residential Use. [Ord.
#72-10; Ord. #73-2; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.9; Ord. #2003-4, § 1; Ord.
#2009-4, § 2]
For each dwelling unit on any one-family or two-family residential lot, there shall be
provided one enclosed parking space per unit directly accessible to the street for the
parking and garaging of one passenger vehicle per unit.
a. Abandonment. A nonconforming use as defined in the preceding section shall be
considered abandoned if the nonconforming use is terminated by the owner or
tenant. Or, if the owner or tenant shall fail to use the property for a period of 12
consecutive months, this shall be presumptive evidence of abandonment and
thereafter the building, structure or land shall not be used in a nonconforming
manner.
b. Conversion to Permitted Use. Any nonconforming building or use which has been
changed to a conforming building or use shall not be changed back again into a
nonconforming building or use.
c. Restoration. Any nonconforming building or use which has been destroyed by fire,
explosion, flood, windstorm, or other act of God shall be examined by the following
three people to determine whether the building is more than 50% destroyed:
1. Borough Tax Assessor;
2. The owner or an architect or engineer selected by the owner;
3. A third person agreed to by the Construction Official and the owner.
If, in the majority opinion of the above three people, the damage is greater than
50%, the building or use shall be considered completely destroyed and may be
rebuilt only upon approval of a use variance as provided by State statutes.
d. Repairs and Maintenance. Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep
a building in sound condition may be made to a nonconforming building or
structure.
e. Sale of Nonconforming Use. Any nonconforming use may change ownership and
continue to function as a nonconforming use provided the other provisions of this
section are met.
a. The parking of automobiles, buses, motorcycles, trailers, boats and other vehicles
§ 22-5.8 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.9
22:20
§ 22-5.10. Outdoor Signs. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.10; Ord.
#94-13]
No billboards shall be erected. No sign of any type shall be permitted to obstruct driving
vision, traffic signals, traffic direction and identification signs, and places of business.
No signs of any type shall be permitted to be flashing or revolving.
in the front yard of a lot (as hereinafter defined) within the Borough is prohibited
except as follows:
b. The parking for any vehicles shall be limited to paved and/or other kinds of stone
surfaces combined and shall not exceed 50% of the total square footage of the
required front yard. The remaining 50% shall be some kind of natural vegetation.
c. The term "front yard" is defined as an open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a building situated between the nearest roofed portion of the building and the street
line of the lot and extending from side lot line to side lot line.
1. In the event of a corner lot, the term "front yard" shall be that as defined
elsewhere in the zoning code.
2. However, the term "front yard" is not intended to include a depth in excess of
the minimum requirements of the Borough of Moonachie Zoning Ordinance.
d. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the Police
Department of the Borough of Moonachie and/or the Building Department.
a. Animated, Flashing and Illusionary Signs. Signs using mechanical or electrical
devices to display flashing, movement, or the illusion of movement are prohibited.
b. Height. No free standing or attached sign shall exceed the maximum height
permitted in the district. In any event, no sign shall exceed any lesser height if
specified elsewhere in this chapter and shall not be higher at any point than the roof
line of the building if it is attached to a building.
c. Illuminated Signs. Where permitted, signs shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
and glare away from adjoining premises in any residential district and away from
all adjoining highways. Illuminated signs shall comply with the National Electric
Code and shall not be erected without a building permit.
d. Maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
e. Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or
portion thereof shall be, if not attached to the building, set back at least 10
horizontal feet from all street lines. Such residential signs shall not exceed two
square feet on each side. Commercial or industrial signs shall not exceed 25 square
feet on each side and shall be removed at the expense of the advertiser within 30
days after the termination or completion of the matter of business being advertised.
f. Sign Area. Sign area shall be measured around the edges of a framed or enclosed
sign or by the area utilized by isolated words or symbols including the background,
whether open or enclosed, but the area shall not include any supporting framework
§ 22-5.9 ZONING § 22-5.10
22:21
and bracing incidental to the display itself.
g. Signs and Sign Structures. Signs and sign structures of all types shall be set back or
elevated sufficiently to allow a clear, unobstructed line of sight from the stop line
of intersecting streets and driveways for at least 300 feet along all abutting streets
and highways.
h. Signs with Two Exposures. Signs with two exposures shall be measured for area by
using the surface area of one side of the sign only. Both sides may be used.
i. Schedule of Sign Regulations. The schedule of sign regulations contained in this
chapter is hereby made a part of this section as if same were more particularly set
forth herein.
Schedule
Sign Regulations By Use
Use Permitted Accessory Sign
One and Two-
Family
Dwellings
1. Street number designations, postal boxes, on-site traffic
directional and parking signs, and signs posting property
as private property, or similar purposes are permitted but
are not to be considered in calculating the sign area.
Mobile Home
Park
1. Each mobile home park may have 1 free standing sign
which shall not exceed 12 square feet in area which shall
be limited to displaying the park's name.
Professional
Offices in One
and Two-
Family
Dwellings
1. Professional occupations may be permitted 1 lighted sign,
nonflashing, and not to exceed 2 square feet in area.
Churches and
Public Uses
1. Churches and public uses may be permitted 1 lighted sign,
nonflashing, and not to exceed 4 square feet in area.
§ 22-5.10 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.10
22:22
Schedule
Sign Regulations By Use
Use Permitted Accessory Sign
Retail Stores
Business and
Personal
Services
Offices
Funeral Parlors
Theatres
Restaurants
Cleaning
Establishments
Newspaper
Printing
Establishment
1. Not more than 1 sign shall be permitted for each tenant on
the premises on each wall fronting on a street
2. The aggregate area, in square feet, of all signs on any wall
shall not be greater than 2 times the length in feet of such
wall
3. Such sign or signs shall be parallel to the face of the
building and no part thereof, including any illuminating
devices, shall project more than 12 inches beyond the face
of the wall to which applied, nor any distance beyond or
above the building in any other direction
4. In addition, where the building is set back from the street
line a distance of 25 feet or more, not more than 1 free
standing sign, with a total area on all faces of not more
than 40 square feet, may be erected
Manufacturing
Warehousing
Research
Facilities
1. Only signs related to the use on the premises are permitted
and in accordance with subsection 22-5.10 and the
following:
(a) Directional signs may be permitted as approved on the
site plan and are not considered part of the minimum sign
area.
(b) One free standing sign may be erected along a street
right-of-way. It may have interior lighting, be not more
than 6 feet high, not more than 6 feet long, have no more
than 2 sides, and be set back at least 1/2 the distance of
the required building set back from the future street rightof-
way.
(c) One (1) attached sign may be permitted either lighted
or unlighted provided the area of the sign does not exceed
the equivalent of 5 percent of the area of the wall on
which it is attached or 150 square feet whichever is
smaller. Where an attached sign is provided, the building
may not be illuminated
2. Buildings themselves may be illuminated in lieu of an
attached sign outlined in paragraph 1(c) above
3. In addition, where the building is set back from the street
line a distance of 25 feet or more, not more than 1 free
standing sign with a total area on all faces of not more
than 40 square feet, may be erected.
§ 22-5.10 ZONING § 22-5.11
22:23
§ 22-5.11. Performance Standards. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-5.11]
a. Buffers. Buffer strips are required in all business and manufacturing districts along
the district boundaries between themselves and residential districts.
1. The buffer strips shall be measured from the district boundary line or the street
line on the side of the street on which the industrial or commercial use is
located where a street center line serves as the district boundary line.
2. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds
and tall grass, in conformance with existing regulations.
3. No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be
permitted in the half of the buffer strip nearest the property line.
4. Buffer widths shall be as established in the schedule of area and bulk
requirements. No less than the exterior half of the buffer area for business
zones and 1/4 for manufacturing zones shall be planted and maintained with
grass or ground cover as well as a dense screen of trees, shrubs, or other plant
material in accordance with the following requirements. (The preservation of
all natural wooded tracts shall be an integral part of all site plans regardless of
their proximity to required buffer areas.)
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be at least four feet in
height when planted and be of such species as will produce a complete
visual screen year round.
(b) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently and any plant
material which does not live shall be replaced within one year.
(c) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will be no closer
than three feet from any street or property line.
(d) A clear-sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections and at
all points where private accessways intersect public streets.
(e) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular and
pedestrian ingress and egress.
5. No screen planting shall be required along streets which form district boundary
lines, provided that:
(a) No outdoor processing or manufacturing activity and no outdoor storage
of materials shall be so located to be visible from the adjacent residential
district or street.
(b) Only the front of any proposed building shall be visible from the adjacent
residential district.
6. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, complete plans showing the
arrangement of all buffer strip and the placement, species and size of all plant
materials and the placement, size, materials, and type of all fences to be placed
in such buffer strip shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer or Construction
§ 22-5.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.11
22:24
Official to ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of this
chapter.
b. Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases.
1. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can cause any
damage to human health, to animals, or vegetation, or to other forms of
property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at
any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission is herewith
prohibited.
2. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise shall
exceed 3/10 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point beyond the
lot line of the use creating the emission. For measurement of the amount of
particles in gases resulting from combustion, standing correction shall be
applied to a stack temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in stack at full
load.
3. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as
parking areas, driveways, roads, loading areas, storage areas, construction
sites, and yards, within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by
appropriate landscaping, oiling, paving or other acceptable means of
stabilization.
c. Glare. No use shall produce a strong dazzling light or a reflection of a strong
dazzling light beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be buffered so that glare
will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties or adjoining districts.
d. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines. Further, no process
shall be permitted which would cause the temperature to rise or fall in any part of
ponds, streams or other watercourses.
e. Noise. The sound level of any operation (other than the operation of motor vehicles
or other transportation facilities on public highways, operations involved in the
construction or demolition of structures, emergency alarm signals or time signals)
shall not exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands as stated below.
The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave
band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards
Association, New York, New York.
The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for smooth and continuous noise
shall be as follows (all of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in each case)
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.:
Frequency Band (Cycles per Second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-Pressure
Level (Decibels) at the Property Line
or Along Any Public Right of Way
Within the Property
20 to 75 60
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
§ 22-5.11 ZONING § 22-5.11
22:25
Frequency Band (Cycles per Second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-Pressure
Level (Decibels) at the Property Line
or Along Any Public Right of Way
Within the Property
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
Above 4,800 28
If the noise is not smooth and continuous or it is not radiated at night time, one
or more of the corrections below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the
decibel levels given above.
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Corrections in Decibels
Daytime operation only (8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.) -/-3
Noise occurs less than 5% of any one-hour period -/-3
Noise is of peculiar character (hum, scream, etc.) or
is of impulsive character (hammering, pressure
release, etc.) (In the case of impulsive noise, the
correction shall apply only to the average pressure
during an impulse, and impulse peaks shall not
exceed the basic standards given above.)
-5
f. Odor. No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as
to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The guide for determining
such quantities of offensive odors shall be the most restrictive provisions of Table
III (odor thresholds) in Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyright
1951 by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., or any other
governmental law which supersedes such provision.
g. Air Pollution Control. The requirement of the State of New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code shall be complied with.
h. Storage and Waste Disposal.
1. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in
bulk aboveground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with
energy devices, heating or appliances, located and operated on the same lot as
the tanks or drums of fuel.
2. All storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products; and all fuel, raw
materials and products stored shall be enclosed in an approved building.
3. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner
that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall
any substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise
render such stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or
§ 22-5.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.11
22:26
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream
or watercourse.
4. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a
fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects
shall be stored in containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
i. Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions in excess of the
standards outlined below, with the exception of that vibration produced as a result
of construction activity. The standards below are set forth in the table of Frequency
Amplitude Relations. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches and
shall be measured with a standard three-component measuring system, which is a
device for recording the intensity of any vibration in three mutually perpendicular
directions.
Frequency of Ground Motion in
Cycles Per Second
Maximum Amplitude of Ground
Motion in Inches
Up to 10 0.003
11 to 20 0.00015
21 to 30 0.0001
31 to 40 0.00007
41 to 50 0.00005
51 to 60 0.00004
j. Evaluation of Environmental Assessment Statement by Planning Board. An
environmental assessment statement may be submitted by the developer addressing
points one through 10 below, which shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which the project will be reviewed by the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall prepare an evaluation of the impact of the
construction upon the ecological, cultural and aesthetic environment of the
borough. Specific points to be covered in the report are as follows:
1. Does the project have a significant impact upon the environment.
2. Is the project controversial.
3. Does the project interfere with existing community standards of living.
4. Is the construction situated on land which, because of its natural beauty and
wilderness state, has potential for recreation or park development and would
the damage to the environment and loss of aesthetics incurred through
construction of the development substantially reduce the potential and cause
an unwarranted burden on the surrounding community.
5. Does the development have a cumulative effect when compared to the number
of other projects proposed in the existing area, and does the development fit
into the overall proposed or adopted master plan of the area.
6. Is there, as a result of the development, an irreversible commitment of natural
resources such as water, gas, and electricity. Signed statements from the
§ 22-5.11 ZONING § 22-5.11
22:27
§ 22-5.12. Principal Use. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.12;
5-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
§ 22-5.13. Service Stations. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.13]
managers of the various utilities affected should be incorporated into the report
assuring existing committees that the new development will:
(a) Have no effect on the current services supplied to those committees; and
(b) Result in no undue cost burden to the existing committee for expansion
of the necessary service facilities for the new construction.
7. If forested area is to be damaged or cleared, does the construction interfere
with any select stands of native forested trees, and is there any serious
influence on the natural wildlife in the area.
8. All changes in natural runoff and the ultimate disposal of the storm waters
collected within the development should be discussed in detail. The
environmental effects of the storm water discharges and the location of the
discharge points should be discussed in detail to insure no serious flooding
conditions or substantial increases in health hazards or flooding over existing
conditions would occur to the surrounding area or communities.
9. All increases in air pollution, noise levels and other environmental quality
changes that might result through clearing of land and increased traffic
patterns should be specifically delineated in the report.
10. All methods of construction to be used in the building of the development
should be specifically delineated and restraints set out to avoid any adverse
effects during the construction project upon surrounding communities. This
would include access roads for truck vehicles and methods to eliminate
blowing of dust and dirt and control noise during the construction period.
In the event that an Environmental Commission shall have been established
by the governing body, the Environmental Commission shall review the
assessment statement required hereunder and submit its report based upon
such review to the Planning Board with any recommendations which the
Commission deems advisable. The reports shall be advisory in nature and the
recommendations contained therein shall not be mandatory on the Planning
Board in making its determination hereunder.
a. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on one lot.
b. No residential premises, including dwelling houses, apartments, rooming houses or
boardinghouses, or any parts thereof or rooms therein, except duly licensed hotels
and motels, shall be rented or let for occupancy by any person or persons for a
period or term of less than 180 days. [Added 5-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2]
a. No service station shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 200 feet along
the same side of a street of any school, playground, church, hospital, public building
or institution, except where such property is in another block or abuts another street
§ 22-5.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.13
22:28
§ 22-5.14. Space, Use and Location of Dwelling Units. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #73-2;
Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code 17-5.14]
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any space within a building
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the Sanitary Code and
Housing Code of the Borough.
§ 22-5.15. Conditional Uses. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.15]
The Planning Board is hereby empowered to grant the conditional uses enumerated
as such in the Schedule of District Use Regulations set forth in Section 22-4 et seq.
in accordance with the definite specifications and standards required thereunder. The
Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for such conditional use within 95 days
of submission of a complete application by a developer to the administrative officer or
in such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The review by the Planning
Board of a conditional use shall include any required site plan review pursuant to the
site plan ordinance of this Borough and the time period for action by the Planning Board
on conditional uses shall also apply to such site plan review. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and
a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 in the case of a subdivision of N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 in the
case of a site plan, the Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
§ 22-5.16. Swimming Pools. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.16]
which the lot in question does not abut.
b. No service station shall be permitted where any oil draining pit or visible appliance
for any purpose (other than gasoline filling pumps or air pumps) is located within
50 feet of any future street line or within 150 feet of any residential district. All such
appliances or pits, other than gasoline filling pumps, or air pumps, shall be within a
building. Gasoline and air pumps shall be permitted within the required front yard
space of service stations, but shall be no closer than 20 feet to any future street line.
c. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or motor vehicles incapable of normal
operation upon the highways shall be permitted on the premises of any service
station. It shall be deemed prima facie evidence of violation of this chapter if more
than three motor vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon
any premises not within a closed and roofed building excepting, that a number not
exceeding six motor vehicles may be located upon any service station premises
outside of a closed or roofed building, for a period of time not to exceed 48 hours
and providing that the motor vehicles are awaiting repair by the owners thereof.
a. Permanent private residential swimming pools shall adhere to the following
standards:
§ 22-5.13 ZONING § 22-5.16
22:29
1. No pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot unless the lot shall contain
a residence building. All pools shall conform to the front yard requirements
for the principal building in the district in which it is located.
2. Pools shall occupy no more than the equivalent of 75% of the yard area in
which it is located.
3. No edge of any pool shall be closer to any lot line than 10 feet.
4. In the case of a corner lot, a permanent private swimming pool shall not be
constructed, erected, installed or maintained closer to the side street line than
the prevailing setback line on the street.
5. The pool may be lighted by underwater or exterior lights, or both, provided all
exterior lights are located so that the light is neither direct nor reflected upon
adjacent properties in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an annoyance to
neighboring properties. Underwater lighting shall be in compliance with the
applicable National Electrical Code.
6. The pool should be completely surrounded by fencing a minimum of four feet
in height. The objective of this provision is as a health and safety precaution to
prevent small children from accidentally entering pools. The fencing should
be of a durable and stable quality and of sufficient material and construction to
fulfill this purpose. Such fenced areas shall also have gates or other means of
access which can be locked when not in use.
7. No public amplifying system shall be used with a private residential swimming
pool.
b. Public swimming pools or club pools intended for open use of the public or to club
members shall adhere to the following standards:
1. Pools shall be located within a lot area of a minimum of two acres. Within
such area may also be located club houses, locker rooms, open space, terraces,
recreational uses, refreshment stand, cabanas, and similar associated uses.
2. The pool shall occupy no more than 8% of the lot area. The area shall include
total water surface including separate wading pools, swimming tanks and
diving tanks.
3. No edge of any pool or separate swimming tank shall be closer to any property
line than 50 feet.
4. The pool shall be enclosed with a fence or in lieu thereof, located on a terrace,
or landscaped or surrounded by structures or any combination of the above or
similar techniques in order to control access to the immediate pool area.
5. The pool shall be lighted both internally and externally but in no case shall any
light be directed in a direct or indirect fashion upon any adjacent property. All
free standing standards used for exterior lighting shall not exceed 15 feet in
height and shall be no closer than 10 feet to the edge of any pool. All lighting
shall be in compliance with the applicable National Electrical Code.
§ 22-5.16 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.16
22:30
§ 22-5.17. Yards Cannot Be Used by Another Building. [Ord. #72-10; Ord.
#79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.17]
No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of complying
with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of the chapter shall be considered as
providing open space for meeting the same requirements for another principal building.
§ 22-5.18. Yards. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.18]
Front yards shall be measured from the front lot line of a street in accordance with the
widths set forth in the Borough Master Plan. On a through lot, the rear yard depth shall
not be less than the required depth of the front yard in the district in which the lot, or
applicable portion of the lot is located.
§ 22-5.19. Existing Zone Lots of Record. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.19]
In any residential zone, only a one-family dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming
zone lot of official record at the effective date of this chapter, irrespective of its area or
width; provided, however, that no adjacent or adjoining vacant land exists or existed at
the time of the effective date of this chapter which would create a conforming lot if all or
part of the vacant land were combined with subject lot. No lot or lots in single ownership
hereafter shall be reduced so as to create one or more nonconforming lots.
§ 22-5.20. Lot Width. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.20]
The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured at the front yard setback line as
required for the district in which it is located. In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose
sides are not parallel, the street frontage shall not be less than the 75% of the minimum
lot width required; provided, however, that the lot width as measured at the front yard
setback line shall be no less than the minimum lot width, as specified in the Zoning
Schedule, for the district in which the lot is contained.
6. All pools shall be constructed below the surface of the ground except that
nothing shall prohibit pool areas from being terraced on side hill locations.
7. All pools shall be landscaped to effectively screen the view of the pool from
neighboring properties.
8. All loudspeakers or public address systems shall be located in the immediate
area of the pool and be directed so that the speakers are not directly aimed at
any adjacent residential buildings.
9. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 30 square feet of
water surface. Such parking facilities may be included with other parking areas
associated with club houses, other recreational uses and similar uses as part of
a total site plan.
c. All pools referred to in paragraphs a and b of this subsection shall have all the areas
surrounding the pool made and kept neat and attractive so as to be in conformity
with surrounding property and no rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to
remain or accumulate in or about the pool.
§ 22-5.16 ZONING § 22-5.21
22:31
§ 22-5.21. Corner Lots. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.21]
At all street intersections, no obstruction exceeding 30 inches in height above the
established grade of the street at the property line, other than an existing building, post,
column, hedge or tree, shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the area bounded
by the line drawn between points along such street lot lines 25 feet distant from their
intersection. The determination of the front yard of a corner lot shall be at the option of
the owner or developer and shall be so designated on all maps and official records.
§ 22-5.22. Through Lots. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.22]
A through lot shall be considered as having two street frontages, both of which shall be
subject to the front yard requirements of the Zoning Schedule.
§ 22-5.23. Required Area or Space Cannot be Reduced. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-5.23]
The area or dimensions of any zone lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be
reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter; and if already existing as less
than the minimum required by this chapter, the area or dimension may be continued and
shall not be further reduced.
§ 22-5.24. Frontage Upon a Street. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.24]
§ 22-5.25. Lot Located in More Than One Zone. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-5.25]
For any zone lot which is located in more than one zone district, which districts differ
in character by permitting residential, commercial or industrial uses, all yard, bulk and
other requirements shall be measured from the zone boundary line and not the true lot
line.
§ 22-5.26. Yard Regulations. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.26]
a. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon an improved
and approved street in accordance with the street standards established by the
Borough.
b. Any property which contains access to one or more approved and improved streets
at its property line but does not contain sufficient street frontage as required herein
shall not be construed to be landlocked. Where such conditions do exist or are
created by virtue of a subdivision, no building permit or occupancy permit shall be
granted unless and until the property contains the required amount of street frontage
as required herein.
c. This provision is not to be construed to provide any building or zone which contains
less street frontage than required herein or to create a building or zone lot, with an
existing structure or structures located thereon, with less street frontage than as
required herein.
a. General.
§ 22-5.21 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.26
22:32
§ 22-5.27. Maximum Lot Coverage. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-5.27]
The maximum lot coverage on each zone lot shall not be greater than is permitted in
the district where such buildings and structures are located and shall include all porches,
chimneys, extensions and accessory buildings.
§ 22-5.28. Earth Satellite Stations. [Ord. #86-4, § I]
1. Required yards shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary
projection of parapets, windowsills, door posts, rainwater leaders and similar
ornamental or structural fixtures which may not project more than six inches
into such yards.
2. Cornices and eaves may project not more than two feet over any required yard.
3. Chimneys or flues may be erected within any yard, provided that they do not
exceed 75 square feet in aggregate external area.
b. Front Yard Requirements Affected by Official Map. Where any lot shall front on a
street right-of-way which is proposed to be widened as indicated on the Official
Map of the Borough, the front yard and the front or side yard of a corner lot in such
district shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
c. Projection into Required Yards. Certain architectural features may project into
required yards as follows:
1. Cornices, canopies, eaves, bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered
stairways and necessary landings and chimneys and other similar architectural
features may project a distance not to exceed two feet.
2. Patios may be located in any side or rear yard, provided that they are not closer
than five feet to any property line.
3. Self-supporting walls and fences may project into any required yard, provided
that any accessory retaining wall or fence is not higher than six feet in height
and shall not obstruct automobile vision. The sight triangle requirements shall
also apply where applicable.
a. Definition. As used in this chapter:
SATELLITE EARTH STATION (DISH)—Shall mean any apparatus, building or
structure which is designed for the purpose of receiving television, radio, microwave,
satellite, or similar signals, in connection with what is commonly referred to
as dish-type antennae.
b. Approving Agency. The provisions of this subsection shall be administered by the
Construction Official, also referred to as the Zoning Official.
c. Procedure. Any property owner, or person, or entity in possession of property, shall
submit to the Zoning Official prior to the placement of a satellite earth station
(dish), a plan showing the size of the satellite earth station, the proposed location of
same on the subject premises, and such other information as may be required
herein.
§ 22-5.26 ZONING § 22-5.28
22:33
d. Site Plan Details. The site plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale not smaller than
one inch equals 40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include
and show the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name, address
and the title of the person or entity preparing the plan and accompanying data,
the date of preparation, and the dates of each revision, where applicable.
2. An appropriate place for the signature of the Zoning Official.
3. The lot(s) and block(s) numbers of the lot(s) from the Borough tax map, and
the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
4. The location, names, and pavement, and right-of-way widths of all existing
and proposed streets abutting the lots in question, the property lines of all
abutting properties, together with the names and addresses as disclosed on the
Borough tax map and the tax rolls as of the date of the application, and the
location of existing buildings within 200 feet of the site in question.
5. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings and structures
on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and finished grade
elevations at all corners.
6. All existing and proposed setback dimensions and landscape areas.
7. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening as required by this
subsection.
8. Any and all other information necessary to meet any of the requirements of
this subsection not listed above.
e. Design Standards.
1. The surface area of satellite earth station antennae (parabolic dish) shall not be
greater than 36 square feet.
2. The maximum height of antennae and mounting structure measured vertically
from the highest point of the antennae when positioned for operation shall not
be greater than 14 feet above the ground.
3. In all zoning districts the dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted
foundation. Maximum height indicated in the above schedule will be from
ground level at the location of the dish foundation.
4. No satellite earth station shall be closer than 20 feet from any side property
line or any rear property line.
5. Satellite earth stations shall be located in the rear yard only.
6. Every satellite earth station shall be in an unobtrusive location, effectively
screened by a special planting screen or fence as approved by the Zoning
Official, which shall be maintained in good condition so that the satellite earth
station shall not be readily visible from any adjacent property or public street.
§ 22-5.28 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.28
22:34
§ 22-5.29. Cell Towers and Antennas. [Ord. #2003-3, § 2]
The uses listed in this subsection are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require a
conditional use permit or variance application.
7. Power control and signal cables from or to the satellite earth station shall be
underground, and installed in accordance with the appropriate building code,
if any.
f. Fees. The application fee for a permit to install a satellite earth station (dish) shall
be $25. In addition, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $100 to cover the cost of
review sources deemed necessary by the Construction Official, such as the Borough
Engineer, Borough Attorney, or other Borough personnel. The Treasurer shall place
the deposit in a trust account and shall charge all disbursements for the review
services. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the
cost of review services exceeds the amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds
shall be deposited before any permit shall be issued.
g. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall, for each
and every violation thereof, and for each and every day that the violation continues
to be in existence, be subject to a fine of not more than $100 per violation.
h. Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Official is hereby designated as the public officer
charged with the enforcement of the terms of this subsection. All complaints for
alleged violation of any of the terms of this subsection shall be submitted in writing
to the Zoning Official.
a. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by
the Borough of Moonachie provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna
or tower has been approved by the Borough of Moonachie. However, the Borough
may, as a condition of such lease, require site plan approval. The decision to extend
such leases to an applicant shall be vested solely with the municipality; shall not be
governed by this general section and shall, to the extent applicable be subject to the
bidding requirements of the local Public Contracts Law of the State of New Jersey.
The Borough in its absolute discretion, reserves the express right to deny all use of
its property for antennas or towers. Preexisting towers and antennas are exempt
from the application of this section.
b. Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be attached to any existing
business, industrial, office or institutional structure located in the relevant zones,
provided that:
1. The antenna does not exceed 10 feet more than the maximum building height
for the zone wherein the structure is located;
2. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations;
3. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes; and
4. The antenna complies with all relevant subsections of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie including materials, placement and
reinforced plastic panels designed to make the antenna the least visually
§ 22-5.28 ZONING § 22-5.29
22:35
§ 22-5.30. Storage Containers. [Ord. #2009-2]
intrusive to adjacent properties.
c. No towers or antennas shall be permitted as conditional uses in residential or public
use zone districts unless located upon property owned by the Borough of
Moonachie and subject to the provisions of all relevant subsections of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie.
a. General Instructions.
1. A single storage container of 1,500 cubic feet or any aggregate of that total (if
multiple containers) or less shall be permitted on any lot in the Borough on a
temporary basis as set forth hereafter. Larger size storage containers are
prohibited in all residential zones.
2. The temporary storage container may be located in any yard area but no closer
than five feet from all interior property lines and it shall not be located any
closer than 10 feet to any street line.
3. The location of the temporary storage container on a corner property shall not
cause a sight obstruction at an intersection as defined in subsection 22-5.21,
corner lots.
4. A storage container shall be permitted in accordance with this section, but it
shall only remain on the lot for a maximum of 30 days from the date that the
permit is issued.
5. A storage container with a valid building permit issued pertaining to the need
for a storage container, shall only remain on the lot for a maximum of 90 days
when there is a need for a storage container.
b. Permit Requirements. Before any owner shall be permitted to place a storage
container on a lot, an application to the Building Department for a permit to do so
shall be filed and approved. The application shall identify the owner and/or the
tenant, location, size and the length of time that the storage container is requested.
1. After approval of a zoning permit, a storage container after approval of a
zoning permit shall be permitted to remain for the following length of time:
(a) Thirty days.
(b) Ninety days if a valid building permit was issued pertaining to the need
for a storage container.
2. The owner may seek to keep the storage container for an additional period of
time by making a separate application for extension to the Building
Department with the understanding and acknowledgment that any extension
granted will not be further extended and additional fees will be required unless
extenuating circumstances apply such as a fire or natural disaster.
c. Fees. In addition to submitting the applications referred to above, each application
shall be accompanied with payment of a fee to the Borough of $50 and in the case
§ 22-5.29 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-5.30
22:36
§ 22-6. EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
§ 22-6.1. Exceptions to Height Limits. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-6.1]
Any portion of the roof structure above that which is used in measuring the height of
a building as defined in subsection 22-2.2 as well as penthouses or roof structures for
the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment,
or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building and fire or parapet
walls, skylights, towers, spires, cupolas, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks,
monuments, watertanks, silos, or similar structures may be erected above the height
limits prescribed by this chapter but in no case more than 25% more than the maximum
height permitted in the district except spires, steeples, silos, water towers, and radio and
television towers shall not exceed 50 feet in height above the ground level. In addition
all structures are subject to regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency.
§ 22-6.2. Exception to Area Requirements. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-6.2; Ord. #90-4]
Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots are held by the same owner, regardless
of whether or not each of the lots may have been approved as portions of a major
subdivision, or acquired by separate conveyance or by other operation of law and one
or more of the individual lots should, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
topographical conditions, substandard area or yard space, not conform with the
minimum lot area and dimension requirements for the zone in which it is located, the
contiguous lots of the owner, for the purposes of this chapter shall be considered as a
single lot and the provisions of this chapter shall hold.
Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the Borough by a lot owner to
meet the minimum street width requirement of the Land Subdivision Ordinance or to
implement the Official Map or Master Plan of the Borough, the Construction Official
shall issue building and occupancy permits for the lot whose depth or areas are rendered
substandard in area only because of such dedication and where the owner has no other
adjacent lands to provide the minimum requirements.
§ 22-7. FEES.
of an Extension Application with payment of a fee to the Borough of $100. The
fees in question will cover the administrative costs of the Borough, as well as
any oversight to make certain that the applicant performs in accordance with
its application, including but not limited to the removal of the container at the
expiration of the permit.
d. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this subsection
shall, upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that a violation exists shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation.
§ 22-5.30 ZONING § 22-7.1
22:37
§ 22-7.1. Fees. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; Ord. #81-6, § 1; 1970 Code § 17-7.1;
Ord. #90-17, §§ 1 — 3]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment of a fee schedule for the
payment of fees with respect to all applications submitted to the Borough pursuant to
Borough Land Use Development Regulations.
a. Conventional Applications.
1. Required Fees and Escrow Amounts: The following list of applications must
be accompanied, at the time of submission of the application, by the fees and
escrow amounts set forth in Schedule A.35 These fees and escrow amounts
shall consist of the sum of the following:
(a) In Column A, an administrative fee which is charged to the applicant to
cover the costs associated with the clerical processing and filing of the
application, which fee shall be non-refundable;
(b) In Column B, a professional review escrow amount which shall be
deposited into the Professional Review Escrow Account, maintained by
the Municipal Treasurer. The deposit required of the applicant and
deposited into the Professional Review Escrow Account shall cover the
costs associated with the required review of the application by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Planning Board's engineer, planner or attorney,
and for applications submitted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, such
other professionals as the Zoning Board of Adjustment may reasonably
require, which review shall include a written report on the application to
be submitted to the Board. Prior to drawing monies out of the
Professional Review Escrow Account, each professional engaged by the
Board shall submit an invoice to the Board Chairperson, or his/her
designee for approval. Following conclusion of the hearings and meetings
regarding the application, any unused funds deposited by an applicant
into the Professional Review Escrow Account shall be refunded to the
applicant. Upon reimbursement of any unused funds, an applicant may
request an accounting of expended funds and same will be provided to
the applicant within 30 days of a written request filed with the Board.
2. Additional Fees. An applicant may request that a Board professional schedule
additional time, in excess of that covered by the monies paid into the
Professional Review Escrow Account, for review of a specific application. If
the Board professional consents to such a request, both the applicant and the
professional shall sign a consent form authorizing such additional review.
When the additional review is completed, the professional shall submit an
invoice to the Board, and simultaneously therewith a copy to the applicant,
detailing the number of hours expended for such review, the professional's fee,
and a description of the work performed. Said invoice shall be due and payable
by the applicant prior to memorialization of the Board's decision on the
particular application.
3. "d" Variances. On each application for a "d" variance filed pursuant to
35. Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 22-7.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-7.1
22:38
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the applicant shall be required to post to the Professional
Review Escrow Account a minimum amount of $500. The applicant shall
also be required to post such additional amounts into the Professional Review
Escrow Account as may be deemed to be reasonably required by the Board
to appropriately consider the application. The amounts required pursuant to
this subsection shall be required to cover the costs of review of the application
by the Board's engineer, planner and attorney as well as the costs of possible
review, in appropriate instances, by "special" professionals, e.g., traffic,
landscaping, and environmental professionals required to review specific
aspects of the application. An applicant shall be notified in writing when
additional amounts to restore the Professional Review Escrow Account shall
become due and payable. Prior to withdrawal of any funds from this
Professional Review Escrow Account, an invoice shall be submitted to the
Board Chairperson or his/her designee, setting forth the work performed for
which such fees are being requested. Following conclusion of the hearings
and meeting regarding the application, any unused portion of this Professional
Review Escrow Account shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon
reimbursement of any unused funds, an applicant may request an accounting
of expended funds, and same will be provided to the applicant within 30 days
of a written request filed with the Board.
(a) Special Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment Meetings. Any
applicant may request that a special meeting of a Board be scheduled and
devoted exclusively to a single application. Such meeting shall be
scheduled upon request of the applicant and at the discretion of either the
Board Chairperson or his/her designee. The time of the Board's
professionals required to prepare for and follow up after such special
meeting shall be charged against such Professional Review Escrow
Account. The Professional Review Escrow Amount for such a meeting
shall be $500. The Professional Review Escrow Amount shall be posted
by the applicant prior to or at the commencement of the special meeting.
The applicant shall be required to deposit any additional funds into the
Professional Review Escrow Account which may be required to cover
costs for professional services in excess of the initial deposit.
(b) Where an application for development includes several approval requests,
the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid, except that there
shall be no cumulative fees charged to an applicant for individual bulk
variances which may be part of a "d" variance application.
4. Waiver and Remission of Fees. (1) The Board, when acting upon application,
shall have the power, for good cause shown, to grant a remission or waiver
from all or any portion of the fee schedules hereinabove established based
upon any of the following: (1) the nonprofit status of the applicant; (2) a
determination that collection of the fees would constitute an economic
hardship upon the applicant; (3) the unique characteristics of the application,
making collection of the full fees substantially disproportionate to the
regulatory costs applicable to reviewing the application; or (4) for other good
cause established in the record.
5. The fees set forth in the aforementioned schedules are exclusive of any other
§ 22-7.1 ZONING § 22-7.1
22:39
§ 22-7.2. Certified Court Reporter. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-7.2]
If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking testimony and
transcribing it with a copy of the transcription available to the Borough shall be at the
expense of the applicant who shall also arrange for the reporter's attendance.
§ 22-8. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 22-8.1. Construction Code Official. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-8.1]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official or the Assistant Construction Code
Official of the Borough to administer and enforce this chapter except as provided in
subsection 22-5.4. In no case shall a permit be granted for the construction or alteration
of any building where the proposed construction, alteration or use would be in violation
of any provision of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official to
cause any new buildings, plans or premises to be inspected or examined and to order in
writing to the owner that any condition be remedied which is found to exist in violation
of any provisions of this chapter. He shall have the right to enter any building or premises
during the daytime in the course of his duties. A copy of each such report shall be filed
with the Borough Council.
§ 22-8.2. Building Permits and Procedures. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code
§ 17-8.2]
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by three sets of plans
drawn in ink, or blueprint, and showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the exact location, size and height of the buildings and accessory buildings
existing and proposed, and the lines within which the building or structure is to be
erected or altered, the existing or intended use of each building or part of a building,
the number of families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, the
number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading areas and such
other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to
charges which may be required by the Borough to cover the costs of the
inspection of buildings or improvements in conjunction with the issuance of
construction permits or Certificates of Occupancy.
6. In the event that any fees paid by an applicant into the Professional Review
Escrow account shall exceed $5,000 such applicant's account shall be placed
into an interest-bearing trust account in conformance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. The applicant shall be notified, in writing of the
institution in which the deposit has been made and the amount of such deposit.
Any interest earned on the account shall be applied in accordance with the
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. The Borough shall keep records of all
application fees paid in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. The fees for all professional reviews of an application shall be
charged to the applicant at the same rate and in the same manner as that
charged by the professional to the Borough.
§ 22-7.1 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-8.2
22:40
determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. One copy of the plans shall
be returned to the owner when the plans shall have been approved by the Construction
Code Official together with such permits as may be granted. All dimensions shown on
these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based
on an actual survey of the lot by a licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey.
The lot and location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before
construction is started. No building permit shall be issued for any new building located
in a subdivision unless that subdivision is duly approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough subdivision ordinance. The provisions
contained in this paragraph are in no way intended to conflict with the obligations of the
Construction Code Enforcement Official as same are more particularly set forth in the
Uniform Construction Code and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 22-8.3. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-8.3]
a. It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any building or part
thereof, hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged wholly or in part, until a
certificate of occupancy, applied for at the time of application for a building permit,
shall have been issued, by the Construction Code Official. The certificate shall
show that the building, or part of a building and the proposed use thereof conform
to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code
Official to issue a Certificate of Occupancy only when he is satisfied that the
building, or part of a building, and the proposed use thereof conform to the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough. Such occupancy permits shall be granted or denied in writing within 10
days from the date that a written application is filed with the Construction Code
Official. A Certificate of Occupancy shall also be required prior to reoccupancy of
a vacated existing building.
b. Should the Construction Code Official decline to issue a Certificate of Occupancy,
his reasons for doing so shall be so stated on one copy of the application and that
copy returned to the applicant.
c. Upon written request from an owner or tenant, the Construction Code Official shall
issue a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or use of land existing on
November 20, 1979, certifying after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of
the building and whether such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
d. The Construction Code Official may issue a conditional Certificate of Occupancy,
for a use of land or a building which is related to the development of a permitted
use of property. Such permits may be issued for a period of one month, and no more
than one month extension may be granted. The reasons for the increase of such
conditional certificate shall be stated on the face of the Certificate of Occupancy.
e. On the serving of notice of any violation of any of the provisions or requirements
of this chapter with respect to any building or use thereof or of land as provided in
Section 22-9 of this chapter, the Certificate of Occupancy for such use shall
thereupon, without further action, be null and void and a new Certificate of
Occupancy shall be required for any further use of such building or land.
f. A monthly report of the Certificates of Occupancy shall be filed with the Tax
§ 22-8.2 ZONING § 22-8.3
22:41
§ 22-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 22-9.1. Penalties for Violation. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-9.1]
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any order, decision
or determination by the Board of Adjustment, the Planning Board, the appropriate
Construction Code Official or the governing body and who refuses to abate the violation
within five days after written notice has been served either by registered mail or by
personal service, shall for each and every violation be subject to a fine of not more than
$200 or 90 days imprisonment or both, at the discretion of the court or judicial officer
before whom a conviction may be had. Each and every successive day that such violation
continues after such notice shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this
chapter without the service of additional notice.
§ 22-9.2. Action Instituted by Borough Attorney. [Ord. #72-10; Ord. #79-20; 1970
Code § 17-9.2]
In case any building or structure is or is not intended to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered or converted, or any building or structure is or is intended to be
used in violation of, or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Borough Attorney
shall, after authorization from the Borough Council and in addition to other remedies,
set forth in the statutes or other laws of the State of New Jersey and in this chapter
institute an action to enjoin, or any other appropriate action or proceeding, to prevent
such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
§ 22-10. DISTRICT CHANGES AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS.
§ 22-10.1. Borough Council May Amend or Change Districts. [Ord. #72-10; Ord.
#79-20; 1970 Code § 17-10.1]
The Borough Council may amend or change by ordinance, the number, shape or area of
districts established on the Zoning Map and the regulations set forth in this chapter in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and any amendments thereto.
§ 22-11. INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY.
§ 22-11.1. Governing Body May Amend. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-11.1]
All amendments of this chapter shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Assessor. A record of all building permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Construction Code Official and copies shall be furnished
on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or
land affected. The charge for each copy shall be $10 except that there shall be no
charge to a municipal agency.
g. The provisions contained in these paragraphs are in no way intended to conflict
with the obligations of the Construction Code Enforcement Official as same are
more particularly set forth in the Uniform Construction Code and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 22-8.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 22-11.1
22:42
New Jersey Law.
§ 22-11.2. Interpretation. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-11.2]
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, morals
and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules,
regulations or ordinances, provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 22-11.3. Copy to Be Filed With County Planning Board. [Ord. #79-20; 1970
Code § 17-11.6]
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a copy of this
chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk shall also file
with the County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances of the Borough relating
to land use such as the subdivision and site plan review ordinances of the Borough.
§ 22-11.4. Definition of Terms. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-11.7]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, such
term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in the
statute unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 22-11.5. Pending Applications. [Ord. #79-20; 1970 Code § 17-11.8]
All applications for development made and filed prior to the effective date of this chapter
may be construed in accordance with a prior law but any appeals arising out of decisions
made on any such application shall be governed by this chapter.
§ 22-11.1 ZONING § 22-11.5
22:43

Chapter 23
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Editor's Note: For mobile home parks, see also General Licensing, Section 4-10 and
Zoning, Section 22-4.
§ 23-1. RENT REGULATION.
§ 23-1.1. Scope. [Ord. #93-13, § 1; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
This Chapter applies to all mobile homes in the Borough of Moonachie.
§ 23-1.2. Recitals. [Ord. #93-13, § 2; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
The following matters are hereby determined, declared and recited, viz.:
§ 23-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. #93-13, § 3; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
a. That from time to time a shortage of rental units may exist within the Borough of
Moonachie with respect to the rental of mobile home spaces and mobile homes in
mobile home parks and that shortage may inhibit tenants' ability to relocate without
undue financial hardship within the immediate community and whereas
extraordinary rental increases may force tenants to vacate their mobile homes in
need of alternative rental housing thereby providing a need for governmental
protection of those tenants;
b. That the number of mobile home parks and spaces permitted within the Borough
has been limited by the Mayor and Council so as to achieve a balance in the types
of housing permitted in the Borough and it is desirable to maintain such balance
and the present situation cannot be corrected by increasing the number of mobile
home parks alone;
c. That by reason of the necessity of licensing of mobile home parks, mobile home
park operators enjoy an unintended monopoly which may be abused by the
charging of unregulated excessive rents;
d. That the Borough has the power to so regulate rents in mobile home parks pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1d bestowing power to enact ordinances for the
preservation of public health, safety and welfare of the Borough and its inhabitants,
pursuant to which grant of powers this Chapter is enacted;
e. That a policy of resolution of fair rental charge disputes by open communication,
discussion and negotiation between mobile home park operators and their tenants is
to be encouraged, in that it will serve to minimize the governmental regulation and
intrusion into the citizens' private business and domestic affairs;
f. That it is the intent of this Chapter that tenants are not to pay for charges caused by
mismanagement or neglect caused by park operators.
a. AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS - Shall mean fit for habitation, as
defined by law, and occupied or unoccupied and offered for rent; or, inhabited,
§ 22-11.5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.3
23:1
whether or not legally fit.
b. BASE RENT - Shall mean the rent charged and received for a lot and/or mobile
home, including, but not limited to, use of the lot and/or mobile home, reasonable
and necessary operating costs, general maintenance, mortgage payments, and
insurance, but exclusive of any of the categories, as defined below, which have been
included in the rent, and are still so included, before the date of calculation of base
rent.
c. OMBUDSMAN - Shall mean an individual appointed by the Mayor and Council
and paid for by the Borough of Moonachie. To review, report and respond to
applications under this Chapter and to administer the terms and conditions herein.
d. BOROUGH - Shall mean the Borough of Moonachie.
e. BYLAWS - Shall mean bylaws or rules and regulations established by the
Ombudsman.
f. MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT - Shall mean a major capital improvement
or a substantial change in the mobile home park accommodations such as would
become an additional benefit to the living conditions of the residents of the park.
The term major capital improvement does not include repairs or replacements,
which merely maintain the mobile home park in efficient operating condition.
g. CATEGORY OR RENT CATEGORY - Shall mean any portion of rent allocated
for a particular purpose, excluding base rent, but including the following:
1. Real property taxes.
2. Space fees charged by the Borough of Moonachie.
3. Any cost of supplied utilities, each such utility constituting a separate
category, viz.:
(a) Sewerage.
(b) Garbage and/or trash removal and/or recycling.
(c) Electricity.
(d) Water.
4. Any major capital improvement, each such improvement constituting a
separate category.
5. Any increase for hardship previously awarded by the Ombudsman.
6. Any other specific charges as approved by the Ombudsman.
h. CHARGES - Shall mean the amount of rent allocated to any of the categories
specifically excluded from base rent.
i. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX OR CPI - Shall mean the consumer price index (all
items) for the region of the United States of which the Borough of Moonachie is a
part, viz., the New York-Northeastern New Jersey area, published periodically by
§ 23-1.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.3
23:2
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor, and more
specifically, CPI-W.
j. LAWS - Shall mean and include Federal laws, State statutes, County ordinances,
and local ordinances, and any rules and regulations resulting from these, including
this Chapter.
k. LEASE - Shall mean any written or oral agreement pursuant to which any person is
permitted to occupy a mobile home and/or a lot.
l. LOT - Shall mean that portion of a park rented or offered for rent, or available for
positioning a mobile home for living purposes, together with all privileges,
services, equipment, facilities, and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy of such portion of the property.
m. MOBILE HOME PARK, OR PARK - Shall mean any plot of ground upon which
two or more mobile homes may be parked for dwelling or sleeping, other than an
enclosed building.
n. MOBILE HOME - Shall mean any manufactured self- propelled or non-selfpropelled
vehicle or portable or semi-portable structure, built on a chassis, designed
without a permanent foundation, connected to utilities and containing a flush toilet,
bath or shower, and a kitchen sink, and used or intended for use as a temporary or
permanent dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons including, but not
limited to, structures commonly known as mobile homes, dependent and
independent travel trailers, piggy-back campers, camp vehicles, mobile home buses
and tents.
o. NOTICE TO QUIT - Shall mean notice that a park operator is required to give to
each tenant specifying amount of net rent increases/decreases in each rent category
and date that tenant must leave premises if rent is not agreed to or otherwise fixed.
No rent increase may be collected or fixed before the issuance of a valid notice to
quit, as defined herein and by existing law.
p. PAD - Shall mean the material, often concrete or macadam, which covers the
ground under a mobile home and prevents the mobile home from sinking into the
ground.
q. LICENSING FEE - Shall mean a fee charged by the Borough of each individual
pad and collected with rent. In this sense, a pad is equivalent to a lot.
r. PARK OPERATOR - Shall mean the operator, owner, or other person leasing or
renting a lot to a tenant.
s. PARK-OWNED MOBILE HOME - Shall mean any mobile home within a park
which is owned by the park operator and which is rented or leased, or intended as
such.
t. PERSON - Shall mean and include any corporations, companies, associations,
societies, firms, partnerships, and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals.
u. REGISTERED TENANT - Shall mean anyone living with a tenant and registered
with the park operator.
§ 23-1.3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.3
23:3
§ 23-1.4. Establishment of Rents. [Ord. #93-13, § 4; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.5. Applications; Filing Fees; Escrow. [Ord. #93-13, § 5; Ord. #99-7; Ord.
#2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
v. RENT - Shall mean the periodic (usually weekly or monthly) amount paid by a
tenant to a park operator which includes base rent, supplied utilities, major capital
improvements and/or hardship increases.
w. SUPPLIED UTILITIES -Shall mean garbage and/or trash removal and/or
recycling, fuel, electrical, water, sewer, and such other services as the Ombudsman
may deem applicable, for which services the park operator is responsible to the
supplier for payment.
x. TAX CHARGE - Shall mean that portion of rent attributable to real estate taxes for
the park.
y. TENANT - Shall mean a resident of a mobile home park owner who rents or leases
a lot and/or mobile home from a park operator.
z. BOARD - Shall mean the Moonachie Mobile Home Park Rent Leveling Board
established pursuant to this Chapter. The Board, if still in place will have the same
powers as the Ombudsman as stated in the Chapter.
a. Establishment of rents in parks shall hereafter be determined by this Chapter.
b. No park operator may demand, request, or receive of tenants any increase in rent
without written approval from the Ombudsman, except as herein provided.
a. Any park operator, tenant, or any group of tenants seeking any determination from
the Ombudsman shall apply to the Ombudsman.
b. Filing Content. Said application shall be filed with the Borough Clerk. Each park
operator's application for an annual rent increase must include, at a minimum, the
following information: a breakdown of each rent category, the current charge to
each rent category for owners and renters, the proposed increase to each rent
category for owners and renters, and an item by item breakdown of the total cost
and amortized allocation of the total cost of any proposed capital improvement
charge. Each tenant application must specify the basis for any rent decrease sought
including the method used to calculate the proposed decrease. Incomplete
applications may be rejected by the Borough Clerk or the Ombudsman and may
alter the effective date of the rent increase or decrease sought.
c. Tenant Application. Each tenant application for a decrease of any type shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $20.
d. Park Operator. Each park operator's application for an increase of any type shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $100
e. Each park operator's applications for an increase of any types shall be accompanied
by an escrow fee of $500.
§ 23-1.3 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.5
23:4
§ 23-1.6. Annual Increase. [Ord. #93-13, § 6; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
§ 23-1.7. Real Property Taxes. [Ord. #93-13, § 7; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
f. The applicant may be responsible for reasonable additional escrow fees for an
application of any type if the services of an accountant will be required which fee
shall not exceed $500.
g. Ombudsman is authorized by the Borough of Moonachie to review applications of
which have been received by the Borough Clerk for completeness and accuracy.
h. All parties reserve their right of review of the Ombudsman's decision as well as
reserve their right to challenge this decision with the filing of an action in lieu of
prerogative writ where the standard of review will be the normal standard of review
for prerogative writ matters and not limited to questions of fraud or mistake of law.
i. Any application by a group of tenants shall contain a list of names and addresses of
those tenants included by said application.
a. A park operator may apply annually for an increase in base rent, of not more than
the percentage increase in the CPI. Such increase shall be granted by the
Ombudsman provided that the park operator has met the requirements of the
application process.
b. The dollar amount of base rent increase per mobile home shall be calculated as
follows:
1. For tenant owned mobile homes: By applying the allowed percentage to the
sum of base rents for tenant-owned mobile homes, and dividing by the number
of said mobile homes in the park.
2. For park-owned mobile homes:
By applying the allowed percentage to the sum of base rents for park-owned
mobile homes, and dividing by the number of said mobile homes in the park.
c. The annual amount supporting any increase in this section shall be based upon the
twelve-month period ending three months prior to the application filing date.
a. When real property taxes to the park operator are increased, the park operator may
apply to the Ombudsman for a commensurate increase in tax charges.
b. When real property taxes to the park operator are decreased, any affected tenant
may apply to the Ombudsman for a commensurate decrease in tax charges.
c. The charge per lot for real property taxes shall be computed by dividing the total
amount of said real property taxes by the total number of lots in the park, including
those for park-owned mobile homes, with reasonable adjustment for structures
which are not properly chargeable to tenants.
d. The Borough Tax Assessor shall notify the Ombudsman's secretary of any change
§ 23-1.5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.7
23:5
§ 23-1.8. Annual Calculation of Supplied Utility Charges. [Ord. #93-13, § 8; Ord.
#99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.9. Licensing Fee Increases. [Ord. #93-13, § 9; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.10. Hardship Increase. [Ord. #93-13 § 10; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
in the assessment of a park.
e. In no event shall the total of real property taxes paid by the tenants exceed the total
real property taxes paid or due to be paid by the park operator, and in granting an
increase under this section, the Ombudsman must, to the extent that evidence is
available, consider this subsection and make any appropriate adjustment.
a. When supplied utility charges to the park operator are increased, the park operator
may apply to the Ombudsman for a commensurate increase in supplied utility
charges.
b. When supplied utility charges to the park operator are decreased, any affected
tenant may apply to the Ombudsman for a commensurate decrease in supplied
utility charges.
c. The charge per lot for supplied utilities shall be computed annually by dividing the
total amount of each supplied utility cost by the total number of lots in the park,
including those for park-owned mobile homes, with reasonable adjustment for
structures which are not properly chargeable to tenants.
d. In no event shall the total of supplied utility charges paid by the tenants exceed the
total utility bills paid or due to be paid by the park operator, and in granting an
increase under this section, the Ombudsman must, to the extent that evidence is
available, consider this subsection and make any appropriate adjustment.
e. One supplied utility increase per year is allowed, based on actual bills for the
twelve-month period ending three months prior to the application filing date.
f. Once the application filing date and calculation period are established, they shall
remain the same for all future applications.
g. The park operator shall, annually, provide the Ombudsman all of the supplied utility
bills for the twelve-month period ending three months prior to the application filing
date.
h. For purposes of this section, each park operator must supply the Ombudsman with
copies of deposited checks made by the park operator to the utility company or bank
statements verifying the monthly utility bills actually paid by the park operator.
a. Whenever the Borough increases the licensing fee, the park operator may, after 30
days' written notice, which shall include a revised itemization of rent, begin
collecting the new licensing fee from the tenants.
b. Before any such increase is collected, the park operator shall give notice to the
Ombudsman, with a copy to the Borough Clerk.
§ 23-1.7 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.10
23:6
#2003-15]
§ 23-1.11. Increase for Major Capital Improvements. [Ord. #93-13, § 11; Ord.
#99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
a. It is recognized that an efficient park operator is entitled to a just and reasonable
rate of return from his property. To that end, a park operator may apply for rental
increases on the basis that rents allowed by this Chapter prevent the park operator
from receiving a just and reasonable rate of return.
b. Said park operator may request, and the Ombudsman shall grant, without formal
application or filing fees, an informal hearing.
c. No park operator shall receive an increase under this section until he has owned and
operated the park for 12 months.
a. A park operator may apply for a rental increase for the reasonable cost of major
capital improvements, including costs of financing such major capital
improvements.
b. Said park operator may apply for preliminary approval by formal application in
accordance with subsection 23-1.5 before construction or purchase of said major
capital improvements is begun.
c. Said park operator shall notify each tenant affected by such application at least 10
days prior to hearing. The notice shall contain the following information:
1. A clear description of the major capital improvement for which the application
is being made.
2. The number of years of useful life of the improvement as allowable to the park
operator for the purpose of depreciation under the Internal Revenue Code (see
IRS Publication 946, Appendix B, Table of Class Lives and Recovery Period)
by the straight line depreciation method.
3. The amount of monthly surcharge to be charged to such tenants if the
application is granted.
4. The dates, time and place of the hearing on the application.
d. The Ombudsman in considering a major capital improvement application shall
consider all of the following criteria in determining that portion of the
improvements final costs to be surcharged to the mobile homes.
Major Capital Improvement shall mean a substantial change to the mobile home
park housing accommodations such as would materially increase the rental value
of the mobile home space and which provides an additional service or benefit to
the residents of the park not previously accorded them. The term does not include
repairs or replacements, which merely maintain the mobile home park in efficient
operating condition. In determining whether a particular expenditure constitutes a
"major capital improvement" under this Chapter, the Ombudsman shall consider the
following:
§ 23-1.10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.11
23:7
§ 23-1.12. Testimony Under Oath. [Ord. #93-13, § 12; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.13. Rent Inequities. [Ord. #93-13, § 13; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
Where a disparity in rents within a park for substantially similar facilities is created due
to the enforcement of this Chapter, any affected party may apply to the Ombudsman for
a hearing.
1. The nature of the improvement.
2. The extent and cost of the improvement.
3. The additional service or benefit to the mobile home park and to the residents'
enjoyment thereof gained as a result of the improvement.
4. The degree of permanency of the improvement.
5. Whether the park owner depreciated the cost of the improvement over the
useful life of the object on his or her tax return.
e. On completion of said major capital improvements, said park operator shall, as a
continuance of said application, submit the actual costs to the Ombudsman for final
approval not later than 12 months after the completion of said improvement.
f. Any increase under this section shall not be collected until completion of the major
capital improvement.
g. The charge per lot for any major capital improvement shall be computed by
dividing the total cost of said major capital improvement by the total number of lots
in the park, including those lots for park-owned mobile homes, with reasonable
adjustment for structures which are not properly chargeable to tenants. Said
increase shall be assessed monthly over the length of time allowed by the Internal
Revenue Code (see IRS Publication 946, Appendix B, Table of Class Lives and
Recovery Period) for depreciating said major capital improvement on a straight line
depreciation basis.
1. Each tenant shall pay the major capital improvement surcharge only for the
number of years that it has been established as the useful life of such
improvement.
2. In any event, no increase by authority of this section shall exceed 10% of the
tenant's base rent at the time the surcharge is levied. In this case the recovery
period shall be expanded on a straight line basis to allow full recovery.
a. Each application before the Ombudsman shall include a sworn statement that the
content of said application is true and that no material facts have been withheld.
b. All testimony shall be under oath and subject to cross-examination.
c. Each party to a hearing shall have full rights of discovery prior to the hearing.
§ 23-1.11 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.14
23:8
§ 23-1.14. Financial Information and Statements. [Ord. #93-13, § 14; Ord. #99-7;
Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.15. Decreases in CPI. [Ord. #93-13, § 15; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
§ 23-1.16. Tax Appeals. [Ord. #93-13, § 16; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
2003-15]
§ 23-1.17. Rent Leveling Board. [Ord. #93-13, § 17; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
The Moonachie Mobile Home Park Rent Leveling Board as currently constituted shall
hear all applications which are pending review under the authority of the prior ordinance
up to and until the validation of this ordinance.36
§ 23-1.18. Powers and Duties of the Ombudsman. [Ord. #93-13, § 18; Ord. #99-7;
Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
a. In any matter considered by the Ombudsman, other than for tax, supplied utility, or
annual base rent increases, the Ombudsman may require the park operator to submit
the following financial information and statements:
1. Statement of financial condition.
2. Statement of operations (income and expense statements).
3. Statement of retained earnings.
4. Statement of cash flows.
5. Such other financial data and information as may be reasonably required by
the Ombudsman.
a. In the event of a decrease in the CPI, any tenants may apply to the Ombudsman in
the same manner as in subsection 23-1.6b, for a decrease in base rent of the
percentage decrease in the CPI. One such tenant application shall be deemed to be
filed on behalf of all tenants.
b. The dollar amount of base rent decrease per lot shall be calculated in the same
manner as set forth in subsection 23-1.6b. Any approved decrease shall be passed
on to all mobile home park tenants covered under this chapter.
a. If a municipal property tax appeal by the park operator is successful, the tenants
shall receive 100% of any resulting reduction excluding land and structures not
charged to tenants after the park operator's costs of securing said tax reduction have
been deducted.
b. This subsection is intended to be consistent with subsection 23-1.7c.
a. The Ombudsman shall establish rules and procedures for the fair and efficient
36. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-15 which amended Chapter 23 and Mobile Home Parks was adopted July 24, 2003.
§ 23-1.14 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.18
23:9
§ 23-1.19. Decision. [Ord. #93-19, § 19; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
§ 23-1.20. Appeal to the Mayor and Council. [Ord. #93-13, § 20; Ord. #99-7; Ord.
#2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
implementation of this Chapter.
Said rules and procedures shall be reviewed and adopted by the Mayor and Council
by ordinance.
Said rules and procedures may from time to time by request of the Ombudsman be
revisited and amended so as to maintain their effectiveness and efficiency of the
Chapter.
b. The Ombudsman shall maintain minutes of its meetings and shall file approved
minutes with the Borough Clerk.
c. The Mayor and Council shall appoint a secretary for the Ombudsman.
d. All meetings of the Ombudsman shall be subject to the Open Public Meetings Act.
a. The Ombudsman shall render its decision in writing. All conclusions and
determinations made by the Ombudsman shall be supported by the record and
reasons for such conclusions and determinations shall be contained in the formal
opinion as well as findings of fact.
b. Said written decision shall specify the decisions and the reasons therefor.
c. Said decision shall, in the event that an increase or decrease in rent or fees is
approved, specify the following:
1. The periodic (weekly or monthly) amount of said increase or decrease.
2. The date on which the increase or decrease is to begin.
3. The duration for which the increase or decrease is effective.
4. The nature of the increase or decrease.
a. Any park operator or tenant affected by any action of the Ombudsman may appeal
said action to the Mayor and Council.
b. Said appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, with a copy for the Ombudsman's
secretary, within 20 business days of the date of final action, and shall specify the
grounds thereof and the name and address of the appellant or his attorney.
c. If the appeal is filed by a tenant, the tenant shall serve to the park operator a copy
of the appeal within 10 business days of the filing thereof with the Borough Clerk,
such service being by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service
with a signed affidavit.
d. The park operator shall post a copy of the appeal in a conspicuous place or places
within the park, within five business days of the filing thereof, if filed by the park
§ 23-1.18 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.20
23:10
§ 23-1.21. Park Operator's Duty to Advise Each Tenant of Net Changes to Base
Rent as a Result of Final Decision. [Ord. #2003-15]
Subsequent to the decision of the Ombudsman or Mayor and Council on appeal, if the
awarded rent increases differ from the proposed increases contained in the notice to quit,
then the park operator must provide each tenant with a revised notice to quit, specifying
the monthly amount of net rent increases/decreases in each rent category, any capital
improvement charge, the effective date of the increase/decrease and the duration of the
increase/decrease.
§ 23-1.22. Maintenance of Standards; Rental Decrease for Violations. [Ord.
#93-13, § 21; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
operator, or within five business days of the receipt thereof, if filed by a tenant.
e. Such appeal shall be decided by the Mayor and Council only upon the record
established before the Ombudsman.
f. Notwithstanding the above, if the Mayor and Council determines that material
information was not known to the Ombudsman at the time of the application, the
Mayor and Council shall remand the application to the Ombudsman for
reconsideration.
g. The Mayor and Council shall take final action on the appeal within 45 business days
of receipt of the complete transcript (or statement) of proceedings before the
Ombudsman.
h. Either the appellant or the applicant may request a public hearing, and the Mayor
and Council shall grant same.
i. Both applicant and appellant shall be served with notice of said public hearing not
less than 10 business days prior thereto.
j. The Mayor and Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the
Ombudsman; remand the application to the Ombudsman for reconsideration; or
take such other action as it may deem appropriate.
k. The Mayor and Council shall render its decision by resolution, specifying the facts
and reasons therefor, and shall deliver a copy thereof to the Ombudsman and to the
appellant within 10 business days of the issuance of said resolution.
l. If the Mayor and Council takes no action within 45 business days of the date of the
delivery of the appeal to the Borough Clerk, the action taken by the Ombudsman
shall be deemed to be affirmed.
m. The filing of an appeal with the Mayor and Council shall not stay the effect of any
decision of the Ombudsman; provided, however, that any proposed increases
collected during the pendency of an appeal with the Mayor and Council shall be
deposited by the park operator in an interest bearing escrow account, and such
pending increases shall be paid to the park operator or refunded to the tenants, as
specified by the Mayor and Council, with interest, if the increase is modified or
reversed.
§ 23-1.20 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.22
23:11
§ 23-1.23. The Anti-Harassment Clause. [Ord. #93-13, § 22; Ord. #99-7; Ord.
#2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
The controlling criteria for the effectuation of this clause shall be N.J.S.A. 2C 33-4 and
Municipal Court Rule 7:2-2.
§ 23-1.24. Change of Ownership of a Mobile Home. [Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
a. During the term of this Chapter, the park operator shall maintain at least the same
facilities and the same standards of service, maintenance, and equipment in the park
and lots as provided or was required to provide, by law or by lease, three months
before this Chapter becomes effective.
b. The park operator shall provide all reasonable, adequate, safe and necessary service
and maintenance in accordance with all applicable law.
c. Where the park operator fails to maintain such standards, any tenant may apply to
the Ombudsman for a reasonable reduction in rent; whereupon the Ombudsman
shall duly notify the park operator and schedule the matter for hearing.
d. Where a park or any part thereof is being operated in violation of law, any affected
tenant may apply to the Ombudsman for a reasonable reduction in rent. Upon
receipt of such application, the Ombudsman shall schedule the matter for a hearing
and notify the park operator thereof.
a. Where there is a change of ownership of a mobile home except by inheritance, the
base rent for said lot may be increased or decreased. The base rent for said lot
cannot be higher than the highest rent charged or lower than the lowest rent charged
on the applicable rent roll in effect at the time of change in ownership. For increases
or decreases after the new tenant's base rent is thus established, the provisions of
this Chapter shall continue to apply except for the first annual increase.
1. The first annual increase for base rent shall be prorated as follows: Number of
tenant-owned months divided by 12 months multiplied by the appropriate
increase.
b. Landlords are required to file a notice with the Ombudsman advising when a
decontrolled unit becomes tenanted. Without written receipt by the Ombudsman of
this "notice," any rent increase on such unit is illegal.
1. Said "notice" shall state the date the new tenancy begins, the name of the
tenant and the amount of rent to be charged.
c. Rental rates shall not be indiscriminately increased or decreased as an advantage in
the sale of a mobile home by the park operator.
d. On request of a tenant, the park operator shall provide to the tenant a statement of
base rent and charges to be effective on, and any conditions pertinent to, the sale of
the mobile home.
1. Said statement shall contain an expiration date.
§ 23-1.22 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.24
23:12
§ 23-1.25. Weekly Rentals. [Ord. #93-13, § 23; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
§ 23-1.26. Rounding. [Ord. #93-13, § 24; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
All increases or decreases calculated pursuant to this Chapter shall be rounded to the
nearest cent.
§ 23-1.27. Retroactive Increases. [Ord. #93-13, § 25; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10;
Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.28. Heirs. [Ord. #93-13, § 26; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.29. Rent Receipts. [Ord. #93-13, § 27; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
2. Said statement shall be provided without charge, provided that any existing
such statement has not expired.
e. If said tenant deems unfair any of the amounts or conditions of such statement, said
tenant may apply to the Ombudsman for a determination.
a. For tenants paying rent on a weekly basis, weekly amounts are to be calculated by
multiplying the monthly amount by 12 and dividing the result by 52.
b. Nothing herein shall be construed to require tenants paying weekly to change their
payment schedules to monthly or vice versa.
a. The Ombudsman may grant the park operator retroactive increases.
b. Any retroactive increases shall not be collected from tenants in a lump sum, but the
length of time for which the increase is effective shall be reasonably adjusted so
that the park operator collects the amount allowed by the Ombudsman.
a. Heirs of a deceased tenant, who are themselves registered tenants, shall be entitled
to the same rights under this Chapter as the tenant when alive, and the provisions of
this Chapter shall apply as if the decedent were alive and occupying the mobile
home.
b. An heir who wishes to occupy said mobile home, but was not a registered tenant in
said mobile home at the time of death, shall be subject to the usual, reasonable
approvals by the park operator, and such approvals shall not be unreasonably
withheld, and if such approvals are granted, the provisions of this Chapter shall
apply as if the decedent were alive and occupying the mobile home.
a. When a tenant pays his or her rent, he or she shall receive a receipt which sets forth
the period for which the rent is paid and the amount paid.
b. When a tenant's base rent or any rent category is increased or decreased, said tenant
shall receive a notice which sets forth the amount of base rent and each rent
category.
§ 23-1.24 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.30
23:13
§ 23-1.30. Legislative Intent. [Ord. #93-13, § 28; Ord. #2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
This Chapter, being necessary for the welfare to the Borough and its inhabitants, shall be
liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 23-1.31. Waiver of Rights. [Ord. #93-13, § 29; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
None of the rights granted herein to tenants may be waived.
§ 23-1.32. Separability. [Ord. #93-13, § 30; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is held
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 23-1.33. Other Chapters. [Ord. #93-13, § 31; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
Wherever, in the Moonachie Ordinances, there is a conflict between this Chapter and
another Chapter, this Chapter shall govern.
§ 23-1.34. Effective Date. [Ord. #93-13, § 32; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
This Chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication and final passage, pursuant
to law.
§ 23-1.35. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #93-13, § 33; Ord. #99-7; Ord.
#2002-10; Ord. #2003-15]
§ 23-1.36. Notice to Tenants. [Ord. #93-13, § 34; Ord. #99-7; Ord. #2002-10; Ord.
#2003-15]
a. For any violations of this Chapter, unless specified otherwise herein, the General
Penalty Provision, Section 1-5 of the Borough of Moonachie Code shall apply.
b. Each day, or part thereof, that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
c. A violation affecting more than one rental space shall be considered a separate
violation as to each rental space.
d. Any attempt to perform any act or create any condition prohibited by this Chapter
shall constitute a violation hereof.
e. Any person who abets another in performing any act or creating any condition
prohibited by this Chapter shall be in violation of this Chapter.
f. Payment of a fine shall not constitute compliance with this Chapter.
g. The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to any revocation proceedings.
§ 23-1.30 MOONACHIE CODE § 23-1.36
23:14
a. The park operator shall post a copy of this Chapter, together with a notice that a
copy can be obtained from the Borough Clerk for the copying fee then in effect, and
any amendments hereto, in a conspicuous place or places throughout the park.
§ 23-1.36 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.36
23:15

Appendix
§ 23-1.36 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 23-1.36
23:17

Appendix A
APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS TO THE LOCAL BOARD OF
HEALTH
§ A-1. LOCAL HEALTH BOARDS; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT;
COMPENSATION. [Ord. #BH-07-001, § I]
There shall be two alternate members appointed to the Moonachie Board of Health. The
said alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the majority approval of
the Borough Council and shall serve without compensation but shall be allowed their
necessary and actual expenses. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
§ A-2. TERMS OF MEMBERS OF LOCAL BOARD; VACANCIES. [Ord.
#BH-07-001, § II]
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years except that the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be for two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year
for Alternate No. 2, so that the term, of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any one year. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term, shall be filled as
hereinabove provided for the unexpired term only.
§ A-3. CONFLICT OF INTEREST; REMOVAL. [Ord. #BH-07-001, § III]
An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he has either
directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate member may, after
public hearing if requested by said alternate member, be removed by the governing body
for cause.
§ A-4. ACTIONS AND VOTING METHOD OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
[Ord. #BH-07-001, § IV]
An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No.
1 shall vote first.
§ 23-1.36 APPOINTMENT OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS TO THE § A-4
A:1

Appendix B
APPENDIX B - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF RETAIL FOOD
ESTABLISHMENTS
§ B-1. AUTHORITY. [Ord. #BH-08-001, § 1; Ord. #BH-10-001, § 1]
An ordinance regulating retail food handling establishments, providing for the inspection
of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations, is hereby established pursuant
to revised statutes 26.3-69.1 to 69.6.
§ B-2. TITLE. [Ord. #BH-08-001, § 2; Ord. #BH-10-001, § 2]
The said code established and adopted by this ordinance is in addition to the New Jersey
Sanitary Code, Chapter 24, "Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food
Establishments" and is referred to in same.
§ B-3. STATE CODE ON FILE. [Ord. #BH-08-001, § 3; Ord. #BH-10-001, § 3]
Three copies of this ordinance as well as the said State of New Jersey Sanitary Code,
Chapter 24 have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon introduction of this ordinance and will remain on file there until final action
is taken on this ordinance for the use and examination of the public.
§ B-4. LICENSE REQUIRED. [Ord. #BH-08-001, § 4; #BH-10-001, § 4]
a. No retail food establishment including restaurants, diners and any other
establishments serving prepared food to the public in the Borough of Moonachie
shall be granted a retail food establishment license unless the owner, manager or
employee in charge of other employees serving food on each particular shift has
successfully completed a course prescribed by the Moonachie Board of Health
pertaining to health, education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food poisoning,
dishwashing procedures, germs, insects and rodents, and other health related
matters. There are two such courses: an Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's
Certification Course and a three-Hour Food Handler's Course. The owner, manager
or employees preparing food on each particular shift must possess a current
certificate of satisfactory completion of the three-Hour Food Handler's Course. The
owner, manager and employees in charge of other employees preparing food on a
particular shift shall have completed the Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Course.
The certificate of satisfactory completion of the three-Hour Food Handler's Course
shall be effective for two years from the date of issuance and the Eighteen-Hour
Food Manager's Certification Course shall be effective for five years from the date
of its issuance. Current certificate of completion of both the Eighteen-Hour Food
Manager's Certification Course and the three-Hour Food Handler's Course shall be
a prerequisite to any license being issued to a retail food establishment after the
appropriate fee has been paid.
b. 1. Each owner of key management personnel activity involved in the daily
operation of a retail food establishment where food is prepared, is required to
satisfactorily complete the Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Certification
§ A-4 APPENDIX B - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF § B-4
B:1
Course. Each owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food on each particular shift is required to satisfactorily complete the
three-Hour Food Handler's Course. Proof of satisfactory completion of both
courses must be supplied by to the Board of Health prior to the Board of Health
issuing an annual license to the retail food establishment. In addition, before a
license shall be issued, the retail food establishment shall pay the appropriate
fee in accordance with this ordinance.
2. Where owner or key management personnel actively involved in the daily
operation of a retail food establishment where food is prepared has not
satisfactorily completed the Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Certification
Course and an owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food on each particular shift has not satisfactorily completed the three-
Hour Food Handler's Course as set forth in this ordinance, the Moonachie
Board of Health may issue a temporary retail food license which shall expire
on March 31 of the license year. For the issuance of such a temporary retail
food license, the retail food establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for
the license together with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food
license in the amount of $100. No part of the surcharge shall be returned or
refunded. The surcharge shall be used for administering this ordinance.
3. Each new owner of a retail food establishment where food is prepared is
required to take the first available Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's
Certification Course, and the new owner and employees in charge of other
employees serving food on a particular shift must take the three-Hour Food
Handler's Course. The Moonachie Board of Health shall issue a temporary
retail food license which shall remain in effect for 90 days from the date of its
issuance or until the required Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Certification
Course and three-Hour Food Handler's Course have been satisfactorily
completed. For the issuance of such a temporary food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee changed for the permit together with a
special surcharge for the temporary retail food license in the amount of $100.
No part of the surcharge shall be returned. The surcharge shall be used for
administering this ordinance.
c. If there is no owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees serving
food to others on each particular shift who has satisfactorily completed the
Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Certification Course in accordance with this
ordinance, then the retail food establishment shall be issued a Summons to appear
before the Moonachie Municipal Court to answer the violation.
d. 1. Any retail food establishment which receives an "Unsatisfactory" rating from
the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall immediately cease from
serving any food or similar products until the license has received a
"Satisfactory" rating from the inspector conducting the inspections.
2. Any retail food establishment which receives two conditional satisfactory
ratings within any one calendar year period shall have its owner or manager
appear at the next meeting of the Moonachie Board of Health to provide
explanation as to reasons for such conditional satisfactory rating and to further
provide the Board of Health with its intended corrective actions so as to avoid
§ B-4 MOONACHIE CODE § B-4
B:2
§ B-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #BH-08-001, § 5; New;
#BH-10-001, § 5]
future conditional satisfactory ratings. The Health Officer and/or inspector
believes it is necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety. In
addition, its owner or manager must take and satisfactorily complete the next
available Eighteen-Hour Food Manager's Certification Course.
Failure of the establishment to adhere to this rule by licensing time of the
subsequent year will result in a surcharge of $500 on the new license.
3. In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting the
inspection shall cause appropriate Summons to be issued for the violation of
Chapter 24 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code, the Ordinances of the Borough
of Moonachie and applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey.
e. A retail food establishment license issued by the Borough of Moonachie under the
provisions of this ordinance shall expire annually on December 31 of each year and
application for renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee
prior to January 1 of each year. Failure to obtain a license prior to January 1 will
result in the inability of the establishment to operate subsequent to January 1.
Additionally, failure to obtain a license for the new year prior to January 1 will also
result in a late fee of $500.
f. A retail food establishment license issued by another Board of Health is not
transferable as to another license. A retail food establishment license issued by the
Board of Health is not transferable to a new owner within the Borough of
Moonachie.
g. As concerns nonprofit organizations, whenever food is being prepared at any of
these facilities, a temporary permit, exempt from fees, must be obtained from the
Board of Health two weeks prior to the date of the function. In order to obtain this
permit, the following information must be provided: (a) date and length of function;
(b) type of food being prepared, and (c) approximate number of people being
served.
h. Nursery schools preparing food or representatives of the nursery schools preparing
food must take the three-Hour Food Handler's Course.
a. Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $100,
nor more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a particular violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ B-4 APPENDIX B - REGULATION AND LICENSING OF § B-5
B:3

Appendix C
APPENDIX C - PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING
§ C-1. AUTHORITY AND ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
An ordinance regulating and controlling the operation of public recreational bathing
places and the issuance of permits to operate public recreational bathing places as
defined in N.J.A.C. 8:26 et seq., which is adopted herein by reference to same, within
the Borough of Moonachie is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1-69.6.
§ C-2. TITLE. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
This Appendix D shall be known and cited by its title: "Public Recreational Bathing
Ordinance." The code hereby established and adopted by this ordinance is in addition to
the New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 9, "Public Recreational Bathing" and is referred
to in same.
§ C-3. STATE CODE ON FILE. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
Three copies of this ordinance as well as the said State of New Jersey Sanitary Code,
Chapter 26 have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon introduction of this ordinance and will remain on file until final action is
taken on this ordinance for the use and examination of the public.
§ C-4. PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
§ C-5. DENIAL OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
Permits required by this ordinance or code may be denied or suspended by the Health
Officer for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance or of the code
or any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. The Health Officer shall afford
the person an opportunity to be heard and shall inform said person of his decision as
provided by Section 2.4 of the State Code (N.J.A.C. 8:26-2.4).
a. A public recreational bathing place, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:26 et seq., including
but not limited to swimming pools or hot tub/spa, shall not be operated or open to
the public until permits have been issued by the Code Enforcement pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 8:26 et seq. and the Health Department of the Borough of Moonachie.
b. The fee for the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a public recreational
bathing place is $100, and shall be submitted with the application for the permit.
c. A permit issued by the Borough of Moonachie under the provisions of this
ordinance shall expire annually on March 31 of each year and application for
renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee prior to April 1 of
each year. Failure to obtain a license prior to April 1 will result in the inability of
the establishment to operate subsequent to April 1. Additionally, failure to obtain a
license prior to April 1 will also result in a late fee of $25.
§ B-5 APPENDIX C - PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING § C-6
C:1
§ C-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BH-16-001]
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for a penalty of not less than $100, nor more
than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ C-6 MOONACHIE CODE § C-6
C:2
Appendix D
APPENDIX D - DOG LICENSING-LATE FEES
§ D-1. AUTHORITY AND ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. [Ord. No. BH-17-001]
An ordinance further regulating the issuance of dog licenses to residents that are keepers
of a dog within the Borough of Moonachie is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1, et seq.
§ D-2. TITLE. [Ord. No. BH-17-001]
This Chapter shall be known and cited by its title: "DOG LICENSING LATE FEE". The
code hereby established and adopted by this ordinance is in addition to the Licensing
Provisions of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie and is
referred to in same.
§ D-3. NONCOMPLIANCE. [Ord. No. BH-17-001]
A "KEEPER" of a dog or dogs that are subject to the dog licensing provisions as herein
above mentioned, shall submit an application for a dog license before February 1st
of each calendar year. Failure or refusal to obtain the requisite dog license(s) before
February 1st shall constitute a violation of subsection 8-1.2 of the Code of the Borough
of Moonachie.
§ D-4. LATE FEE. [Ord. No. BH-17-001]
A "KEEPER" that submits an application for registration tags after February 1st of each
calendar year shall pay a late fee in the amount of $10 for the issuance of the license and
registration tags. The late fee shall also apply to first-time keepers on the 11th day after
purchasing a dog(s) of licensing age as defined in the Licensing Provision of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie.
§ D-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BH-17-001]
Any person or keeper who violates the dog licensing provision of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Moonachie shall be liable for a penalty of not less than
$100, nor more than $500 for each violation. Each unlicensed dog subject to the dog
licensing provision shall constitute separate offense.
§ C-6 APPENDIX D - DOG LICENSING-LATE FEES § D-5
D:1

Appendix E
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ E-1. Purpose. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the practices of body art, including permanent
cosmetics, microblading, tattooing and body piercing, as set forth in this chapter, within
the Borough of Moonachie so as to ensure the public safety and health against illness
and injury.
§ E-2. Definitions. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
All terms referenced in this chapter shall be defined in accordance with the definitions
set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.3.
§ E-3. Prohibitions. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
All persons who own or operate an establishment that practices or performs body art
procedures, such as permanent cosmetics, microblading, tattooing and body piercing,
within the Borough of Moonachie shall do so only in complete compliance with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1 through 8:27-11.5.
§ E-4. Certificate of Inspection. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
No person shall own or operate a tattoo or body art establishment within the Borough
of Moonachie unless such person has registered such establishment with the Moonachie
Board of Health and has received a certificate of inspection from the Board. No
certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the establishment has been inspected by
the Board of Health and found to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and all applicable provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code. The Board of
Health shall inspect each tattoo or body art establishment annually to ensure that said
establishment complies with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey Administrative
Code.
§ E-5. License to Operate; Fee; Renovations. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No.
BH-21-001]
a. No person shall own or operate a tattoo or body art establishment without first
obtaining a license from the Board of Health to engage in such business.
b. An application for a license to operate a tattoo or body art establishment shall be
accompanied by an annual fee in the amount of $300. Any change in ownership of
a tattoo or body art establishment shall require a new application and license,
requiring payment of an additional license fee.
c. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December annually.
d. Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the body art
establishment so that same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
e. In the event of any renovations and/or alteration to a tattoo or body art
§ D-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § E-5
E:1
§ E-6. Operating Requirements. [Added 4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
§ E-7. Revocation or Suspension of License to Operate; Penalties. [Added
4-12-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-001]
establishment, plans must be submitted to the Board of Health detailing the nature
and extent of any renovations and/or alterations.
f. All applicants shall submit construction plans and/or floor plans to the Moonachie
Health Department and Moonachie Construction Department for review and
approval prior to construction and operation.
a. Compliance with requirements of State Department of Health. All establishments
and practitioners of body art shall comply with all requirements enacted by the State
Department of Health pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 et seq., and the regulations
promulgated thereunder pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1, as they pertain to the
practice of permanent cosmetics.
b. Persons seeking body art services.
1. It shall be a violation of this section for any establishment or practitioner to
provide body art services to an individual under 18 years of age without
authorization signed by the parent or legal guardian of such individual and
witnessed by the operator of the establishment. The operator shall be
responsible for maintaining the original consent form and copies of all consent
information, and copies of the photographic identification of both the
individual receiving the body art services and the parent or legal guardian
authorizing such services, for a period of three years.
2. Each person receiving body art services must first apply to the operator of the
establishment, on a form approved by the Moonachie Health Department.
Body art services may then be applied no sooner than one hour after the time
of the application received by the practitioner. If the applicant is suspected of
being under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other behavioral modifying
substance, the operator shall refuse to perform body art services for the
applicant.
3. All establishments, operators of establishments, and practitioners shall be
subject to a satisfactory background check as may be required by the
Moonachie Police Department.
4. No establishment, operator of an establishment, or practitioner shall have been
convicted of a criminal offense in any jurisdiction.
a. The Board of Health shall have the authority, as established by N.J.A.C. 8:27-11.1
through 8:27-11.4 to suspend or revoke any license to operate issued to any owner/
operator of a tattoo or body art establishment in the event of any material violation
of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the New Jersey Administrative
Code. In the event the Health Officer of the Borough finds that an owner/operator
of an establishment has violated the provisions of this chapter or the Administrative
Code, the Board of Health may suspend or revoke any license to operate the
establishment or impose any applicable penalties as authorized by the New Jersey
§ E-5 MOONACHIE CODE § E-7
E:2
Administrative Code.
b. Penalty. Any establishment, operator or practitioner who violates any subsection of
this chapter or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter, or the State
Department of Health or sanitary codes, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $1,000 for each violation, or imprisonment in the county jail up
to 90 days, or both. Each day that the violation exists shall be considered to be a
separate offense.
§ E-7 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § E-7
E:3

Appendix F
FERAL CATS
§ F-1. Definitions. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-002]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth
in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, words in the singular
number include the plural, and words in the male gender include the female gender.
ABANDON — To forsake a cat entirely or neglect to provide appropriate care and
support for a cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER—Any person employed or appointed by the Borough
who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and regulations concerning animals,
and to issue citations in accordance with New Jersey law and the Borough Code.
CARETAKER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or otherwise cares
for a cat, and who has been appropriately trained as a caregiver.
DAYLIGHT HOURS — Hours during the day after dusk until dawn.
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat that is a companion to a person, is regularly fed
and sheltered in that same person's habitation and carries visible indicia or ownership,
including a collar or tag.
EAR TIPPING — Straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat by a licensed
veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT — A cat that is completely or substantially unsocialized to humans and is
not an owned or licensed cat.
FERAL CAT COLONY — A group of feral or stray cats that congregate together
outside as a unit and share a common food source.
NUISANCE — Conduct by feral or stray cats that disturbs the peace or causes any
condition that threatens or endangers the health, safety, or well-being of persons or other
animals, including, but not limited to:
STRAY CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans and is not an owned cat.
SUITABLE SHELTER — A structure that provides feral and stray cats with protection
from the sun, cold, rain and other weather-related elements to protect the health of the
cats.
TNR—The method of managing feral and stray cats known as "trap, neuter and return."
TNR PROGRAM — A municipal program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are
a. Habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming;
b. Molesting or interfering with persons in the public right-of-way;
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of property against
the wishes of the owner of the property; or
c.
d. Attacking or injuring persons or domestic animals.
§ E-7 FERAL CATS § F-1
F:1
trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped, and returned to the
location where they were captured or congregate by a caretaker in accordance with this
chapter.
§ F-2. Responsibilities of Owners of Domesticated Cats. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord.
No. BH-21-002]
§ F-3. Feral Cat Colonies; TNR Program. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No.
BH-21-002]
A TNR program shall be permitted, and caretakers shall be entitled to maintain feral cat
colonies in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ F-4. Caretakers; Feeding of Feral Cats. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No.
BH-21-002]
a. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate food, water
and shelter for their cats.
b. The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to guard against the
cat creating a nuisance.
c. The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated cat shall not
permit his/her cat to roam unsupervised.
d. An owner shall not under any circumstances abandon a domesticated cat.
Affirmatively placing a cat at the location of a feral cat colony on property
belonging to another individual or entity shall be considered abandonment.
a. A person shall be deemed a caretaker if he/she provides food, water or shelter to a
feral cat or cats in their colonies.
b. Caretakers are required to feed the cats in their colonies as part of properly
managing the colonies. As part of this requirement, caretakers must:
1. Feed only during daylight hours;
2. Feed only the amount of food required by the cats in the colony;
3. Leave food out for a maximum of one hour per feeding, no more than twice
per day, which shall mean removing all food dishes after each one-hour
feeding;
4. A bowl or similar small container with fresh water may be left out at all times;
and
5. Feeding must take place in the location least likely to cause a nuisance to
tenants, neighbors, customers, and the general public.
c. It shall be unlawful to feed feral cats who are not spayed/neutered, ear-tipped and
vaccinated in accordance with this chapter, unless the caregiver is in the process of
trying to trap the cats for spay/neuter, ear-tipping and vaccination. Animal control
officer(s) shall be empowered to give a warning notice to any individual feeding
§ F-1 MOONACHIE CODE § F-4
F:2
§ F-5. Caretaker Requirements. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-002]
It shall be the responsibility of a caretaker to:
§ F-6. Nuisance Abatement. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-002]
§ F-7. Enforcement. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-002]
one or more feral cats not spayed/neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated in accordance
with this chapter. The warning notice shall require the individual to contact the
animal control officer(s) within 15 days to obtain assistance in getting the cat(s)
spayed/neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated in order to be brought into compliance
with this chapter. Failure to make such contact within 15 days and cooperate with
the animal control officer(s) in meeting the requirements of this section will subject
the violator to a maximum fine of $100 per cat, per offense.
a. Make reasonable efforts to trap all cats in a registered colony and have all trapped
cats neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and ear-tipped by a licensed
veterinarian, as deemed medically necessary;
b. Keep and maintain vaccination, neuter/spay, and medical records for all trapped
cats and provide the Borough with copies of vaccination and neuter/spay records
for all trapped cats upon request;
c. Provide adequate food and water on a regular basis to colony cats and make
reasonable efforts to ensure suitable shelter for colony cats;
d. Obtain proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to require it;
e. Make reasonable efforts to remove and place stray cats and kittens born to colony
cats after they have been weaned in homes, foster homes, or with animal shelters,
rescue organizations or veterinary offices for the purpose of subsequent permanent
placement;
f. Make reasonable efforts to work with the Moonachie Health Department via the
animal control officer(s) to resolve any complaints over the conduct of the caretaker
or of colony cats managed by the caretaker.
a. If an animal control officer determines that a feral colony cat is causing a nuisance
as defined by this chapter, or state law, the caretaker must begin nuisance abatement
procedures within 48 hours after being notified of a nuisance by the Borough and
must take all reasonable steps to resolve the nuisance in as short a time period as
possible, not to exceed 30 days.
b. The Borough reserves the right to issue a summons up to $500 if a caretaker fails to
prevent a nuisance within 30 days or face further action.
a. The Borough and/or animal control officer retain the right to:
1. Seize or remove any cat from a colony that is demonstrating signs of rabies
and is not up to date with rabies vaccinations.
2. Investigate any nuisance complaint allegedly caused by a feral or stray cat or
§ F-4 FERAL CATS § F-7
F:3
§ F-8. Violation and Penalties. [Added 8-9-2021 by Ord. No. BH-21-002]
Any person who knowingly releases any domestic or nonspayed or nonneutered cat into
the community shall be in violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof, for each
offense, pay a penalty of not less than $100 or more than $1,250 and/or community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
feral cat colony.
3. Seize or remove a cat from a colony creating a nuisance as defined by this
chapter or state law, after the caretaker has been given 30 days to abate the
nuisance or remove the cat and has failed to do so.
4. Seize and remove a registered feral cat colony if the caretaker regularly fails
to comply with the requirements of this chapter and does not correct the
situation within 30 days of being given written notice by the Borough
delineating the caretaker's failures with specificity.
b. The requirements of this section notwithstanding, animal control officer(s) may
investigate any nuisance complaint. If an animal control officer determines that an
ear-tipped feral colony cat is causing a nuisance as defined by this chapter and the
caretaker fails to resolve the nuisance or remove the cat within 30 days, the animal
control officer may remove the cat. If an animal control officer reasonably
determines that a cat is injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the
officer may reduce the time that the caretaker has to resolve the complaint, as
necessary to protect the cat and public health, before taking further action. In the
case of an emergency, the animal control officer or a law enforcement officer may
remove the cat, but within 24 hours the Borough must provide the caretaker with
notice of the cat's whereabouts and allow the caretaker an opportunity to retrieve
the cat for treatment, return, or relocation.
§ F-7 MOONACHIE CODE § F-8
F:4
Disposition List
§ F-8 FERAL CATS § F-8
F:5

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Ordinance Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the preparation
of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance description indicates
material that is special in nature and has not been included in this Code.
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2010-4 8-26-2010 Amend §§ 13-14.2 Residential Sewer
Charges; 13-14.3 Commercial and
Industrial Sewer Charges
22
2010-5 8-26-2010 Appropriation (Special) 22
2010-6 8-26-2010 Appropriation (Special) 22
BH 10-001 10-4-2010 Amend food establishments — Licensing,
Appendix B
22
2010-7 10-28-2010 Salary Ordinance (Special) 22
2010-8 11-30-2010 Bond Ordnance (Special) 22
2010-9 11-30-2010 Amend § 10-1.4 22
2010-10 12-28-2010 Amend § 3-12.11b., Payment for Police
Services by Private Contractors
22
2011-1 2-24-2011 Amend § 9-2.4f., Fees for Use of Borough
Recreational Areas
22
2011-2 3-24-2011 Amend Property maintenance —
Enforcement Officer, § 11-1.7
22
2011-3 4-28-2011 Fences and walls, 22-5.6 22
2011-4 5-26-2011 CAP Bank (Special) 22
2011-5 9-22-2011 Fire protection, first aid and rescue squad
services, 2-16
22
2011-6 9-22-2011 Trailer camp license fees, 4-10.4 22
2011-7 9-22-2011 Rapid entry box system (key box), 12-3 22
2011-8 9-22-2011 Salary Ordinance (Special) 22
2011-9 11-30-2011 Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
13-22
23
2011-10 11-30-2011 Fertilizer Application, 13-23 23
2011-11 11-30-2011 Dumpsters, 14-3, 14-3.1 23
2011-12 11-30-2011 Dumpsters, 14-3.4 — 14-3.7 23
2011-13 12-29-2011 Bond 23
§ F-8 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2011-14 12-29-2011 Limousines, 4-9.12 23
2011-15 12-29-2011 Towing-Charges, 3-13.7 23
2012-1 2-23-2012 Inspection of grease traps, 13-16.3 24
2012-2 4-26-2012 Improvements (Special) 24
2012-3 5-24-2012 Trucks over 10 tons excluded from certain
streets, 7-4.3, penalty, 7-4.4
24
2012-4 CAP (Special) 24
2012-5 6-28-2012 Salary (Special) 24
2012-6 6-28-2012 Improvements (Special) 24
2012-7 8-16-2012 Road improvements (Special) 24
2012-8 8-16-2012 Improvements (Special) 24
2012-9 9-27-2012 Appropriation (Special) 24
2012-10 9-27-2012 Reappropriation (Special) 24
2012-11 10-25-2012 Road improvements (Special) 24
2013-1 Not adopted 24
2013-2 Not adopted 24
2013-3 5-23-2013 Reimbursement for police services by
private contractors, 3-12.11
24
2013-4 7-25-2013 Reimbursement for police services by
private contractors, 3-12.11
24
2013-5 8-22-2013 Bond (Special) 24
2013-6 8-22-2013 Bond (Special) 24
2013-7 8-22-2013 CAP (Special) 24
2013-8 8-22-2013 Sanitary sewer charges-residential,
13-14.2; commercial and industrial uses,
13-14.3
24
2013-9 9-26-2013 Police Department Composition, 2-13.1 24
2014-1 6-26-2014 Amends salary and personnel policy,
Special
25
2014-2 4-24-2014 CAP, Special 25
2014-3 8-28-2014 Bond, Special 25
2014-4 8-28-2014 Bond, Special 25
2014-5 9-25-2014 Bond, Special 25
2014-6 10-23-2014 Bond, Special 25
2014-7 11-25-2014 Establish Joint Planning Board/Zoning
Board of Adjustment, 20-1-20-3
25
§ DL-1 MOONACHIE CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2015-1 3-25-2015 Amends Ch. 10, Building and Housing,
adds 10-1.8, reflective symbol on
structures using light-framed construction
26
2015-2 4-23-2015 CAP, Special 26
2015-3 6-25-2015 Bond, Special 26
2015-4 6-25-2015 Salary range and personnel policies,
Special
26
2015-5 7-23-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations, 3-13.8,
towing rules and regulations
26
2015-6 7-23-2015 Salary range, Special 26
2015-7 9-24-2015 Reappropriation, Special 26
2015-8 9-24-2015 Bond, Special 26
2015-9 9-24-2015 Capital, Special 26
2015-10 10-22-2015 Bond, Special 26
2015-11 10-22-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations; 3-9,
repeal curfew for minors
26
2015-12 12-30-2015 Bond, Special 26
2016-1 2-25-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-3.4 and Ch. 7A,
Schedule I renames Lladro Drive to
Oxford Drive
27
2016-2 2-25-2016 Bond, Special 27
2016-3 4-28-2016 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing; 4-1.16
Games of Chance Permitted, Borough
Clerk to be Licensing Authority
27
2016-4 4-28-2016 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations; 3-12.11
Reimbursement for Police Services by
Private Contractors
27
2016-5 5-26-2016 CAP, Special 27
2016-6 9-22-2016 Appropriation, Special 27
2016-7 10-27-2016 Bond, Special 27
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2016-8 12-22-2016
(retroactive
to 1-1-2016)
Salary and Personnel Policies: Section 1
Salary Ranges-not codified; Section 2
Police Department-not codified; Section 3
Department of Public Works and Full-
Time Police Communications Operatorsnot
codified; Section 4 Vacations codified
at 5-4.3; Section 5 Holidays and Personal
Leave codified at 5-4.2b and 5-4.2e;
Section 6 Sick Leave codified at 5-4.4c;
Section 7 Terminal Leave codified at
5-4.8
27
BH-16-001 3-14-2016 Adds Code Appendix D Public
Recreational Bathing (Swimming Pools)
27
2017-1 5-25-2017 Vacation of Street, Special 28
2017-2 5-27-2017 COLA, Special 28
2017-3 8-24-2017 Bond, Special 28
2017-4 9-28-2017 Bond, Special 28
2017-5 9-28-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-12 Handicapped
Parking; 7-16.1 Parking and Residential
Permit Parking
28
2017-6 11-29-2017 Bond, Special 28
2017-7 11-29-2017
(Retroactive
to 1-1-17)
Salary and Personnel Policies, Section 1
Salary Ranges-not codified; Section 2
Police Department-not codified; Section 3
Department of Public Works and Full-
Time Police Communications Operatorsnot
codified; Section 4 Vacations codified
at 5-4.3; Section 5 Holiday and Personal
Leave codified at 5-4.2b and 5-4.2e;
Section 6 Sick Leave codified at 5-4.4;
Section 7 Terminal Leave codified at
5-4.8
28
BH:17-001 10-16-2017 Creates Appendix E Dog Licensing - Late
Fees, E-1 — E-5
28
2018-1 4-26-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic, 7-3.5 Parking
Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets and Ch. 7A, Schedule II
Parking Prohibited Certain Hours, 7-12.1
Parking Restrictions and Ch. 7A, Schedule
XIX Parking Area for Handicapped
Persons
29
2018-2 4-26-2018 Amends Ch. 22 Zoning, 22-5.6 Fences
and Walls
29
§ DL-1 MOONACHIE CODE § DL-1
DL:4
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2018-3 4-26-2018 CAP Bank, Special 29
2018-4 7-12-2018 Appropriation, Special 29
2018-5 10-11-2018 Bond, Special 29
2018-6 10-11-2018 Bond, Special 29
2018-7 10-25-2018 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations; 3-13.7
Charges
29
2018-8 11-29-2018 Salary and Personnel Policies, Ch. 5,
5-4.2, 5-4.3, 5-4.4, 5-4.8
29
2018-9 12-18-2018 Bond, Special 29
2018-10 12-18-2018 Bond, Special 29
2018-11 12-18-2018 Bond, Special 29
2018-12 12-18-2018 Salary, Special 29
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2019-1 5-23-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 30
2019-2 5-23-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 22 30
2019-3 8-22-2019 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 19 30
2019-4 10-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 22 30
2019-5 10-24-2019 Appropriation NCM 30
2019-6 10-24-2019 Personnel Amendment Ch. 5 30
2019-7 11-26-2019 Appropriation NCM 30
2019-8 1-5-2020 Appropriation NCM 30
2019-9 1-5-2020 Appropriation NCM 30
2019-10 1-5-2020 Appropriation NCM 30
2020-1 4-23-2020 Streets, Sidewalks and Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 14 1
2020-2 6-25-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 1
2020-3 6-25-2020 Appropriation NCM 1
2020-4 9-24-2020 Police Regulations Amendment Ch. 3 1
2020-5 9-24-2020 Appropriation NCM 1
2020-6 11-12-2020 Salaries and Personnel Amendment Ch. 5 1
2020-7 12-17-2020 Appropriation NCM 1
2020-8 12-17-2020 Appropriation NCM 1
2020-9 12-17-2020 Salaries NCM 1
2021-1 5-27-2021 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 2
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2021-2 7-22-2021 Zoning Amendment Ch. 22 2
2021-3 7-22-2021 Utilities Amendment Ch. 13 2
2021-4 7-22-2021 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 19 2
2021-5 8-25-2021 Appropriation NCM 2
2021-6 8-25-2021 Cable Television Amendment Ch. 17 2
2021-7 11-30-2021 Personnel Amendment Ch. 5 2
2021-8 11-30-2021 Appropriation NCM 2
2021-9 12-16-2021 Appropriation NCM 2
BH-21-001 4-12-2021 Body Art Establishments Appendix E 3
BH-21-002 8-9-2021 Feral Cats Appendix F 3
§ DL-1 MOONACHIE CODE § DL-1
DL:6

ZONING
22 Attachment 2
2003 SCHEDULE OF AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
BOROUGH OF MOONACHIE
Zone Minimum Area Requirements Minimum Yard Requirements Maximum Bulk Requirements
Side Yard
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
Street
Yard
(feet)
One
(feet)
Other
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Bldg.
Coverage
(Percent)
Bldg. Height
(feet)
Buffer Strip
Requirements
R-1 5,000 50 100 25 6* 12* 30 30 35
R-2 7,500 75 100 25 8** 12** 30 30 35
MHP 10 Acres 200 200 25 15 15 15 60 15 (3)
B-1 10,000 50 100 10 10 10 15 50 30 (1)
B-2 20,000 100 150 25 10 10 20 50 30 (1)
M 80,000 200 200 35 25 25 25 50 40 (2)
Notes:
(1) Ten feet from adjacent residential zone.
(2) One hundred feet from adjacent residential zone.
(3) 60% of lot or pad.
* The side yards total distance between houses located on contiguous lots must be a minimum of 18 feet.
** The side yards total distance between houses located on contiguous lots must be a minimum of 20 feet.
22 Attachment 2:1 Publication, Sep 2020

ZONING
22 Attachment 3
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS
BOROUGH OF MOONACHIE
Zone District Permitted Principal Use Permitted Accessory Use Conditional Use
R-1
One-Family
Residential Zone
1. One-family detached dwelling not to exceed 1 such
dwelling on each lot.
2. Municipal parks and playgrounds, including customary
recreational, refreshment and service buildings, and any other
proprietary or governmental use of the Borough.
3. Places of worship including parish houses and religious school
buildings, and public and private schools conducted
for children, including uses customarily accessory thereto. Private
schools permitted under this paragraph shall be a nonprofit
organization within the meaning of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated.
4. Building or structure used for agricultural purposes
provided no greenhouse or heating plants shall be operated
within 20 feet of any lot line, and no livestock, including
horses, shall be kept on the property.
1. Garden house, tool house, playhouse or green house.
2. Private garage for not more than 3 motor vehicles of which not
more than 1 may be commercial vehicle and the others
passenger automobiles. Such vehicles shall belong to residents on
the premises, except that space for not more than 1 such
automobile may be leased to a nonresident. When on the premises,
the commercial vehicle shall be garaged and shall at no time be
parked or left standing at any point outside thereof.
3. The keeping of a reasonable number of customary
household pets but excluding the commercial breeding or
keeping of same. Horses, chickens and other farm animals
are not considered household pets herein.
4. Signs, in accordance with all applicable local or other
ordinances or statutes.
5. Swimming or wading pool incidental to the residential use
of the premises, and not operated for gain, and
subject to provisions of subsection 22- 5.17.
1. Professional office as part of a residential structure
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(a) The office or studio is incidental to the residential use
of the premises and is carried on by a resident thereof
with not more than 1 assistant who does not reside on the
premises.
(b) The office or studio does not occupy more than 50%
of the area of 1 floor of the building.
(c) Off-street parking is supplied on the premises which
is sufficient to accommodate the expected parking needs
of the residents and the office.
(d) The off-street parking area is screened by a buffer
strip of at least 5 feet in width.
(e) The proposed office or studio would have no adverse
effect on adjacent properties or roads.
R-2
Two-Family
Residential Zone
Any R-1 permitted principal use subject to the same restrictions as
prescribed therein.
Two-family detached dwelling not exceeding 1 such building on each
lot.
Any R-1 permitted accessory use subject to the same restrictions as
prescribed therein.
Any R-1 permitted conditional use subject to the same
restrictions as prescribed therein
MHP
Mobile Home
Park
Mobile home park` Any R-1 permitted accessory use subject to the same restrictions as
prescribed therein.
Off-street parking.
Recreational uses.
None
22 Attachment 3:1 Publication, Sep 2020
MOONACHIE CODE
Zone District Permitted Principal Use Permitted Accessory Use Conditional Use
B-1
General
Business Zone
1. Retail stores and banks.
2. Personal service stores such as, but not limited to barber
shops, beauty parlors and tailors, provided that where steam
pressure is used in clothes pressing, the generating apparatus
shall not exceed 5 rated boiler horsepower.
3. Business, professional or governmental office.
4. Funeral parlors.
5. Service establishments furnishing services other than of a
personal nature, but excluding gasoline filling stations and
motor vehicle storage, repair or service.
6. Theatres and restaurants, excluding amusements parks, galleries
or circuses, whether open or enclosed.
7. Outlets and pickup stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments. Except in self-service, automatic laundry
establishments, containing not more than 30 washing
machines, washing of wearing apparel on the premises is
prohibited. Except for incidental removal of spots with
flammable solvent, cleaning of wearing apparel or
household effects on the premises is permitted only if
non- flammable solvent is used.
8. Newspaper printing, including incidental job printing.
1. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
2. Signs.
3. Accessory storage within a wholly enclosed permanent structure
of materials, goods and supplies intended for sale or
consumption on the premises.
None
B-2
Limited
Business Zone
Business and Professional Offices Banks 1. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
2. Signs.
3. Accessory storage within a wholly enclosed permanent structure
of materials, goods and supplies intended for sale or
consumption on the premises.
1. Restaurants; restaurant, fast food and eateries for
district establishments subject to the following conditions
and limitations:
(a) The minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet.
(b)The principal structure shall be no closer than
150 feet to any R-1 or R-2 zone. No parking or loading
area shall be located closer than 25 feet to any R-1
or R-2 zone.
(c) There shall be no audible noises beyond the
confines of the structure.
(d) Facilities shall prohibit the sale or consumption
of food or beverages within a parking area or open space
outside the confines of an enclosed structure on the
property.
(e) No part of any premises used for a fast
food restaurant (including any premises used as a
parking lot therefor) shall be located within a radius of
750 feet of any part of any other premises on which a fast
food restaurant (or a parking lot therefor) is located.
(f) May be subject to the execution of a
maintenance agreement to include operator of the
premises, to maintain the premises and the surrounding
area free of litter and to minimize loitering on or about
the premises.
M
Manufacturing
Zone
Manufacturing, warehousing, research and office uses subject to the
performance standards of subsection 22-5.11 excluding all the uses
listed in Attachment S-1 to the Schedule of District Use Regulations.
1. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
2. Signs.
3. Accessory storage within a wholly enclosed permanent structure
of materials, goods and supplies intended for sale or
consumption on the premises.
None
22 Attachment 3:2 Publication, Sep 2020
ZONING
22 Attachment 3:3 Publication, Sep 2020