Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
[Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:49-1. "Ordinance" and "Resolution"
defined. The term "Ordinance" when used in this Code means and
includes any act or regulation of the governing body of any
municipality required to be reduced to writing and read at more
than one (1) meeting thereof and published. The term "Resolution"
when used in this Code means and includes any act or regulation
of the governing body of any municipality required to be reduced to
writing, but which may be finally passed at the meeting at which it is
introduced.]
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Millburn (1994)," and is herein referred to as
the "Revision" or the "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1967 Code § 1-1-2; New; Ord. No. 2330-09
§ 1]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
CODE OR THIS CODE — Shall mean "The Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Millburn, New Jersey."
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the Business Administrator
of the Township of Millburn or such officer, agent or employee thereof to
whom he/she shall delegate his/her duties and powers under this Code upon
notice to the Township Committee.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Essex.
DAYS — Shall mean the calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the municipal
government established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a
AO:1
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Township
Committee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Millburn in the County of
Essex.
OATH — Shall mean and include an affirmation where an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath. In such cases, the words swear and sworn shall
be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land shall mean and include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either
alone or with others.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words of the Township of Millburn followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Revision, so long as it shall have been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall mean and include
any part owner, any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other entity, bodies politic and corporate, as well as to
individuals.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall mean and include lands, tenements and
hereditaments, all rights thereto and interests therein.
REVISION OR THIS REVISION — Shall mean "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Millburn."
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any impervious path between the curb line and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
§ 1-2 MILLBURN CODE § 1-2
AO:2
STREET — Shall mean and include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane,
highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, court, culvert, sidewalk and
crosswalk and every class of road, square, place or municipal parking
field used by the general public, and it shall also be construed to include
a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Township
Committee.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Millburn in the County of Essex,
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP CLERK, CHIEF OF POLICE OR SUCH OTHER NAMED
TOWNSHIP OFFICER — Shall be construed to mean the Township Clerk,
Chief of Police or such other Township Officer or Department respectively
of the Township of Millburn in the County of Essex, State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — Shall mean the Township Committee of the
Township of Millburn, County of Essex, New Jersey.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1967 Code §§ 1-1-2, 1-1-3; New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter and can be applied
to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
Computation of Time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act
to be done, the time shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
Writing and written includes printing, typewriting, and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as
well as legible handwriting.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code, identified by an
Arabic number, and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
§ 1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3
AO:3
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
The letters "N.J.S.A." shall refer to the "New Jersey Statutes Annotated," and
any supplements and amendments thereto.
Catchlines of Sections. The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of
the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections,
nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they
be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted.
The source history of each section or subsection is provided as follows: the
first listing refers to the location of the Code provision in the prior Code (the
Code that was adopted in 1967) and the listings subsequent thereto refer to
ordinance numbers and sections which were adopted after 1967.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1967 Code § 1-1-4; New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1967 Code § 1-1-11; Ord. No. 3-79; Ord.
No. 5-84; Ord. No. 2234-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2269-06 § 1]
For the violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of
the Township of Millburn unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided
in connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); imprisonment in the County
Jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days; or to a period of community
service not exceeding ninety (90) days, at the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)1
Prior to imposing a fine in an amount greater than one thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) upon an owner for violations of the
1. Editor's Note: For State law as to maximum fine and imprisonment for violation of
municipal ordinances, see N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 1-3 MILLBURN CODE § 1-5.1
AO:4
Housing or Zoning Code provisions of these Revised General Ordinances
the owner shall be allowed a thirty (30) day period to cure or abate the
condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before
a Court of competent jurisdiction for an independent determination
concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty (30)
day period a fine greater than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($1,250.00) may be imposed if a Court has not determined otherwise or,
upon reinspection of the property it is determined that the abatement has
not been substantially completed.
Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated limits the
authority of the Township to punish the violation of any particular provision
of this Code or other Township ordinance, rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than that provided
in this section or imprisonment for a shorter term than that provided in
this section, then the violation of such particular provision of this Code
or other Township ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished
by the imposition of not more than the maximum fine or imprisonment so
authorized or by both such fine or imprisonment.
Whenever any fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and any costs
and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt or such
other manner as may be provided by law.
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violation. [1967 Code § 1-1-11]
Except as otherwise provided, every day on which a violation of any
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance of the Township exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in the general penalty clause of this section is
not intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation.
Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 1-5.4. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Committee may prescribe that, for the violation of any
particular Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be
imposed, which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00).
§ 1-5.5. Disposition of Fines. [1967 Code § 1-1-12]
All fines imposed and collected for violations of the provisions of this Code
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer, as required by law.
§ 1-6. TOWNSHIP SEAL.
§ 1-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6.1
AO:5
§ 1-6.1. Official Seal Designated. [1967 Code § 1-1-6]
The common seal of the Township, the impress of which has been affixed
hereto, shall be the official seal of the Township.
§ 1-6.2. Custodian of the Township Seal. [1967 Code § 1-1-7]
The Township Clerk or other person legally performing the duties of the
office of the Clerk of the Township shall have custody of the Township Seal
and affix the same as directed by law, ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-7. CODE TO BE CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING
ORDINANCES. [1967 Code § 1-1-5]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as
those of "The Code of the Township of Millburn, New Jersey, 1967," and
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-6.1 MILLBURN CODE § 1-7
AO:6
ARTICLE I
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE
§ 2-1. MEMBERSHIP OF TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE; MEETINGS.
§ 2-1.1. Composition; Election of Members; Term of Office. [1967
Code § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 8-88 § 3]
The Township Committee shall consist of five (5) members elected at large
for staggered three (3)-year terms by a plurality of the votes cast at the
general election. (The general election shall be held on the next Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in each year.) Each member shall hold
office for a term of three (3) years, commencing at 12:00 noon on January
1 next succeeding his/her election. Vacancies in the Township Committee
shall be filled as provided by law.
§ 2-1.2. Powers. [1967 Code § 2-1-2; Ord. No. 8-88 § 3]
The Township Committee shall exercise all legislative powers of the
Township and such other powers as are invested in the Committee pursuant
to law.
§ 2-1.3. Meetings. [1967 Code § 2-1-3; Ord. No. 8-88 § 3; Ord. No.
2453-16]
a. Annual Meeting. The Township Committee shall hold its annual meeting
in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:63-3, at 12 o'clock
noon on January 1, or at some other hour on any day during the first
week in January.
b. Regular Meetings. The Committee shall meet regularly thereafter on
the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 7:30 p.m. at Town Hall,
except as the Township Committee may, by resolution, change the time,
date or place of such regular meeting, or dispense of the same.
c. Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called upon written request
by a majority of the members of the Committee or by the Mayor. The
call for a special meeting shall be filed with the Township Clerk and
served upon each Committee Member. The request and call for a
special meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting and no
business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than that
specified.
d. Conference Meetings. The Committee may hold conference meetings
on such date, time and place as may be determined by a majority vote of
the Committee.
e. Open Public Meetings Act. All meetings of the Township Committee
shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Law.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.4
AO:7
§ 2-1.4. Quorum. [1967 Code § 2-1-4; Ord. No. 8-88 § 3]
A majority of the entire number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum, and no action shall be taken or ordinance
adopted by the Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of the
quorum of the Committee, unless otherwise provided by law. If a quorum
is not present one-half (1/2) hour after the appointed time for any meeting,
or at any time during the course of a meeting, the Mayor, Acting Mayor,
Presiding Officer, or the Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 2-1.5. Roll Call Votes; Minutes. [1967 Code § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 8-88
§ 3]
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall, when requested,
be taken by roll call and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes.
The Township Clerk shall record and keep the minutes of each meeting of
the Township Committee.
§ 2-1.6. Rules and Order of Business. [1967 Code § 2-1-6; Ord. No.
8-88 § 3]
Matters of procedure not covered in this Code or Statute shall be governed
by the rules and order of business of the Township Committee as the same
have been adopted or modified by resolution.
§ 2-1.7. Mayor and Deputy Mayor. [1967 Code § 2-1-7; Ord. No. 8-88
§ 3]
a. Election. At its annual meeting the Township Committee shall elect by
majority vote of the full membership of the Committee one (1) of its
members as Chairperson of the Committee, who shall be known as
Mayor, but who shall have no additional authority by virtue of such
designation except as may be otherwise provided by applicable law. The
Committee shall also have the power and authority to elect one (1) of its
members as Vice-chairperson of the Committee, who shall be known as
Deputy Mayor.
b. Powers and Duties. The Mayor shall preside at all the meetings of the
Township Committee. The Mayor shall have the power to make
proclamations concerning holidays or events of interest to the
Township. The Mayor may, with the approval of the Township
Committee, appoint citizens' committees to inquire into matters that
are of interest to the Township. The Mayor shall have such other
appointment powers as are conferred upon the Mayor by law or the
Township Committee. The Mayor shall have and exercise the
ceremonial power of the Township. In addition to the foregoing powers
and duties, the Mayor shall exercise every other power and duty
conferred upon the Mayor by law or the Township Committee; in the
absence or disability of the Mayor, either the Deputy Mayor or, in the
latter's absence, a temporary presiding officer, elected by the
Committee from among its members, shall have all the powers and
§ 2-1.4 MILLBURN CODE § 2-1.7
AO:8
duties of the Mayor and shall serve and be known while so serving as
the Acting Mayor of the Township.
§ 2-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.7
AO:9

ARTICLE II
TOWNSHIP OFFICERS2
§ 2-2. BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-2.1. Office Created. [1967 Code § 2-2-1a; Ord. No. 12-27-77 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A-136 et seq., there is hereby created the office of
Business Administrator.
§ 2-2.2. Appointment and Qualifications. [1967 Code § 2-2-1b; Ord.
No. 12-27-77 § 1; Ord. No. 2479-17 § 1]
The Business Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the
Township Committee on the basis of his/her executive and administrative
abilities and qualifications, with special regard to education, training and
experience in government affairs. He/she shall make his/her permanent
residence in the Township, within one year of the date of his/her
appointment, and shall during his/her term in office remain a resident of the
Township. Should he/she cease to be a resident for more than ninety (90)
days, his/her office may be deemed vacated. However, and notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Township Committee may, at any time and in its
discretion, waive this residency requirement by the adoption of a
Resolution, in circumstances and for reasons which it deems appropriate
and justifiable.
§ 2-2.3. Term of Office; Absence or Disability; Vacancy. [1967 Code
§ 2-2-1c; Ord. No. 12-27-77 § 1]
The Business Administrator shall hold office at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. During the absence or disability of the Business Administrator,
the Township Committee may appoint an officer or regular employee of the
Township to perform his/her duties. If he/she shall be absent or disabled
for more than three (3) months, his/her office may be deemed vacated. Any
vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the Township Committee.
§ 2-2.4. Removal. [1967 Code § 2-2-1d; Ord. No. 12-27-77 § 1]
The Business Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the Township Committee, the resolution of removal to become effective
three (3) months after its adoption by the Township Committee. The
Township Committee may provide, however, that the resolution of removal
shall have immediate effect, provided that the Township Committee shall
cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of
his/her salary and his/her salary for the next three (3) calendar months
following adoption of the resolution.
2. Editor's Note: For State law as to Township officers generally, see N.J.S.A. §§ 40:145-1 to
40:145-32.
§ 2-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.5
AO:11
§ 2-2.5. Powers and Duties of the Business Administrator. [1967
Code § 2-2-2; Ord. No. 12-27-77 § 1]
The Business Administrator shall, under the supervision and control of the
Township Committee:
a. Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Township and shall be
responsible to the Township Committee as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the business of the Township. His/her duties
and responsibilities shall relate to the general management of all
Township business, except those duties and responsibilities conferred
upon other Township officials by applicable laws, rules and regulations,
judicial authority, or Township ordinances. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Township Committee and its members shall deal with the
Township, administrative staff solely through the Business
Administrator, and neither the Township Committee nor any member
thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the Business
Administrator either publicly or privately.
b. Supervise and direct the business activities and functions of all
departments, boards, officials and employees of the Township and
delegate to any department head or Township employee such of his/her
powers as he/she may deem necessary for the effective administration
of Township business.
c. Assist the Township Committee in its determination of policy and make
recommendations to the Township Committee as to such policies and
the adoption of such measures as he/she deems necessary or advisable
for the best interests of the Township. Such recommendations may
include, but are not limited to:
1. The employment of experts and consultants to perform work and
render advice in connection with Township business or projects
(subject to the approval of the Township Committee), and
2. The nature and location of Township improvements (as determined
by the Township Committee).
d. Implement all policies established by the Township Committee.
e. Keep the Township Committee informed as to the conduct of Township
matters, and submit periodic reports, either in writing or orally, on the
work of all departments and officials, the condition of the Township
finances, the physical condition of Township property and such other
reports, either in writing or orally, as the Township Committee may
request.
f. Submit to the Township Committee, as soon as possible after the close
of the fiscal year, a complete written report on the administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding year.
§ 2-2.5 MILLBURN CODE § 2-2.5
AO:12
g. Represent the Township in its relations with the Federal, State, County
and other municipal governments, subject to the direction of the
Township Committee.
h. Keep the Township Committee informed as to Federal and State aid
projects and any other aid programs for which the Township may
qualify.
i. Execute and enforce the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances and
resolutions of the Township.
j. Prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee and
attend all Township Committee meetings and be prepared to advise
with respect to and discuss such business as may be raised in such
meetings with the right to participate in the discussions at such
meetings.
k. Attend meetings of such Township boards, agencies, advisory
committees or other Township entities as directed by the Township
Committee.
l. Receive copies of all general and official correspondence addressed to
the Township and Township officials and refer such correspondence to
the appropriate officials or department for disposition and reply.
m. Implement and enforce the policies of the Township Committee with
respect to the compiling and release of public information.
n. Receive complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township
and by himself/herself, or by an officer designated by him/her,
investigate and dispose of the complaints keeping a written record of
each complaint and when and what action was taken in response
thereto and providing the Township Committee with a copy of such
records when so requested. If any such complaint involves possible
illegal acts, he/she shall make same known to the appropriate law
enforcement agencies.
o. Serve as the personnel officer of the Township, and when he/she deems
it advisable or necessary and in the best interests of the Township, and
subject to the consent of a majority of the Township Committee, and
subject to applicable civil service and other regulations and
requirements of law:
1. Hire Township employees;
2. Promote or advance Township employees (subsequent to the
satisfactory completion of a probationary period, if any); and
3. Suspend, discharge, remove or replace Township employees. The
Business Administrator shall report at the next meeting of the
Township Committee any action taken by him/her pursuant to this
subsection.
§ 2-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.5
AO:13
p. At the request of the Township Committee, study and analyze the duties
and responsibilities of, or investigate the performance of, any elected or
appointed official or department of the Township, submitting his/her
report relating thereto to the Township Committee for such further
action as the Township Committee may deem advisable.
q. Establish and maintain effective personnel practices and maintain
appropriate records of all employees.
r. Conduct preliminary negotiations for the Township in its labor matters
and advise the Township Committee as to such negotiations for their
final approval.
s. Attend to the negotiation and award of Township contracts, and
supervise the performance and faithful execution of such contracts,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by law upon some
other Township officer or official, and evaluate the Township's interest
in contracts, franchises and other business transactions.
t. Obtain compliance with the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Township.
u. Prepare and submit to the Township Committee before the close of the
fiscal year, or at such time as the Township Committee shall determine,
a proposed operating and capital budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the proposed budgets, he/
she or an officer designated by him/her, shall obtain from each officer or
the head of each department, agency, or board, estimates of revenues
and expenditures and other supporting data as he/she requests. The
Business Administrator shall then review the estimates and may raise
them before submitting the proposed budget to the Township
Committee.
v. Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by
the Township Committee and the implementation of the work programs
contained in the budget, and maintain a continuing review and analysis
of budget operations, work programs and costs of Township services.
w. Supervise the disbursement of all Township funds and review and
approve all vouchers and bills before their submission to the Township
Committee for final approval.
x. Analyze the cash needs for the Township and recommend prudent
investment of such funds as temporarily may be in excess of the amount
to meet Township obligations, such duties to be discharged in
consultation with the Chief Financial Officer.
y. Be the chief purchasing agent for the Township and develop procedures
for: the purchase of materials, supplies and equipment; the storage and
distribution of all supplies, materials and equipment; and the control of
all storerooms and stockrooms.
§ 2-2.5 MILLBURN CODE § 2-2.5
AO:14
§ 2-3. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.3
§ 2-3.1. Appointment; Power; and Duties. [1967 Code § 2-2-3; Ord.
No. 4-7-69 § 1; Ord. No. 20-78 § 1; Ord. No. 4-79 § 1]
The Township Committee may by resolution appoint and employ a
competent Attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey as Township Attorney,
to hold office until January 1 next following his/her appointment, and until
his/her successor is appointed and has qualified.
The Township Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Township
Committee and Board of Health and to all boards, departments and
agencies of the Township except as provided otherwise by law, ordinance or
resolution. In furtherance of his/her general powers, and without limitation
thereto, the Township Attorney shall:
z. Provide for the custody and deposit of all Township moneys.
aa. See that all money owed the Township is promptly paid, and that proper
actions are taken for the security and collection of all Township claims.
bb. Perform such other duties as may be assigned to him/her by ordinance,
resolution or direction of the Township Committee.
a. Advise the Committee as to the form and sufficiency of all ordinances
and resolutions prior to their passage.
b. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Township.
c. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township, or directed by the Committee.
d. Subject to the approval of the Committee, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Township is involved.
e. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him/
her by the Committee with respect to their official powers and duties, or
the powers and duties of any official of the Township.
f. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
related to the Township's interest, and report thereon as the Committee
may require.
g. Furnish legal counsel and advice to the Township Committee, Board of
Health and other boards, departments and agencies of the Township.
h. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by ordinance or resolution of the Committee.
3. Editor's Note: For State law authorizing Township to appoint a Township Attorney, see
N.J.S.A. § 40:145-12.
§ 2-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.1
AO:15
§ 2-4. TOWNSHIP PUBLIC DEFENDER. [New; Ord. No. 17-97 § 1]
Whenever the Township Committee deems the interests of the
Township so require, it may on its own or at the recommendation of
the Township Attorney appoint special counsel to do such jobs as it
shall assign to him/her. If the Township Attorney should be disqualified
with respect to any matter, the Committee, on its own or at the
recommendation of the Township Attorney, shall appoint special
counsel to represent the Township for and with respect to such matter.
The Township Attorney shall receive a salary to be fixed by the
Township Committee for (a) attending twenty-two (22) regular
meetings per year of the Township Committee and Board of Health,
(b) miscellaneous routine advice and written opinions and conferences
with the members of the Township Committee and Board of Health
and all other Township officers and officials, and (c) preparation of all
ordinances and resolutions (except major ordinances and resolutions
which exceed ten (10) typed pages). For all other services which the
Township Attorney may render, as directed, authorized or approved by
the Township Committee, he/she shall receive, by way of compensation
therefor and in addition to his/her salary, such fees as may be
recognized generally as reasonable and appropriate for similar and
equivalent services in similar and equivalent proceedings, and as may
be approved by the Township Committee. The Township Attorney shall
also be reimbursed for such disbursements as he/she may necessarily
or appropriately incur in the performance of any of the services
aforesaid.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and all other materials
relating to its legal affairs shall be and remain the property of the
Township. Upon the termination of his services with the Township, the
Township Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his/her successor all
such property together with a written consent to substitution of his/her
successor in all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which
the Township is a party.
a. Office Created; Appointment; Term; Salary. There is hereby created the
office of Township Public Defender to be filled by a competent Attorneyat-
law of the State appointed by the Township Committee for a term of
one (1) year until the first day of January next following his or her
appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and has
qualified. The Township Public Defender shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the Township Committee.
b. Powers and Duties. The Township Public Defender shall provide for the
legal representation of any indigent defendant in the Municipal Court of
the Township in accordance with P.L. 1997, c. 256.
§ 2-3.1 MILLBURN CODE § 2-4.1
AO:16
§ 2-4.1. Application Fee for Representation by Township Public
Defender. [Ord. No. 5-94 § 1; Ord. No. 17-97 § 1]
A person applying for representation by the Township Public Defender
or court approved counsel shall pay to the Township Municipal Court an
application fee of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), but only
in an amount necessary to pay the costs of municipal public defender
services. In accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court,
the Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in whole or
in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
The Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time not to exceed four (4) months.
§ 2-5. TOWNSHIP PROSECUTOR. [New]
The Township Committee may appoint and employ a competent Attorneyat-
law of the State as Municipal Court Prosecutor, to hold office until
January 1 next following his/her appointment and until his successor is
appointed and has qualified. The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall perform
such legal services in connection with the prosecution of complaints before
the Municipal Court and the trial of appeals therefrom as may be required
under the direction and supervision of the Township Attorney.
§ 2-6. TOWNSHIP CLERK. [New]
For the appointment of and powers and duties of the Township Clerk, refer
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 18A:17-31.
§ 2-7. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER. [New]
For the appointment of and powers and duties of the Chief Financial Officer,
refer to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 and N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26.
§ 2-8. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
§ 2-8.1. Office Created; Appointment.4 [1967 Code § 2-2-4]
There is hereby created the office of Township Engineer, to be filled by
appointment by the Township Committee.
§ 2-8.2. Qualifications; Powers and Duties. [1967 Code § 2-2-5]
No person shall be appointed to the office of Township Engineer who, at
the time of his/her appointment, shall not be a duly qualified professional
engineer and certified Municipal Engineer who has been and is licensed
by the State as provided by law. The Township Engineer shall perform
such services, having to do with municipal engineering, with the planning,
4. Editor's Note: For State law authorizing a municipality to appoint a Township Engineer,
see N.J.S.A. § 40:145-12. As to tenure of office, etc., see N.J.S.A. §§ 40:145-13.1,
40:145-13.2.
§ 2-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.2
AO:17
laying out, construction, maintenance, inspection or supervision of public
improvements and works, or other matters of similar character as may be
referred to him/her by the Township Committee, Business Administrator, or
any other board, committee, commission or department of the Township.
He/she shall prepare and revise the tax and assessment maps of and for the
Township. He/she shall, whenever requested by the Township Committee,
Business Administrator or any other board, committee, commission, or
department of the Township, furnish his/her professional advice,
suggestions or opinions upon any municipal engineering matter or question
submitted to him/her. He/she shall prepare all estimates, proposals for
bidders and certificates required in connection with any public contact.
Neither he/she, nor any of his/her full-time assistants, shall, directly or
indirectly, render any professional advice or services other than to or on
behalf of the Township, or to a board, commission, committee or department
thereof.
§ 2-8.3. Employment of Outside Personnel. [1967 Code § 2-2-7]
In and for the purposes of such projects, operations or other municipal
activities requiring, in the discretion of the Township Committee, additional
engineering services, advisory, supervisory or supplemental in character,
the Township Committee may employ the services of a duly qualified
professional engineer for the purpose or purposes aforesaid, upon such
compensation as may be fixed by contract between such engineer and the
Township.
§ 2-9. TAX COLLECTOR. [New]
For the appointment of and powers and duties of the Tax Collector, refer to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq.
§ 2-10. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-10.1. Creation of Office. [New]
There is hereby created the office of the Superintendent of Public Works
in the classified service, in accordance with State law. The Superintendent
shall be appointed by the Business Administrator with the consent of the
Township Committee, subject to law, and shall be subject to removal as
provided by law.
§ 2-10.2. Powers and Duties. [New]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall, in addition to the functions,
powers and duties that are conferred and imposed upon him by law and
ordinance:
a. Have full charge and management of the Department of Public Works,5
and of the employees in the department subject to the direction of the
5. Editor's Note: See Section 2-18 for the establishment of the Department of Public Works.
§ 2-8.2 MILLBURN CODE § 2-10.2
AO:18
§ 2-11. DIRECTOR OF RECREATION.
§ 2-11.1. Appointments; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 22-81 § 1]
There is hereby created the office of Director of Recreation in the
unclassified service, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11:22-2(d), who shall be appointed
by resolution of the Committee. The term of office shall be one (1) year,
commencing January 1 of each year and until the appointment and
qualification of his/her successor. The Director of Recreation shall be
subject to removal as provided by law, and shall receive such compensation
for his/her services as the Committee shall by ordinance provide. The
Director of Recreation shall be head of the Department, and in addition to
the functions, powers and duties that are conferred and imposed upon him/
her by law and ordinance, shall:
Business Administrator. Such charge shall include the power to
supervise employees within the Department subject to law and the
power to prepare rules and regulations with the initial and continued
approval of the Business Administrator with respect to the management
and conduct of the employees of the department.
b. Have direct charge and management of the maintenance and/or repair
of all streets, sewers, drainage, shade trees, parks, and other like
operations performed by the Township. In addition he shall coordinate
the work of the Department with the work of other Departments and
Township officers by whom the services of the Department are
required.
a. Have full charge and management of the Department of Recreation,
and of the other officers and employees in the Department subject to
the Civil Service Law. Such charge shall include the power to hire, fire,
discipline and promote employees within the Department subject to law
and the power to prepare rules and regulations with respect to the
management and conduct of the officers and other employees of the
Department.
b. Keep accurate records and books of account of all his/her transactions
as Director and of the work and transactions of his/her office. The
Director of Recreation shall prepare budget recommendations for the
Department and shall have full charge and management of the
properties and equipment belonging or assigned to the Department.
c. Render to the Township Committee such reports, recommendations,
drawings or other documents as may be required, at regularly stated
intervals or upon special request therefor and hold himself/herself
available for consultation and advice to all Township officials and
Township boards or commissions, and shall prepare and present to the
Township Committee short- and long-range planning recommendations
for the development and improvement of the Township.
§ 2-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11.1
AO:19
§ 2-12. through § 2-15. (RESERVED)
d. Have direct charge and management of recreational functions for
which the Township is responsible. In addition, the Director of
Recreation shall coordinate the work of the Department with the work
of other departments and Township officers by whom the services of the
Department are required.
§ 2-11.1 MILLBURN CODE § 2-12
AO:20
ARTICLE III
DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED
§ 2-16. POLICE DEPARTMENT.6
§ 2-16.1. Police Department Established; Composition;
Appointments. [New]
The Police Department of the Township is hereby established. The Police
Department shall consist of such ranking officers and police officers as shall
be determined by resolution of the Township Committee. Appointments
shall be made by the Business Administrator and confirmed by resolution of
the Township Committee.
§ 2-16.2. Rules and Regulations of Police Department. [1967 Code
§ 18-1-2; Ord. No. 7-20-70 § 2; Ord. No. 2454-16 § 1]
The Township Administrator shall be designated as the appropriate
authority, as defined and provided in the New Jersey statutes (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118), for the promulgation of rules and regulations. The Township
Administrator shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its members.
Such rules and regulations shall be styled "Rules and Regulations of the
Police Department of the Township of Millburn, New Jersey." The rules may
prescribe the duties of the members of the Department more specifically
than is herein contained, and may provide such penalties, not inconsistent
with law, as may be deemed necessary and expedient for the proper
regulation of the Department. All of the rules and regulations made in
pursuance hereof shall be in writing and filed in the office of the Township
Clerk, and shall be binding on all persons subject to the jurisdiction of the
Department after notice thereof. A written or printed copy of such rules
shall be delivered to each member of the Department and copies shall
be on file in the headquarters of the Department, and such delivery or
availability shall be deemed notice of the adoption and effectiveness thereof
to those subject thereto. Such rules shall prescribe the uniforms, badges
and insignia to be worn by the police officers, and the time and manner of
wearing the same, and such other provisions in reference thereto as may be
deemed proper.
§ 2-16.3. Chief of Police. [1967 Code § 18-1.3; New; Ord. No.
2454-16 § 2]
a. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Department. The
Chief shall exercise sole and complete control over the Department, its
members and employees, and over its property, subject only to the
authority of the Business Administrator, with the approval of the
Township Committee. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police
Department and shall be directly responsible to the Township
6. Editor's Note: For "Fees charged by the Police Department," see subsection 2-61.2.
§ 2-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.3
AO:21
§ 2-16.4. Duties and Powers of Members.7 [1967 Code § 18-1-7]
Administrator for its efficiency and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to
policies established by the Township Administrator, the Chief of Police
shall:
1. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directives for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers;
2. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department;
3. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
4. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control; and
5. Report at least monthly to the Township Administrator, in such
form as shall be prescribed, on the operation of the Police
Department during the preceding month and make such other
reports as may be requested by the Township Administrator.
The Business Administrator, with the approval of the Township Committee,
may designate an acting Chief of Police during any extended period of
absence or disability of the Chief of Police.
b. The duties of the Chief of Police shall be as established by state statute
or as otherwise directed.
a. The members of the Police Department shall perform the duties
imposed and exercise the authority bestowed upon them by the rules,
orders and regulations prescribed by the Chief of Police, the ordinances
of the Township, the Police Rules and applicable state law.
b. The members of the Department, when on duty, shall devote their time
and attention to the discharge of the duties of their positions according
to the regulations of the Police Department and the Police Rules
prescribed by the Chief of Police. It shall be their duty to the best of
their ability to preserve order, maintain the peace and enforce the laws
and ordinances throughout the Township. Every member of the Police
Department shall have power to arrest all persons in the Township
found in the act of violating any applicable law or ordinance or aiding
and abetting any such violation, or where there is probable cause for
arrest, and shall take all such persons so arrested to Police
headquarters or other place designated by the Police Rules for such
purpose.
7. For state law as to powers of members of the Police Department, see N.J.S.A. § 40:149-1.
See 40A:14-118 (Police).
§ 2-16.3 MILLBURN CODE § 2-16.4
AO:22
§ 2-16.5. Temporary and Special Police. [1967 Code § 18-1-9]
Editor's Note: Refer to N.J.S.A. 40:47-19.
§ 2-16.6. Appointments. [1967 Code § 18-1-10]
All appointments to the Police Department shall be made by the Business
Administrator and confirmed by the Township Committee in accordance
with the laws of the state.
§ 2-16.7. Residency Requirements. [1967 Code § 18-1-12.1; Ord. No.
4-19-77 § 2; Ord. No. 14-91 § 2]
Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the Police
Department, the Township Committee shall classify all the duly qualified
applicants for the position or positions to be filled in the following classes:
I. Residents of Essex County, Morris County and Union County.
II. Other residents of New Jersey.
c. The duties of the Chief of Police shall be as established by state statutes
or as otherwise directed.
d. Members of the Police Department shall have power and authority in
the Township to serve and execute warrants and other process for the
apprehension and commitment of persons charged with, or held for
examination or trial, or taken in execution for the commission of any
crime or misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance in or of the
Township, and while executing or serving or assisting in the execution
or service of any such warrant or process; and while in the performance
of their duties as peace officers of the Township, they shall be vested
with and have all the powers and authority conferred on constables by
law.
a. In cases of emergency, the Township Committee may appoint
temporarily, for periods not to exceed one year such additional number
of police for temporary service as may be deemed necessary for the
preservation of the safety, peace and good order of the Township. The
temporary police, when so appointed, shall have and exercise all the
powers and perform the duties, for the time being, of police in the
Township; but such temporary appointees shall, by their appointment,
derive no tenure of office and may be discharged at the expiration of
their temporary employment.
b. The Township Committee is hereby authorized to appoint persons of
suitable character as special police, on the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, for terms not exceeding one year, and revoke such
appointment without cause or hearing. The special police so appointed
shall have and exercise all the powers of police in the Township but
shall not receive any compensation for their services rendered pursuant
to assignment to temporary police duty.
§ 2-16.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.7
AO:23
III. All other qualified applicants.
Within each such classification, duly qualified applicants who are veterans
shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are provided by law.
Persons discharged from the service within six months prior to making
application to the Township, who fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-10.1, and who are thereby entitled to appointment notwithstanding
their failure to meet the New Jersey residency requirement at the time
of their initial application, shall be placed in Class II. In making such
appointments, the Township Committee shall first appoint those in Class I
and then those in each succeeding class in the order above listed, and shall
appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a vacancy or vacancies
remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes
have been appointed or have been declined an offer of appointment. The
classes of qualified applicants as defined in this section shall be considered
as separate and successive lists of eligibles, and the New Jersey Department
of Personnel shall, when requested to certify eligibles for positions specified
in this section, make such certifications from the classes separately and
successively, and shall certify no persons from any such class until all
persons in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have
declined offers of appointment. This section shall apply only to initial
appointments and not to promotional appointments of persons already
members of the Police Department. In making temporary appointments, the
Township Committee shall utilize the classifications set forth in this section,
and shall classify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the position or
positions to be temporarily filled.
§ 2-16.8. Regulations in Connection with Elections. [1967 Code
§ 18-1-15]
No member of the Police Department shall be actively engaged in
electioneering or other proceedings of a political or party nature, or shall, in
any manner, when on duty, interfere with any election in this state; nor shall
any police officer be present at the polls at any such election, except such
reasonable time as may be required by him/her for the purpose of voting,
unless he/she shall be detailed by the Chief of Police, to be present thereat
for the preservation of peace and good order during such election.
§ 2-16.9. Off-Duty Employment of Police Officers for Police-Related
Activities. [Ord. No. 2261-05 § 1; amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2538-19]
a. Purpose. The intent of this subsection is to assist persons and entities
by allowing them to utilize the services of off-duty Township police
officers and authorizing outside employment of off-duty Township police
officers within Essex County in accordance with New Jersey Attorney
General Opinion No. 23 (1977) and No. 11 (1978), recommendations of
the New Jersey Department of the Treasury, Division of Pensions,
including, but not limited to, the notices of August 1989 and February
1990, and New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
§ 2-16.7 MILLBURN CODE § 2-16.9
AO:24
Local Government Services, including, but not limited to, Local Finance
Notice CFO 2000-14. The Township seeks to accomplish these purposes
by establishing policies and procedures regarding the use of and
compensation for said off-duty Township police officers.
b. Approval of employment. Off-duty Township police officers shall be
permitted to perform on behalf of private employers police-related
activities which are not prohibited by state law or regulation, Township
ordinance or Police Department rules and regulations, only during each
respective Township police officer's off-duty hours and at such times as
will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled
or emergency duty for the Township as determined by the Chief of
Police.
1. An off-duty Township police officer performing police-related
activities shall perform such activities as if they were performing
such activities for the Township and shall be subject to Police
Department discipline and control in connection with their actions
and/or inactions concerning the police-related activities.
2. Any private person or entity, including any other municipality or
governmental entity other than the Township or its agencies,
boards, etc., wishing to have off-duty Township police officers
perform police-related activities shall first obtain the approval of
the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted if, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, such requested activity is not
inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of
the Police Department and would not unreasonably endanger or
threaten the safety of the Township police officers performing such
activities.
3. In the event that the Chief of Police approves a particular policerelated
activity, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall post
within the Police Department notice of the availability of such
activities. The Chief of Police shall also post a list of those activities
which the Chief has determined shall not be considered policerelated
activities.
4. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for making all
determinations regarding the method of designation of the off-duty
officers, the number of continuous hours which such off-duty
officers are permitted to work in conjunction with their regular
police duties, the impact that sickness of a police officer may have
on the selection of an off-duty police officer, and all related issues.
5. The procedures set forth in this subsection shall apply to all
requests for off-duty officers to perform police-related activities,
including requests from other municipalities made on behalf of a
private person or entity.
c. Request for services.
§ 2-16.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.9
AO:25
1. All requests to the Township for off-duty Township police officers to
perform police-related activities shall be submitted in writing to the
Chief of Police on a form provided by the Township and setting
forth the following information:
(a) Name, address, telephone number and fax number of the
person or entity requesting that the police perform a policerelated
activity;
(b) The date, time, and place that the police-related activity is to
take place;
(c) The number of Township police officers requested;
(d) The number of estimated hours for each Township police
officer requested (minimum of four hours);
(e) A detailed description of the police-related activity;
(f) Whether a patrol car of the Township is requested, with a
patrol car being mandated for all traffic-related services;
(g) An acknowledgement by the requesting party that:
(1) The party is solely responsible for payment of the policerelated
activity requested and all applicable fees;
(2) The party shall pay any and all legal fees, costs, and
expenses, including, but not limited to, experts, court
reporting services, etc., as well as costs of suit, incurred by
the Township in connection with:
(i) Any claim, suit and/or dispute out of the police-related
activity;
(ii) Any suit for collection of any fees related to this
subsection;
(iii) Any suit to enforce the terms of this subsection;
(3) The party shall pay the Township a late payment fee for
each day that any balance on the payment is late,
beginning on the 15th day after the police-related activity
has been completed. The late payment fee shall be per the
fee schedule established by the Police Department;
(4) This subsection of the Township Code has been read, and
the party agrees to its terms and conditions;
(5) The party shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Township and its agents, officials, and employees,
including, but not limited to, the off-duty Township police
officers performing the police-related activities and their
superior Township police officers, against all claims,
§ 2-16.9 MILLBURN CODE § 2-16.9
AO:26
demands, actions, suits, causes of action, damages,
liabilities, judgments, losses of any kind whatsoever, costs,
and expenses, including, but not limited to, reasonable
court costs and counsel fees, occurring as a result of the
employment of off-duty Township police officers and
regardless of whether the loss was due, in whole or in part,
to the conduct of the off-duty police officer; and
(h) Acknowledgement by the Chief of Police that he has approved
the request as required by this subsection.
2. The party requesting off-duty police officers to perform policerelated
activities shall carry comprehensive general liability
insurance and workers' compensation insurance. At the time the
police-related activity is requested, the party requesting such
activity shall attach to their written request a copy of their
certificates of insurance for comprehensive general liability
insurance and workers' compensation insurance, as well as
evidencing that the Township is a named additional insured. The
coverage limits for comprehensive general liability shall be no less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence.
3. At the time that the request is made, the party shall pay the
Township for the off-duty Township police officer's services, which
will be on a rate schedule available in the office of the Municipal
Clerk and Chief of Police.
4. In the event that the party cancels the requested police-related
activity, notification must be made prior to two hours before the
activity is to be performed. If the party fails to cancel the requested
police-related activity prior to two hours before the scheduled start
time, the party will be charged a four-hour minimum.
5. Upon request, the Township shall return the payment already made
by the party to the Township for the police-related activity less a
$25 administrative fee if notice was made two hours prior to the
scheduled job.
d. Rates of compensation, administrative fees, and payment for services.
1. The hourly rate of compensation to be paid by the requesting party
to the Township for any off-duty Township police officer(s) will be
determined by a rate schedule to be established by the Township
Committee. The Township Committee shall establish the hourly
rate for each category of Township police officer by resolution.
2. An administrative fee as listed in the rate schedule per off-duty
Township police officer is established to cover the Township's costs,
overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses and shall be paid by the
requesting party at the same time as all other payments are
required to be made, i.e., when the request for the activity is made.
§ 2-16.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.9
AO:27
3. If a patrol car is requested in connection with a police-related
activity because: the request for police-related activities involves
traffic services, or the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee
determines in his/her sole discretion that a patrol car is necessary
due to the nature of the activity, a flat administrative fee per patrol
car shall be charged per the rate schedule.
4. All administrative fees and late fees paid by the requesting party
shall belong to the Township.
5. Immediately upon completion of the police-related activity, the
Police Chief's designee shall issue an invoice on a form to be
approved by the Chief of Police and the Township's Chief Financial
Officer. The form shall provide for the number of hours that the
police-related activity was performed, the number of officers
utilized as part of the police-related activity, the hourly rate
charged for each such officer, the total fee for the police-related
activities, the fee for the use of any patrol cars, and all applicable
administrative fees, less any payments previously made in
accordance with this subsection. The requesting party shall
acknowledge receipt of the invoice, receipt of the services and the
number of hours by signing a copy of the invoice and dating when
the acknowledgement was made. Any balance owed by the
requesting party to the Township is due within 12 days of
completion of the activity, but in no event later than 30 days from
the date that the police-related activity commenced. The off-duty
Township police officer who transmits the invoice to the requesting
party shall transmit the original, signed invoice to the Township's
Chief Financial Officer within 48 hours of its execution by the
requesting party.
6. The Township shall pay the off-duty Township police officer in
accordance with the rate schedule. The off-duty Township police
officer shall receive his/her pay for the police-related activity on the
next regularly scheduled payday after the activity has been
performed so long as the activity was completed and a copy of the
invoice is received by the Township's Chief Financial Officer at
least 10 business days before the next regularly scheduled payday,
provided the escrow funds are available.
7. In the event that a requesting party requires the services of off-duty
Township police officers on a regular and/or continuous basis, such
party shall be required to maintain a minimum balance in an
escrow fund with the Township equal to the average amount paid
for such off-duty Township police officers in the average of the
highest two consecutive months on a quarterly basis to determine
whether the minimum balance needs to be adjusted or remain the
same. In the event the balance is determined to be too high, the
Township will return any excess to the party quarterly. The party
would not be entitled to any interest on such funds. In the event
that the escrow fund is reduced to less than one month's estimated
§ 2-16.9 MILLBURN CODE § 2-16.9
AO:28
§ 2-17. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-17.1. Fire Department Established; Composition; Appointments.
[1967 Code § 10-1-1; Ord. No. 10-16-67 § 1; Ord. No. 9-5-72 § 1;
New]
The Fire Department of the Township is hereby established. The Fire
Department shall consist of such ranking officers and fire fighters as shall
be determined by resolution of the Township Committee. Appointments
shall be made by the Business Administrator and confirmed by resolution of
the Township Committee.
§ 2-17.2. Rules and Regulations of the Fire Department.8 [1967
Code § 10-1-2; Ord. 9-25-72 § 1]
The Fire Chief, subject to the initial and continuing approval of the Business
Administrator, shall promulgate Rules and Regulations of the Fire
Department, not inconsistent with the laws of this State or the ordinances
of the Township, for the government and control of the members of the
uniform paid and volunteer Divisions of the Fire Department as may be
deemed expedient and proper to carry out the objectives of this Chapter,
and with a view to making the Fire Department and all the officers and
members thereof efficient, vigilant, prompt and useful to the Township. The
Rules may prescribe the duties of the members of the Fire Department more
specifically than is herein contained, and may provide such penalties, not
inconsistent with law, as may be deemed necessary and expedient for the
proper regulation of the Department. All the Rules and Regulations made in
pursuant hereof shall be in writing and filed in the office of the Township
Clerk, and shall be binding on all persons subject to the jurisdiction of the
Department after notice thereof. A written or printed copy of such Fire
Rules shall be delivered to each member of such Department and copies
shall be posted conspicuously in the headquarters of the Department, and
cost, such party shall be required to replenish the fund within five
days of notification by the Township.
8. The Township shall, if required by law and at the determination of
the Township's Chief Financial Officer, establish a dedicated fund
for the receipt of fees paid by requesting parties and for the
payment of wages to off-duty Township police officers for the
police-related activities and payment to the Township of all benefits
as described above, as well as all administrative fees.
9. No off-duty Township police officer shall be assigned to perform
and/or be allowed to perform any police-related activity unless and
until the Township police officer acknowledges that the officer is
performing the police-related activity in accordance with this
subsection and consents to be so governed.
8. Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to prescribe rules and regulations
for the Fire Department, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 (Fire Department).
§ 2-16.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17.2
AO:29
such delivery or posting shall be deemed notice of the adoption and
effectiveness thereof to those subject thereto. The Rules shall prescribe
the uniforms, badges and insignia to be worn by the members of the Fire
Department, and the times and manner of wearing the same and such other
provisions in reference thereto as may be deemed proper.
§ 2-17.3. Chief of the Fire Department. [1967 Code § 10-1-3; New]
§ 2-17.4. Duties of Members.9 [1967 Code § 10-1-6; New]
The members of the Fire Department shall severally perform the duties
imposed and exercise the authority bestowed upon them by the Rules,
Orders and Regulations prescribed by the Chief of the Department, the
Business Administrator, the ordinances of the Township, the Rules and
Regulations of the Fire Department and applicable State law.
§ 2-17.5. Appointments to the Paid Fire Department.10 [1967 Code
§ 10-2-1; Ord. No. 14-19-77 § 1; Ord. No. 14-91 § 1; New]
All appointments to the paid Fire Department shall be made by the
Township Committee in accordance with the laws of the State.
Appointments to the paid Fire Department shall first be made from the
members of the volunteer firefighters in the Township, who shall have
service as active firefighters for at least two (2) years next preceding such
appointment or from among the exempt firefighters of the volunteer force
and who shall not be under twenty-one (21) or over forty (40) years of age
at the time of the appointment. If no such member or exempt firefighter is
available for such appointment, the following procedures shall be followed.
Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the paid Fire
Department, the Township Committee shall classify all the duly qualified
applicants for the position or positions to be filled in the following classes:
I. Residents of Essex County, Morris County and Union County.
II. Other residents of New Jersey.
a. Control over Department; Acting Chief. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall exercise sole and complete control over the entire
Department, both the paid and volunteer members thereof and the
property thereof, subject only to the Business Administrator. The
Business Administrator, with the confirmation of the Township
Committee, may designate a qualified paid member of the Department
to act as Chief thereof during any absence or disability of the Chief.
b. Duties of the Chief of the Fire Department shall be as established by the
N.J. Department of Personnel job description or as otherwise directed.
9. Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to prescribe the duties of officers of
the Fire Department, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.
10.Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to appoint officers of the Fire
Department, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.
§ 2-17.2 MILLBURN CODE § 2-17.5
AO:30
III. All other qualified applicants.
Within each such classification, duly qualified applicants who are veterans
shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are provided by law.
Persons discharged from the service within six (6) months prior to making
application to the Township, who fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-10.1, and who are thereby entitled to appointment notwithstanding
their failure to meet the New Jersey residency requirement at the time
of their initial application, shall be placed in Class II. In making such
appointments, the Township Committee shall first appoint those in Class I
and then those in each succeeding class in the order above listed, and shall
appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a vacancy or vacancies
remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes
have been appointed or have been declined an offer of appointment. The
classes of qualified applicants as defined in this section shall be considered
as separate and successive lists of eligibles, and the New Jersey Department
of Personnel shall, when requested to certify eligibles for positions specified
in this section, make such certifications from the classes separately and
successively, and shall certify no persons from any such class until all
persons in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have
declined offers of appointment. This section shall apply only to initial
appointments and not to promotional appointments of persons already
members of the Fire Department. In making temporary appointments, the
Township Committee shall utilize the classifications set forth in this section,
and shall classify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the position or
positions to be temporarily filled.
§ 2-17.6. Regulations in Connection with Elections. [1967 Code
§ 10-2-2]
No paid member of the Fire Department shall be actively engaged in
electioneering or other proceedings of a political or party nature, or shall
in any manner when on duty interfere with any election in this State; nor
shall any member of the paid Fire Department be present at the polls at
any election, except such reasonable time as may be required by him/her
for the purpose of voting unless he/she shall be detailed by the Chief of the
Department to be present thereat for purposes of fire protection.
§ 2-17.7. through § 2-17.15. (Reserved)
§ 2-17.16. Application for Appointment as Volunteer Member. [1967
Code § 10-3-1]
Any person desiring an appointment as a volunteer firefighter shall make
written application therefor to the Business Administrator. The Chief of
the Fire Department shall endorse his/her recommendation with respect
thereto.
§ 2-17.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17.17
AO:31
§ 2-17.17. Appointment of Volunteers. [1967 Code § 10-3-2; New]
Volunteer firefighters shall be appointed to the Department by the Business
Administrator with the approval of the Township Committee and shall meet
all training and safety standards, as well as comply with the rules and
regulations of the Millburn Fire Department.
§ 2-17.18. Compensation. [1967 Code § 10-3-3]
The amount appropriated in the budget of the Township as compensation
to volunteer firefighters for each year shall be apportioned among the
volunteer firefighters according to the number of regular fire alarms, or the
equivalents thereof, in which each of them attended and participated.
§ 2-18. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-18.1. Department of Public Works Created. [New]
A department to be known as the Department of Public Works is hereby
established.
§ 2-18.2. Divisions; Personnel; Appointment. [New]
The Department shall consist of a Superintendent of Public Works and
such other officers and employees as the Business Administrator may deem
proper, all of whom shall be appointed by the Business Administrator with
the confirmation of the Township Committee.
§ 2-18.3. Powers and Duties. [New]
The Department is charged with the maintenance of the Township streets,
sewer system, parks, shade trees, and garage and shall have such other
powers and duties as the Township Committee shall confer upon it.
§ 2-19. PARKING UTILITY.
§ 2-19.1. Established. [Ord. No. 2290-07 § 1]
That parking system consisting of on-street parking and parking within
garages, lots and other facilities, and fixtures and equipment owned, leased,
or otherwise under the control of the Township of Millburn, is hereby
created and established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., as a municipal
public utility for all the purposes of the Local Bond Law of New Jersey and
the Local Budget Law of New Jersey hereinafter to be referred to as the
"Parking Utility."
§ 2-19.2. Purpose; Findings. [Ord. No 2290-07 § 2]
The Parking Utility is hereby found and determined to be a utility, enterprise
or purpose authorized to be undertaken by the Township and from which
it may receive rates, rentals or other charges for or in connection with or
§ 2-17.17 MILLBURN CODE § 2-19.2
AO:32
the use of services of such Parking Utility which shall be held, used and
applied in accordance with the provisions of the Local Bond Law and the
Local Budget Law and any other applicable laws.
§ 2-20. through § 2-24. (RESERVED)
§ 2-19.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20
AO:33

ARTICLE IV
MUNICIPAL COURT
§ 2-25. TOWNSHIP OF MILLBURN.11
§ 2-25.1. Establishment; Designation. [1967 Code § 14-1-1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, there is hereby established a Municipal Court,
in and for the Township, to be known as the Municipal Court of the
Township of Millburn, in the County of Essex.
§ 2-25.2. Seal. [1967 Code § 14-1-2]
The Municipal Court shall have a seal, which shall be similar, except as to
the name, to the seal of the Township, and in place of the name and legend
upon the Township seal, the seal of the court shall bear the name of the
court.
§ 2-25.3. Judge of the Municipal Court. [1967 Code § 14-1-3]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and who shall serve for a term as prescribed by law,12
and until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. The Municipal Court
and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise all of the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the laws of the State.
§ 2-25.4. Court Administrator.13 [1967 Code § 14-1-5]
The position of Court Administrator is hereby established. The Court
Administrator shall be appointed by the Business Administrator of the
Township Committee subject to law. The Court Administrator shall perform
such functions and duties as shall be prescribed by law, the rules applicable
to municipal courts, and by the Judge.
§ 2-25.5. Deputy Court Administrator. [1967 Code § 14-1-6]
There shall be a Deputy Court Administrator appointed by the Business
Administrator with the approval of the Township Committee. The Deputy
Court Administrator shall have such powers and perform such duties as may
be prescribed by the Court Administrator, the Judge and by law.
11.Editor's Note: For State law as to municipal courts generally, see N.J.S.A. §§ 2A:8-1 to
2A:8-41.
12.Editor's Note: For State law as to municipal courts generally, see N.J.S.A. §§ 2A:8-1 to
2A:8-41.
13.Editor's Note: For State Law as to the Court Administrator, see N.J.S.A. 2A:8-13 and
2A:8-14.
§ 2-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-25.5
AO:35

ARTICLE V
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
§ 2-26. BOARD OF HEALTH.14
§ 2-26.1. Creation of the Board of Health; Composition. [1967 Code
§ 2-8-1; Ord. No. 9-79 § 1; Ord. No. 2-90 § 1; Ord. No. 2183-01 § 1]
There is hereby established a Board of Health of nine (9) members of whom
seven (7) shall be regular members and two (2) shall be alternate members.
The regular members shall be composed of the five (5) members of the
Township Committee and two (2) citizens of the Township with expertise in
public health to be appointed by the Township Committee for alternately
arranged three (3) year terms beginning January 1 in the year in which each
is appointed. The term of one (1) citizen member first appointed shall be
for three (3) years and the term of the other citizen member first appointed
shall be for two (2) years. The alternate members shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and shall be designated Alternate No. 1 and Alternate
No. 2. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except
that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be for two (2)
years for Alternate No. 1 and one (1) year for Alternate No. 2.
§ 2-27. BOARD OF RECREATION COMMISSIONERS.
§ 2-27.1. Creation; Appointment and Composition.15 [1967 Code
§ 2-3-10; Ord. No. 3-2-70 § 1; Ord. No. 2266-06 § 1]
There is hereby created the Board of Recreation Commissioners to consist
of seven (7) persons, citizens and residents of the Township, and to be
appointed by the Mayor. The Township Committee may, by ordinance or
resolution, provide for the appointment of not more than two (2) alternate
members. The alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate No. 1"
and "Alternate No. 2."
§ 2-27.2. Term of Office; Vacancies; Compensation. [1967 Code
§ 2-3-11; Ord. No. 3-2-70 § 2; Ord. No. 2266-06 § 2]
a. Term of Office. The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall hold office
for the term or terms prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:12-1. The alternate
members shall hold office for the term or terms prescribed by N.J.S.A.
40:12-1.1.
b. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
c. Compensation. The members of the board shall receive no
compensation for their services.
14.Editor's Note: For the statutory reference, refer to N.J.S.A. 26:3-3.
15.Editor's Note: For State law as to Board of Recreation Commissioners generally, see
N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq.
§ 2-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-27.3
AO:37
§ 2-27.3. Powers and Duties. [1967 Code § 2-3-12]
The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall have and exercise such rights
and powers and shall be under such duties as may be created, prescribed
and imposed by law.
§ 2-28. (RESERVED)16
§ 2-29. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-29.1. Created; Composition; Term; Compensation; Officers.
[1967 Code § 2-3-24; Ord. No. 4-21-69 § 2; Ord. No. 1-90 § 1]
There is hereby created, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., as
amended, an Environmental Commission for the protection, development
or use of natural resources, including water resources, located within the
Township. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members and two
(2) alternates, appointed by the Mayor of the Township. One (1) of such
members shall also be a member of the Township Planning Board, and
all shall be residents of the Township. All members shall serve without
compensation except as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., as amended.
The Mayor shall designate one (1) of the members to serve as Chairman
and Presiding Officer of the Commission. Members of the Commission
shall hold office for alternately arranged terms of three (3) years and until
the appointment and qualification of their successors. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two (2)
years, except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall
be two (2) years for Alternate No. 1 and one (1) year for Alternate No. 2 so
that the term of not more than one (1) alternate member shall expire in any
one (1) year.
§ 2-29.2. Powers; Records; Reports; Funds. [1967 Code § 2-3-25;
Ord. No. 4-21-69 § 3; Ord. No. 1-90 § 2]
The Environmental Commission shall have the powers set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:56A-2 and 40:56A-3 and shall keep records of its meetings and activities
and make an annual report to the Township Committee. The Township
Committee may appropriate funds for such expenses as may be incurred by
the Commission.
§ 2-30. through § 2-31. (RESERVED)
§ 2-32. CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-28, Board of Improvement Assessment Commissioners,
previously codified herein was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 09-95.
§ 2-27.3 MILLBURN CODE § 2-32.1
AO:38
§ 2-32.1. Created; Appointment; Composition. [1967 Code § 2-3-42;
Ord. No. 21-87 § 1]
There is hereby established a Cable Television Advisory Committee to assist
the Township Committee in its duties with respect to cable television in
the Township. The committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. All
appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Township Committee or until appointment and qualification of
a successor. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of the term shall
be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointments are
made. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he/she
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest, except
that the member may be a subscriber to cable television services. The
committee shall elect from its membership a Chairman, a Vice Chairman
and a Secretary.
§ 2-32.2. General Reports. [1967 Code § 2-3-43; Ord. No. 21-87 § 1]
It shall be the responsibility of the Cable Television Advisory Committee to:
§ 2-33. SHADE TREE ADVISORY BOARD. [1967 Code § 2-3-6; Ord.
No. 21-78 § 1]
A citizens' advisory committee to be known as the Shade Tree Advisory
Board is established to assist and advise the Township Committee, the
Superintendent of Public Works and the Forester with respect to the
planting, care and control of trees and shrubbery in public places owned,
leased or managed by the Township. The Board shall consist of five (5)
persons appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Township Committee. The term of each member shall be three (3) years.
§ 2-34. (RESERVED)17
a. Act as a liaison between subscribers and the holder of the cable
television franchise in the Township.
b. Receive written complaints, forward such complaints to the cable
television franchise holder requesting a response and take reasonable
actions to resolve such complaints.
c. Monitor the cable television franchise holder's performance during its
franchise period.
d. Meet with the Township Committee on an annual or as-needed basis
and submit written reports on a quarterly basis.
e. Take such further actions as the Cable Television Advisory Committee
deems reasonably necessary to promote quality cable television
services in the Township.
§ 2-32.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35
AO:39
§ 2-35. MILLBURN TOWNSHIP/P.T.A. MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE
COMMITTEE.
§ 2-35.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 3-90 Preamble]
In March 1989, the New Jersey Legislature created the Governor's Council
on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse and an Alliance to Prevent Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse (P.L. 1989, c. 51; N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-1 et seq.).
The Alliance to Prevent Alcoholism and Drug Abuse is dedicated to a
comprehensive and coordinated effort against alcoholism and drug abuse
and is a means for implementing policies to reduce alcoholism and drug
abuse.
A Millburn Township/P.T.A. Municipal Alliance Committee, in consultation
with the County Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, shall
identify alcoholism and drug prevention, education and community needs;
implement programs; become a member of the Alliance effort; and be
eligible to receive State funds to assist the programs developed by the
Millburn Township/P.T.A. Municipal Alliance Committee.
§ 2-35.2. Establishment; Membership; Organization. [Ord. No. 3-90
§ 1]
The Millburn Township/P.T.A. Municipal Alliance Committee ("Alliance
Committee") is hereby established. The membership of the Alliance
Committee shall include broad representation of no fewer than twenty
(20) persons from the Township. Membership may include, but shall not
be limited to: a Mayoral representative; the Chief of Police or his/her
representative; the President of the School Board or his/her representative;
the Superintendent of Schools or his/her representative; a student
assistance coordinator; a representative from each of the Parent Teacher
Associations; a representative of the Chamber of Commerce, including, but
not limited to, local business and industry representatives; a Municipal
Court judge or a representative of the court system; representatives of
local civic associations; representatives of local mental health agencies
and local treatment and prevention providers; a representative of local
religious groups; and private citizens, including youth representatives and
youth and adults recovering from drug and/or alcoholic abuse. Members
may be appointed by the Mayor for alternately arranged terms of three
(3) years. The Mayor shall approve of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson
and Secretary selected by the Alliance Committee from among its members
each to serve for one (1) calendar year. Bylaws shall be adopted by the
Alliance Committee. Regular meetings shall be held with a calendar of
meetings established in advance. A quorum consisting of a majority of the
full Alliance Committee is required for decisions. Minutes shall be taken to
17.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-34, Maintenance of Stone House in Cora Hartshorn
Arboretum and Bird Reservation. Trustees to be Appointed by Mayor, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1967 Code § 2-3-8 and Ord. No. 21-78 was repealed in
its entirety by Ord. No. 2199-02.
§ 2-35 MILLBURN CODE § 2-35.2
AO:40
serve as a record. Standing and ad hoc committees may be established as
needed.
§ 2-35.3. Purposes. [Ord. No. 3-90 § 1]
The purposes of the Alliance Committee are to:
§ 2-35.4. Functions. [Ord. No. 3-90 § 1]
The functions of the Alliance Committee shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Organize and coordinate efforts involving schools, law enforcement,
business groups and other community organizations for the purpose of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
b. In cooperation with local school districts, develop comprehensive and
effective alcoholism and drug abuse education programs in grades
kindergarten through 12.
c. In cooperation with local school districts, develop procedures for the
intervention, treatment-referral and discipline of students abusing
alcohol and drugs.
d. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education, support
and outreach efforts for parents in the community.
e. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness programs.
a. Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens, and
representatives from public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support drug alcohol prevention and education programs and
related activities with an emphasis on youth.
b. Conducting an assessment of the Township to determine the needs of
the Township in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
c. Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
d. Coordinating projects within the Township to avoid fragmentation and
duplication.
e. Developing programs and/or projects to be implemented at the
Township level or participate in regionally developed programs that
accomplish the purpose of the Alliance Committee.
f. Assisting the Township in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
g. Cooperating with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal data,
§ 2-35.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35.4
AO:41
§ 2-35.5. Relationships with Other Groups. [Ord. No. 3-90 § 1]
Since cooperative relationships are necessary to effectively develop the
Alliance Committee, in order to maximize coordination and avoid
duplication of efforts, and to assure effective use of resources including
volunteers and funds, the Alliance Committee shall determine how to best
work with and/or join municipal groups such as drug and alcohol task
forces, municipal youth services commissions, youth task forces or other
groups compatible with the purposes and functions of the Alliance
Committee. These interrelationships may involve shared memberships, joint
subcommittees or joined groups.
§ 2-35.6. Application for DEDR Funds. [Ord. No. 3-90 § 1]
The Alliance Committee may apply for mandatory Drug Enforcement and
Demand Reduction (DEDR) funds through the request for proposal process
initiated annually through the County Local Advisory Committee on
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee.
§ 2-36. YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-36.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 6-92 § 1]
The Millburn Township Committee hereby finds that it should establish
a Youth Advisory Committee in order to address requests by Millburn
Township teens for organized supervised drug-and-alcohol-free activities
within Millburn Township and in order to provide a continuity of activities
and programs from year to year and to offer programs during the summer,
as well as to provide an adult base of support and guidance for teen
activities throughout the Township.
§ 2-36.2. Establishment; Membership; Organization. [Ord. No. 6-92
§ 1]
The Youth Advisory Committee is hereby established. The membership of
the Youth Advisory Committee shall include (a) a minimum of seven (7)
adult advisors, (b) a minimum of twenty-five (25) youths representing a
cross-section of the high school-aged population in the Township, and (c)
one (1) liaison member each from the Township Committee and the Board
of Education. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve for one
(1) year ending on June 30. Members shall select the Chairperson. The
Vice Chairperson, Treasurer and Secretary shall be selected by the Youth
Advisory Committee from among its members. The officers shall serve for
one (1) year. Bylaws shall be adopted by the Youth Advisory Committee.
Regular meetings shall be held with a calendar of meetings established in
reports or other information which may be required for the County
Annual Alliance Plan or needed to assist the Alliance effort.
h. Reporting to the Millburn Township Committee on a quarter-annual
basis.
§ 2-35.4 MILLBURN CODE § 2-36.2
AO:42
advance. Minutes shall be taken to serve as a record. Standing and ad hoc
committees may be established as needed.
§ 2-36.3. Functions. [Ord. No. 6-92 § 1]
The functions of the Youth Advisory Committee shall include, but not be
limited to:
§ 2-37. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CRISIS INTERVENTION TEAM.
§ 2-37.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 05-96 § 1]
In 1991, the New Jersey Legislature passed the Prevention of Domestic
Violence Act of 1991, N.J.S.A. 2C:25-17 et seq. (the "Act"), having
determined that domestic violence is a serious crime against society with
victims from all social and economic backgrounds. Pursuant to the Act,
crisis intervention teams of trained residents can be formed to assist police
authorities in dealing with domestic violence cases. The Millburn Domestic
Violence Intervention Team would provide assistance to victims of domestic
violence by providing information on available resources and referrals and
acting as a liaison with the police and other agencies, as appropriate.
§ 2-37.2. Establishment; Qualification for Membership;
Appointment; Coordinator. [Ord. No. 05-96 § 1; Ord. No. 2173-00
§ 1]
The Millburn Township Domestic Violence Crisis Intervention Team is
hereby created. The team shall consist of an unlimited number of resident
volunteers who shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. Each
volunteer shall complete an application form supplied by the Township
a. Holding monthly meetings to assess the needs of the youth of the
Township.
b. Planning, implementing and evaluating supervised, organized drugand-
alcohol-free activities and programs to meet the needs of the youth
of the Township.
c. Involving a cross-section of the high school-aged youth from the entire
Township population in the planning and implementation of the
activities of the Youth Advisory Committee.
d. Promoting positive interaction between students and all segments of
the Township through social service activities.
e. Providing a clearing house for ideas, inspiration and action to all
segments of the Township's population in an effort to make the teens of
the Township a productive group that contributes to the Township in a
positive fashion.
f. Reporting to the Township Committee on a quarterly basis as to the
activities and programs of the Youth Advisory Committee.
§ 2-36.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-37.2
AO:43
and be fingerprinted by the Police Department. Upon satisfactorily passing
a routine background check, volunteers shall complete a forty (40) hour
specialized training program as developed by the Division of Criminal
Justice pursuant to the Act. Upon completion of the training program,
volunteers may be named to the team by the Township Committee to
serve for a term of one (1) year subject to the pleasure of the Township
Committee. The Township Committee shall also appoint a team Coordinator
or Coordinators who shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
The Coordinator(s) shall be supervised by the Business Administrator or the
Business Administrator's designee(s).
§ 2-37.3. Functions. [Ord. No. 05-96 § 1]
The functions of the Millburn Township Domestic Violence Crisis
Intervention Team shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 2-38. PEDESTRIAN SAFETY ADVISORY BOARD. [Added 6-18-2019
by Ord. No. 2532-19]
§ 2-38.1. Purpose.
There is hereby established a Pedestrian Safety Advisory Board to serve
as a volunteer advisory committee to the Township Committee concerning
issues affecting pedestrian safety and acting in a manner consistent with
the Traffic Issues Management Policy adopted by Resolution 19-079 and as
amended from time to time.18
§ 2-38.2. Membership.
a. Meeting with victims of domestic violence to provide support and
compassion; and
b. Providing information on available resources, appropriate agencies,
hotlines, etc., and serving as a liaison with police and other agencies, as
appropriate.
a. The Board shall be comprised of the following nine members. Members
7 through 9 shall be bona fide residents of the Township of Millburn.
1. A representative of the Township Committee.
2. The Superintendent of the Millburn Township Public Schools or
designee.
3. A Parent Teacher Organization Council (PTOC) Safety Committee
member.
4. The Township Engineer or designee.
5. The Police Chief or designee.
18.Editor's Note: Said policy is on file in the Township offices.
§ 2-37.2 MILLBURN CODE § 2-38.2
AO:44
§ 2-38.3. Terms.
§ 2-38.4. Organizational Structure; Meetings.
6. The Business Administrator or designee.
7. A Township resident applying through the volunteer interest form.
8. A Township resident applying through the volunteer interest form.
9. A Township resident applying through the volunteer interest form.
a. The Township members of the Board, including the representative of
the Township Committee and the Township residents, shall be
appointed by the Township Committee and shall serve for a term of
three years, or until a successor is appointed. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term only. All members of
every category first appointed shall hold office until December 31,
2019. The balance of the members shall serve on the Board by virtue of
holding office or employment in the categories designated. After 2019,
they shall continue on the Board for as long as they hold the office or
employment designated or until a successor holds the office or
employment designated.
b. Township resident members shall hold office for alternatively arranged
staggered terms of one, two and three years, commencing at the first
annual reorganization meeting of the Township Committee following
the adoption of this section, as follows:
1. One of the Township residents applying through the volunteer
interest form shall serve an initial three-year term.
2. One of the Township residents applying through the volunteer
interest form shall serve an initial two-year term.
3. One of the Township residents applying through the volunteer
interest form shall serve an initial one-year term.
a. The Board may adopt bylaws to govern its general operation, provided
that the bylaws and any revisions are approved in advance by resolution
of the Township Committee.
b. The Board shall meet not less than quarterly or as otherwise more
frequently determined by the Board.
c. Meetings shall be open public meetings administered in accordance
with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act.19
d. Minutes of each meeting of the Board shall be taken to serve as a public
record.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-38.5
AO:45
§ 2-38.5. Consultant and Staff Assistance.
The Board shall have no budget but shall, following authorization by the
Township Committee, be assisted and advised from time to time by the
Township Planner, the Township engineering consultant and other pertinent
consultants, as well as the Fire Chief or designee, and other staff members
or employees of the Township. The activities to be performed by
consultants, staff and/or employees shall include grant writing services,
transportation analyses, data requests and related services.
§ 2-38.6. Functions.
The functions of the Board shall be as follows:
§ 2-39. through § 2-45. (RESERVED)
a. Investigation and analysis of issues affecting pedestrian safety within
Millburn Township.
b. Recommendations to the Township Committee regarding initiatives and
policies designed to enhance pedestrian safety within Millburn
Township, which recommendations shall be made consistent with the
procedure set forth in the Traffic Issues Management Policy adopted by
Resolution 19-079 and as amended from time to time.
c. Annual report to the Township Committee of the Board's activities and
recommendations.
§ 2-38.5 MILLBURN CODE § 2-39
AO:46
ARTICLE VI
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND POLICIES
§ 2-46. INDEMNIFICATION.
§ 2-46.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1]
The Millburn Township Committee hereby finds that it is appropriate to
provide for the defense and indemnification of Township officials and
employees consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-1, et seq., which
empowers local public entities to provide for such defense and
indemnification.
§ 2-46.2. Definition. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1]
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE AS USED IN THIS SECTION —
Shall mean each person presently or formerly holding any Township office,
position or employment, elective or appointive, full-time or part-time,
whether or not compensated, by fixed salary or hourly rate, and including
members of the various boards, commissions or agencies of the Township,
but shall not include any person furnishing professional or extraordinary
unspecifiable services as an independent contractor under separate
appointment, retainer or contract.
§ 2-46.3. Providing Defense of and Indemnification for Civil Actions.
[Ord. No. 02-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2352-10; Ord. No. 2384-11]
The Township of Millburn is hereby authorized to provide out of public
funds for the defense of actions brought against its officials and employees
and to indemnify such officials and employees for compensatory damages
or any settlement approved by the Township Committee, to the fullest
extent permitted by law, and subject to the limitations, exceptions and
procedures of this section. The defense and indemnification shall extend to
a cross-action, counterclaim or cross-complaint against a Township official
or employee. The obligation of the Township to defend and indemnify its
officials or employees shall be limited to acts or omissions which are within
the scope of their employment.
§ 2-46.4. Indemnification for Costs of Defense for Criminal or
Disciplinary Proceeding if Found Innocent. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1]
If any criminal or disciplinary action is instituted against a Township official
or employee based upon the act or omission of that person arising out of
and directly related to the lawful exercise of his or her official duties or
under color of his or her authority, and that action is dismissed or results
in a final disposition in favor of that officer or employee, the Township
shall reimburse that person for the costs of defending the action, including
attorneys' fees and costs of trial and appeals which are determined by the
Township Committee to be reasonable.
§ 2-46 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-46.5
AO:47
§ 2-46.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2384-11 § 2]
Indemnification or the defense of any action shall not be provided or shall
be disclaimed if the Township Committee determines by resolution that any
of the following conditions shall exist or occur:
§ 2-46.6. Reimbursement of Township. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2352-10; Ord. No. 2384-11 § 3]
Notwithstanding any municipal ordinance to the contrary, if a Township
official or employee is found guilty of a crime, or if the Township Committee
determines that the act or omission complained of constitutes actual fraud,
actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong, the Township
official or employee shall not be indemnified by the Township, the Township
shall not pay any compensatory, exemplary and/or punitive damages on
behalf of the Township official or employee, and the Township official or
employee shall be obligated to reimburse the Township for the cost of the
legal defense (if any is provided by the Township) within such time and upon
such terms as determined by the Township Committee. A determination by
the Township Committee that the act or omission complained of constitutes
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong shall
be made at the conclusion of any alternative dispute resolution or litigation
a. The act or omission complained of was not within the scope of the
official's or employee's authority, duty to or employment by the
Township.
b. The act or failure to act complained of was a crime or because of actual
fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
c. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the official or employee.
d. There exist policies of insurance, either obtained by the Township or by
another, by virtue of which the Township official or employee is entitled
to a defense of the action from the insurer. However, the Township shall
provide a defense and indemnification as provided by this section to the
extent the official or employee is not covered by insurance.
e. The Township official or employee has failed to deliver to the Township
Business Administrator within ten (10) days of the time he or she is
served with the summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or
pleading, the original or copy of such document; provided, however,
that this time period may be extended by the Township Committee for
good cause shown.
f. The official or employee fails to request the defense of any action.
g. The official or employee fails to cooperate fully with the Township in the
defense of the matter.
h. If the action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Township.
§ 2-46.5 MILLBURN CODE § 2-46.6
AO:48
and exhaustion of all appeals, and shall be made by resolution of the
Township Committee.
§ 2-46.7. Procedures. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2352-10; Ord.
No. 2384-11 §§ 4, 5]
a. Official's or Employee's Duty to Notify, Request Defense By and
Cooperate with, the Township. A Township official or employee shall not
be entitled to a defense or indemnification under this section unless
within ten (10) calendar days of the time he or she is served with any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading he or she
delivers the original or copy thereof to the Township Business
Administrator, requests that the Township provide a defense and fully
cooperates with the Township during the defense. After the Business
Administrator has received the summons, complaint, process notice,
demand or pleading and a request from the Township official or
employee that the Township provide a defense, the Business
Administrator shall notify the Township Committee. If the Township
official requesting a defense or indemnification under this section
serves as the Township Business Administrator at the time the
Township official is served with any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading, then the Township Business Administrator
shall deliver the original or a copy of the summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading, and his or her request for defense or
indemnification, directly to the Township Committee.
b. Notification of Township Committee. If the Township Committee
determines that the official or employee requesting defense or
indemnification is not entitled to a defense or indemnification under
this section, then within thirty (30) days after the Township Committee
has received the notice required pursuant to subsection 2-46.7a, the
Township Committee shall adopt a resolution declining to provide a
defense or indemnification. The time periods for actions pursuant to
paragraphs a and b of this subsection may be extended by the Township
Committee for good cause shown.
c. Township to Control Representation. Whenever the Township provides
for the defense of a Township official or employee pursuant to this
section, the Township may, through its attorney, assume exclusive
control over the representation of such Township official or employee.
d. Methods of Providing Defense. The Township may provide for a defense
pursuant to this section by an attorney representing the Township or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the Township's
right under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the insurer
to provide the defense.
e. Selection of Attorney and Approval of Fees. If the Township Committee
decides not to select counsel to represent the official or employee, the
official or employee may propose his or her own counsel, subject to the
approval of the Township Committee, who shall enter an agreement
§ 2-46.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-46.7
AO:49
§ 2-46.8. Punitive Damages. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2384-11
§ 6]
Nothing in this section shall require the Township to pay for punitive or
exemplary damages resulting from the commission of a crime, actual fraud,
actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong. However, the
Township Committee may indemnify an official or employee for punitive or
exemplary damages provided the Township Committee determines the acts
complained of did not constitute a crime, actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or an intentional wrong. Such a determination shall be made by
resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 2-46.9. Retroactivity. [Ord. No. 02-95 § 1]
The events giving rise to a cause of action or claim for which a defense or
indemnification is sought must have occurred after January 1, 1990, and
any claim based on an event prior to that date shall not be covered by this
section.
§ 2-47. PROCEDURE FOR PAYMENT OF SALARIES.
§ 2-47.1. Method of Payment of Salaries of Township Officers and
Employees.20 [1967 Code § 2-1-8; Ord. No. 8-88 § 2]
The method by which Township employees or officers shall be paid the
applicable compensation provided in the salary ordinance of the Township
shall be as follows:
with the Township, setting forth the rate of compensation and the
estimated total cost of the defense.
a. For each pay period, a payroll register shall be kept by the Chief
Financial Officer/Treasurer, in which entries shall be made of all
personnel and their respective amounts of compensation.
b. In the preparation of payrolls, a summary statement shall be made from
the payroll register, which shall be subdivided in accordance with the
categories of salaries and wages set forth in the budget and shall be
signed by the Chief Financial Officer, or the Assistant Treasurer, in the
Chief Financial Officer's absence.
c. For each pay period, the Chief Financial Officer shall prepare two (2)
checks, drawn on the Township's general account to the order of the
Township Payroll Account and the Payroll Agency Account, in the
amounts of the total compensation for the period. Such checks and the
summary statement referred to in paragraph b above shall be
submitted immediately before the payment date to the required
signatories authorized in this section. The signatories, if satisfied that
20.Editor's Note: The ordinance establishing salaries for officers and employees of the
Township is reenacted each year. Such ordinance is not set out in this Code, but may be
found on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 2-46.7 MILLBURN CODE § 2-47.1
AO:50
§ 2-48. PAYMENT OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS.
§ 2-48.1. Payment of Fire Insurance Claims Required for Claims in
Excess of $2,500.00. [1967 Code § 2-10-1; Ord. No. 14-81 § 1]
No insurance company which has issued or renewed any fire insurance
policy after the adoption of this section shall pay to a claimant under the
fire insurance policy any claim in excess of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for fire damages on any real property located within
the Township until such time as all anticipated demolition costs and all
taxes, assessments and other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the Official Certificate of Search have been paid either by
the owner of the real property or the insurance company pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 2-48.2. Township Committee May Adopt Resolution in Lieu of
Payment Requirements. [1967 Code § 2-10-2; Ord. No. 14-81 § 2]
In lieu of the requirements of subsection 2-48.1, the Township Committee
may adopt a resolution pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-11,
allowing the full payment of the insurance proceeds to the owner for
restoration or improvement of the damaged property.
§ 2-48.3. Copy of Ordinance to Be Submitted to Fire Department.
[1967 Code § 2-10-3; Ord. No. 14-81 § 3]
A copy of this ordinance (section) shall be submitted upon final adoption to
the Fire Department.
the checks are correct, shall sign and return them to the Chief Financial
Officer.
d. The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit the signed checks in the
Payroll Account and the Township Payroll Agency Account and draw the
individual payroll checks, which shall be signed by him/her, or the
Assistant Chief Financial Officer in the Chief Financial Officer's
absence, and distributed on the designated date.
e. At the regular meeting of the Township Committee first following the
date on which checks were presented for signature, the Township
Committee, if satisfied that the checks were correctly prepared, shall
ratify the action of the signatories by resolution.
Such officers as may be designated by the Township Committee are
hereby authorized to sign checks drawn on the general account. The
Chief Financial Officer, or the Assistant Treasurer in the Chief Financial
Officer's absence, is hereby authorized to sign checks drawn on the
payroll account.
§ 2-47.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48.4
AO:51
§ 2-48.4. Fire Department to Notify Tax Collector's Office of all
Fires. [1967 Code § 2-10-4; Ord. No. 14-81 § 4]
The Fire Department shall notify the Tax Collector's office with the address
of all fires occurring after the adoption of this section.
§ 2-48A. POLITICAL FUNDRAISING ON OR BY USE OF PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
§ 2-48A.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2182-01 § 1]
As used in this section:
CANDIDATE — Shall mean (i) any individual seeking election to a public
office of the Federal, State, County, or municipal government, or school
district or political party, and (ii) any individual who shall have been elected
or failed to have been elected to any such office.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Shall mean any
person holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position
in the municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or
office thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated
or uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or of any
municipal agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether the position
is full-time or part-time.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Shall mean any loans and transfers of
money or other things of value to any candidate, elected official, or
representative of any political organization, or other commitments or
assumptions of liability to make any such transfer. Political contributions
shall be deemed to have been made upon the date when such commitment
is made or liability assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any two (2) or more persons
acting jointly, or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote
the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for
Federal, State, County, municipal or school board office or political party
office. Political organization includes, but is not limited to, organizations
defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a political committee, joint candidates
committee, continuing political committee, political party committee,
candidate committee, or legislative leadership committee.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean all personal property owned, leased, or
controlled by the Township, including but not limited to vehicles, phones,
fax machines, computers, stationery including Township letterhead,
postage, and other office equipment.
SOLICIT — Shall mean to ask for, by oral or written communication, a
political contribution as that term is defined herein.
§ 2-48.4 MILLBURN CODE § 2-48A.2
AO:52
§ 2-48A.2. Soliciting or Accepting Political Contributions in Rooms
or Buildings Used for the Discharge of Public Duties Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2182-01 § 1]
No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution for
any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any room or
building used for the discharge of official municipal business. This section
shall include solicitation or acceptance of political contributions made over
a private cell phone or by use of a private computer, if the person soliciting
or accepting the political contribution, or using the cell phone or computer
for purposes of soliciting or accepting the political contribution, is in any
room or building used in the discharge of official municipal business.
§ 2-48A.3. Use of Public Property for Political Fundraising
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2182-01 § 1]
No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution for
any candidate, elected official or political organization while utilizing public
property.
§ 2-48A.4. Exception. [Ord. No. 2182-01 § 1]
In the event public facilities are made available to any group for
nongovernmental use as a meeting facility, the prohibitions in this section
shall not be deemed to prevent fundraising of any sort among members of
such group during the time such groups have reserved exclusive use of the
meeting facility.
§ 2-48B. POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS FROM DEVELOPERS
ENGAGED IN REDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
§ 2-48B.1. Redevelopment Agreements Under the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law. [Ord. No. 2312-08 § 1]
Prohibition of entering into or amending redevelopment agreements with
certain contributors:
a. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township Committee shall not enter into an agreement, amend an
agreement, or otherwise contract with any redeveloper for the
planning, replanning, construction or undertaking of any
redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of any
public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the Township of Millburn, (the "Township") pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, during the applicable time period as specified below, to
any candidate or campaign committee of a candidate for Millburn
Township municipal office or holder of municipal public office within
§ 2-48A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48B.1
AO:53
Millburn Township at the time the contribution is made, to any Millburn
Township political organization or political campaign committee, to any
committee or election committee of an Essex County Party Organization
or to any political action committee (PAC) which regularly engages in
the support of candidates in the Township of Millburn. For the purposes
of this section, the "applicable time period" -- shall be defined as the
time period between the date that the property which is the subject
of the redevelopment project has been included in a memorializing
resolution adopted by the Governing Body directing the Planning Board
to conduct a preliminary investigation to determine if the site is in need
of redevelopment pursuant to and in accordance with the New Jersey
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, ("LRHL") N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et
seq., and the date of entering into the redevelopment agreement.
b. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Township Committee shall contain provisions prohibiting
redevelopers from making any contribution of money or pledge of a
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any candidate or
campaign committee of a candidate for Millburn Township municipal
office or holder of municipal public office within Millburn Township at
the time the contribution is made, to any Millburn Township political
organization or political campaign committee, to any committee or
election committee of an Essex County Party Organization or to any
political action committee (PAC) which regularly engages in the support
of candidates in the Township between the time of the issuance of a
Request for Proposals by Millburn Township regarding the
redevelopment project and the later of the termination of negotiations
or the completion of all matters specified in the redevelopment
agreement. All redevelopment agreements shall contain the following
provisions:
1. The redeveloper shall be prohibited from soliciting or making any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution including in-kind
contributions, in violation of this section. The making of a
contribution in contravention of this contract shall constitute a
default of the Redevelopment Agreement and the redeveloper shall
be obliged to remit to the Township of Millburn the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each and every violation of the
aforesaid section and this provision. The redeveloper shall make
said payment within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice from the
Township Clerk.
2. It shall be an Event of Default for the redeveloper to violate the
provisions of this section. In the event that any violation is not
cured within thirty (30) days of written notice by the Township
Clerk, the Township may terminate this Agreement or take
whatever action at law or in equity which is necessary or desirable
to enforce the performance or observance of any rights, remedies,
obligations, agreements, or covenants of the redeveloper as
applicable under the Agreement.
§ 2-48B.1 MILLBURN CODE § 2-48B.1
AO:54
§ 2-48B.2. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
2312-08 § 2]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to any of the candidates, office
holders, or entities described in subsection 2-48B.1a shall be deemed a
violation of this section nor shall an agreement for redevelopment projects
of any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby if that contribution or
agreement was made by the redeveloper prior to the effective date of this
section.21
§ 2-48B.3. Notice Given by Township; Sworn Statement of
Redeveloper. [Ord. No. 2312-08 § 3]
3. In the event that a professional, consultant, or lobbyist employed
by the redeveloper makes a contribution in violation of subsection
2-48B.4 of this section then that employee shall be terminated by
the redeveloper unless the contribution is returned pursuant to
subsection 2-48B.5 of this section but in any event the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be payable to the Township by
the redeveloper for each and every such violation.
c. Pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, a
"redeveloper" means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
limited liability company that shall enter into or propose to enter into a
contract with the Township for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of
an area in need of redevelopment, or an area in rehabilitation, or any
part thereof, under the provisions of the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, or for any construction or other work forming part of a
redevelopment or rehabilitation project. For purposes of this section
the definition of a redeveloper also includes an individual, that
individual's spouse, and any adult child of that individual living at the
same address as well as any firm, corporation, professional corporation,
partnership, organization or association, including all principals who
own ten (10%) percent or more of the equity in any of the foregoing.
The redeveloper shall also include any subsidiary directly controlled by
the redeveloper and any professionals, consultants, or lobbyists
employed by the redeveloper.
d. For the purposes of this section, the governmental entity that is
considered to have responsibility for arranging and entering into the
redevelopment agreement under this section shall be the Millburn
Township Committee.
a. It shall be the Township's continuing responsibility to give notice of this
section when the Township adopts a resolution directing the Planning
Board to conduct an Area in Need Study, when the Township adopts a
resolution directing the Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment
plan, at the time that the Township adopts the ordinance to implement
21.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2312-08, codified herein, was adopted April 1, 2008.
§ 2-48B.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48B.3
AO:55
§ 2-48B.4. Contribution Restrictions and Disclosure Requirement
Applicability to Consultants. [Ord. No. 2312-08 § 4]
§ 2-48B.5. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. No. 2312-08 § 5]
If a redeveloper makes a contribution that would otherwise bar it from
receiving a redevelopment agreement or makes a contribution during the
term of a redevelopment agreement in violation of this section, the
redeveloper may request a full reimbursement from the recipient and,
if, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the applicable ELEC
Report is published, the redeveloper notifies the Township Committee in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution, (including
contributions below the reporting threshold) the redeveloper shall again
be eligible to receive a redevelopment agreement and shall no longer be
in violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the redeveloper has entered
into a redevelopment agreement with the Township, the redeveloper shall
remain obliged to remit the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for
each and every violation of this section, pursuant to subsection 2-48B.1b.
§ 2-48B.6. Penalty and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2312-08 § 6]
the redevelopment plan, and when the Township issues its Request for
Proposals for its redevelopment project.
b. Prior to entering a redevelopment agreement, the Township shall: (1)
require the redeveloper to provide a sworn certification that it has not
made a contribution in violation of this section and (2) require each
member of the Township Committee to provide a certification that he or
she has not received a contribution from a redeveloper or from any
committee or election committee of an Essex County Party
Organization, which has received a contribution from a redeveloper.
Both the redeveloper and the members of the Township Committee
shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of this section that
may occur during the pendency of the redevelopment agreement.
a. The prohibition against contributions in this section shall apply to all
professionals, consultants or lobbyists contracted or employed by the
business entity ultimately designated as the redeveloper to provide
services related in any manner or respect to the redevelopment project.
b. A redeveloper who participates in, or facilitates, the circumvention of
the contribution restrictions through professionals, consultants or
lobbyists shall be deemed in violation of this section.
a. In addition to the penalties that may be imposed by the New Jersey
Campaign Contributions and Expenditures Reporting Act, the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law ("LRHL"), or any other applicable
statute, it shall be a violation of this section; cognizable in the Millburn
Township Municipal Court for a redeveloper to: (i) make or solicit a
contribution for an entity in violation of this section (ii) knowingly
conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or received; (iii) make or
§ 2-48B.3 MILLBURN CODE § 2-48B.6
AO:56
§ 2-48C. GOVERNMENT ENERGY AGGREGATION PROGRAM.
§ 2-48C.1. Established. [Ord. No. 2501-18 § 1]
The Township hereby establishes a Government Energy Aggregation
Program, in accordance with the provisions of the Government Energy
Aggregation Act, N.J.S.A. 48:3-93.1 et seq.
§ 2-48C.2. Authorization to Execute Agreement. [Ord. No. 2501-18
§ 2]
The Mayor is authorized to execute and the Clerk to attest to the execution
of and Electric Distribution Aggregation Agreement, in a form acceptable to
the Township, with JCP&L.
§ 2-48C.3. Township to Act as Lead Agency. [Ord. No. 2501-18 § 3]
The Millburn Township Committee will act as Lead Agency of the MSEA
and, in that capacity, and consistent with applicable rules, will solicit
proposals for electric generation service and energy aggregation services
on behalf of Township residents and businesses, and enter into a contract
for such services provided that the lowest qualified bid price is below the
prevailing price for utility-provided basic generation service.
§ 2-48C.4. Execution of Master Performance Agreement. [Ord. No.
2501-18 § 4]
As Lead Agency the Millburn Township Committee will execute a master
performance agreement that obligated the participants in the MSEA to
purchase electricity at terms and conditions stated therein with a third
party supplier who has been awarded the contract by the Lead Agency
solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution; (iv) make
or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the agreement
that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of any candidate
or holder of the public office of the Township; (v) engage or employ
a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or understanding that such
lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any contributions, which
if made or solicited by the redeveloper itself, would subject that entity
to the restrictions of this section; (vi) fund contributions made by
third parties, including consultants, attorneys, family members, and
employees; (vii) engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent
the intent of this section; or (viii) directly or indirectly, through or by
any other person or means, do any act which would subject that entity
to the restrictions of this section.
b. Furthermore, any redeveloper who violates paragraph a(ii)-(viii) shall
be disqualified from eligibility for future Township redevelopment
agreements for a period of five (5) calendar years from the date of the
violation.
§ 2-48B.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48C.4
AO:57
on behalf of participating members of the MSEA, and provided that such
contract shall be at prices reasonably forecast and estimated by the
Millburn Township Committee to provide savings to participants relative to
the price charged for basic generation service by JCP&L.
§ 2-48C.5. Term of Authorization. [Ord. No. 2501-18 § 5]
The authorization provided to the lead agent shall be valid until December
31, 2021 (the "Effective Period"), at which time the MSEA will be subject to
renewal at the discretion of the Millburn Township Committee.
§ 2-48C.4 MILLBURN CODE § 2-48C.5
AO:58
ARTICLE VII
CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND FRANCHISES22
§ 2-49. COOPERATIVE PRICING.
§ 2-49.1. Morris County Cooperative Pricing Council. [Ord. No.
15-91 § 1]
§ 2-49.2. Essex County Cooperative Pricing Program. [Ord. No.
17-89; Ord. No. 29-95 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds that savings and efficiencies may
be achieved in the purchase of work, materials and supplies through
participation in volume purchasing on behalf of two (2) or more public
agencies pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5). The Township therefore agrees
to participate in the Essex County Cooperative Pricing Program in the
purchase of work, materials and supplies for use by the Township and
the County and by such other contracting units as may lawfully enter
into similar agreements. The terms and conditions of a certain agreement
between Essex County and the Township and other municipalities located
in Essex County are hereby approved, and the agreement shall be kept on
file in the office of the Township Clerk. The Mayor and Township Clerk are
hereby authorized to enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township.
§ 2-50. INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENT.
§ 2-50.1. Agreement Between the Millburn Township Board of
Health and the Essex Regional Health Commission for
Environmental and Local Public Health Services. [Ord. No. 4-94
§§ 1, 2]
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor and
Township Clerk are hereby authorized to enter into a Cooperative
Pricing Agreement with the Lead Agency as defined in the Agreement
or any other contracting unit within the County of Morris or adjoining
Counties for the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
b. The Lead Agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of
Millburn shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other
provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
a. Certain Interlocal Services Agreements for the furnishing of health
services by the Millburn Township Board of Health, as provided in the
22.Editor's Note: The Township of Millburn has authorized a telephone franchise agreement
with Bell Atlantic — New Jersey (see Ord. No. 5-78, adopted 3/21/78) and has authorized a
renewal of a Cable Television Franchise Agreement with Comcast Cablevision of New
Jersey (see Ord. No. 2147-98, adopted October 6, 1998); Fiber Optic Agreement (see Ord.
No. 18-93; New); Telecommunications, Fiber Optic Cable Agreement with Teleport
Communications New York (see Ord. No. 13-96).
§ 2-49 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-50.1
AO:59
§ 2-51. through § 2-60. (RESERVED)
agreement more particularly described below, are hereby approved by
reference.
An agreement between the Essex Regional Health Commission
(hereafter "Commission"), Provider, and the Millburn Township Board
of Health, Recipient, for the Commission to provide environmental and
public health service to the Recipient. The term of the agreement shall
be indefinite.
b. The Mayor and Township Clerk and the President and Secretary of the
Millburn Township Board of Health are hereby authorized and directed
to execute the agreement on behalf of the Township of Millburn. A copy
of the agreement is available for public inspection in the Offices of the
Township Clerk and the Township Board of Health.
c. This agreement shall take effect after its approval by the New Jersey
Commissioner of Health and the filing of this ordinance (subsection)
with the New Jersey Division of Local Government Services.
§ 2-50.1 MILLBURN CODE § 2-51
AO:60
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES ESTABLISHED
§ 2-61. FEES ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-61.1. Fees for Public Records and Copies of Documents. [New;
Ord. No. 14-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2215-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2258-05 § 1; Ord.
No. 2422-14 § 1]
Requests for copies of records available pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1, the
Open Public Records Act, shall be requested in accordance with the
requirements of that law from either the Township Clerk's office or the
Police Department. Copies of records may be purchased for the fees set
forth below. If a fee is not prescribed in this section, the fee shall be the
actual cost of duplicating the record except as otherwise provided by law.
Delivery/postage fees may apply depending upon the method of delivery. In
the case where an extraordinary expenditure of time is involved in fulfilling
the request, the requestor will be charged on a case-by-case basis applying
the criteria set forth in the New Jersey Government Records Council's
"Special Service Charge 14-Point Analysis" as amended from time to time.
These factors include:
What records are requested;
The general nature and number of government records requested;
The period of time over which the records extend;
Whether some or all of the records sought or archived are in storage;
The size of the agency (total number of employees);
The number of employees available to accommodate the request;
The extent to which the requested items must be redacted;
The level of personnel, hourly rate and number of hours, if any, required
for a government employee to locate, retrieve and assemble the records for
copying;
The level of personnel, hourly rate and number of hours, if any, required
for a government employee to monitor the inspection or examination of the
records requested;
The level of personnel, hourly rate and number of hours, if any, required for
a government employee to return records to their original storage place;
The reason the agency employed, or intends to employ, the particular level
of personnel to accommodate the records request;
Who (name and job title) in the agency will perform the work associated
with the records request and that person's hourly rate;
The availability of information technology and copying capabilities; and
The detailed estimate categorizing the hours needed to identify, copy or
prepare for inspection, produce and return the requested documents.
a. There shall be paid to the Township the following amounts:
§ 2-61 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-61.1
AO:61
Municipal Code Book $222.00
Supplements $25.00 per supplement
Zoning Ordinance $25.00
Master Plan $25.00
Natural Resources Inventory $25.00
24" x 23" Tax Map (Xerox) $5.00
Zoning Map $5.00
Photocopies:
Letter Paper (8 1/2 x 11);
Legal Paper (8 1/2 x 14); and
Ledger Paper (11 x 17)
$0.05 per sheet
Color Letter Paper (8 1/2 x 11);
Legal Paper (8 1/2 x 14); and
Ledger Paper (11 x 17)
$0.15 per sheet
b. Fee Schedule for copies of Specifications and Bid Specifications
(including maps and blueprints 24" x 36" copies).
0 to 100 pages $40.00
101 to 120 pages $50.00
121 to 130 pages $60.00
131 to 140 pages $70.00
Over 141 pages $70.00 plus $10.00 for each 20
page increment
c. Copies of Audio Cassette [not including cost of duplication if
applicable]: $1.00 per cassette.
d. Copies of Video Tape [not including cost of duplication if applicable]:
$5.00 per tape.
e. Copies of CD and DVD [not including cost of duplication if applicable]:
$0.50 per CD/DVD.
f. List of Property Owners within 200 feet [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12]: Fee is the
greater of $.25 per name or $10.00.
g. Municipal Lien Search : $10.00.
§ 2-61.1 MILLBURN CODE § 2-61.2
AO:62
§ 2-61.2. Fees. [1967 Code § 18-1-16; Ord. No. 7-2-73; Ord. No. 6-80
§ 1; Ord. No. 17-88 § 1; New; Ord. No. 2215-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2247-05
§ 1; Ord. No. 2422-14 § 2]
The following fees are to be charged by the Police Department (unless
covered by subsection 2-61.1a.):
a. Fees (other than Municipal Court Discovery):
1. Copies shall be charged in accordance with subsection 2-61.1a
above.
2. Mailed Accident Reports (N.J.S.A. 39A:4-131): $5.00 each.
b. Fees for Municipal Court Discovery:
1. Copies shall be charged in accordance with subsection 2-61.1a
above.
c. Fingerprinting: $10.00 per card.
d. Photographs: $2.00 each.
§ 2-61.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-61.2
AO:63
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
[Editor's Note: For regulations concerning the removal of brush,
weeds and debris and abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 10, Property
Maintenance.]
§ 3-1. ADVERTISEMENTS; HANDBILLS.
§ 3-1.1. Attaching to Trees or Utility Poles Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 15-1-13]
No person shall place upon, or attach to any tree, or upon, or to any
telegraph, telephone, or utility pole upon any of the streets within the
Township any handbill, advertisement, written or printed, or partly written
or printed notice of any kind, except such notices as by law are required to
be posted.
§ 3-1.2. Advertising Attached to Motor Vehicles Prohibited. [New]
No person shall place upon or fasten to any motor vehicle, or any motor
vehicle part, parked within the Township, any handbills, advertisements,
circulars or other written or printed matter.
§ 3-1.3. Scattering Circulars in Streets Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 15-1-14]
No person shall scatter or throw upon any of the streets or other public
place within the Township any handbills, advertisements, circulars or other
written or printed matter, or fasten, by pasting or otherwise, any such
advertisements, notices or circulars to any of the sidewalks or bridges in
the Township.
§ 3-2. BICYCLE REGULATIONS AND LICENSING.23
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 6-1-1]
As used in this section:
BICYCLE — Shall mean any device upon which a person may ride, propelled
wholly or in part by human muscular power and having two (2) tandem
wheels, either of which is twenty (20") inches or more in diameter.
§ 3-2.2. Leaving Bicycle on Sidewalk or Street. [1967 Code § 6-1-6]
No operator of a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lying or standing upon a
sidewalk or street in a manner or position likely to hinder, impede or
endanger pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
23.Editor's Note: Bicycle regulations are also found in Section 3-23.
§ 2-61.2 MILLBURN CODE § 3-2.3
AO:64
§ 3-2.3. Riding on Sidewalks Prohibited; Exception. [1967 Code
§ 6-1-9]
No person over twelve (12) years of age shall ride or operate any bicycle
on any sidewalk in the Township except for delivery of newspapers or
merchandise and then only in the residential section of the Township, and
when the sidewalk is not being used by pedestrians.
§ 3-2.4. Obedience to Traffic Laws.
All persons riding or propelling bicycles upon any street in the Township
shall observe all statutes, traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto.
§ 3-2.5. Responsibilities of Parents and Guardians. [1967 Code
§ 6-1-12]
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this section.
§ 3-2.6. Registration and License Tags. [New]
Any Township resident who owns, rides, or propels a bicycle in the Township
of Millburn may register the bicycle with the Police Department.
§ 3-2.7. Inspection; Grounds for Refusal. [1967 Code § 6-2-3]
Upon receiving an application for registration of a bicycle, the Chief of
Police shall cause an inspection to be made of the bicycle, and, if the
bicycle is in an unsafe mechanical condition, he/she shall refuse to issue a
registration certificate.
§ 3-2.8. Issuance. [1967 Code § 6-2-4]
Upon receiving a proper application therefor and finding the bicycle in a
safe, mechanical condition, the Chief of Police shall issue to the owner of
such bicycle a registration certificate.
§ 3-2.9. Contents of Registration Certificate. [1967 Code § 6-2-5]
Every registration certificate issued pursuant to this section shall be
numbered serially, and shall contain the date of issue, the name and address
of the owner or owners of the bicycle, the serial number appearing on the
frame of the bicycle, if any, and any other permanent identifying feature
of the vehicle. The Township registration number shall be engraved on the
bottom pedal bearing housing.
§ 3-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.10
AO:65
§ 3-2.10. Duty of Chief of Police to Keep Records. [1967 Code
§ 6-2-16]
The Police Department shall keep a record of the registration of all bicycles,
including the number of each registration certificate, the date of issuance,
the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the name or make
and the serial number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.
§ 3-3. through § 3-6. (RESERVED)
§ 3-7. NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
§ 3-7.1. Loud, Unnecessary Noise Prohibited.24 [1967 Code
§ 15-1-18]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the Township.
§ 3-7.2. Enumeration of Prohibited Noises. [1967 Code § 15-1-19;
Ord. No. 14-97 § 2; Ord. No. 2144-98 § 2]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of subsection 3-7.1, but such enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
a. Animals,25 Birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
b. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit music
being made upon streets or sidewalks by brass bands or other bands
nor to prohibit religious organizations from beating drums in their
religious worship.
c. (Reserved)
d. Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
24.Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to prevent disturbing noises, see
N.J.S.A. § 40:48-1.
25.Editor's Note: As to barking dogs, see subsection 5-6.5.
§ 3-2.10 MILLBURN CODE § 3-7.2
AO:66
e. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
f. Hawkers, Peddlers, etc.26 The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
g. Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or
public place of the Township, except as a danger warning, the creation
of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling
device and the sounding of any such device for unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one
operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such signaling
device when traffic is held up for any reason.
h. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
i. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, etc. The use of calliopes, mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers of any kind for any purpose upon the streets
of the Township.
j. Noises to Attract Attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale.
k. Pile Drivers, Hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.
l. Radios, Phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is
in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
26.Editor's Note: See hawkers and peddlers, subsection 4-8.35.
§ 3-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7.2
AO:67
§ 3-8. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY MITIGATION. [Amended in
entirety by Ord. No. 2518-18. Prior history includes Ord. Nos.
2144-98, 2189-01]
§ 3-8.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
The purpose of this Section 3-8 is to regulate the hours of construction, the
use of power equipment and heavy equipment, imposing requirements for
dust and silt control, requiring fencing, requiring toilet facilities, limiting
the location of dumpsters, and requiring compliance with the current Tree
Preservation Ordinance (Chapter 11) in order to protect and promote the
health, welfare and safety of the public in the Township. This Section 3-8 is
applicable to all land use activities.
§ 3-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
The following definitions apply to this Section 3-8:
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Shall mean construction, repair, alteration
or demolition of any building or structure, or the laying of any pavement,
and including, but not limited to, the making of an excavation, movement of
earth, clearing of land, and loading or unloading of construction material,
equipment or supplies, where a permit is required to perform the work.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Shall mean heavy-duty vehicles, designed for
executing construction tasks, including, but not limited to, a bulldozer,
backhoe or excavator.
m. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
n. Steam Whistles. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of
Township authorities.
o. Transportation of Metal Rails, etc. The transportation of rails, pillars or
columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other
public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so
loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of
such streets or other public places.
p. Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type
of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
§ 3-7.2 MILLBURN CODE § 3-8.2
AO:68
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Shall mean the following days are observed as federal
Legal Holidays, in accordance with 5 U.S.C.A. § 6103(a): New Year's Day,
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Washington's Birthday also referred to as
Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, entity, contractor, sub-contractor, or
group of persons engaging in Construction Activity.
POWER EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any tools powered by electricity or fuel,
including, but not limited to, a power saw, hammer, sander, drill, grinder,
lawn mower, leaf blower, thatcher, generator, air compressor, or like power
equipment.
§ 3-8.3. Activities Restricted. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
§ 3-8.4. Permitted Hours of Restricted Activities. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
§ 3-8.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
The restrictions of this Section 3-8 shall not apply to the following:
a. Construction Activity shall be unlawful except as carried out as
specified in this Section 3-8.
b. Operating any Power Equipment shall be unlawful except as carried out
as specified in this Section 3-8.
c. Operating any Heavy Equipment, for the purposes of performing
Construction Activity, shall be unlawful except as carried out as
specified in this Section 3-8.
a. The activities restricted by this Section 3-8 shall be permitted only
during the following hours:
Weekdays: 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturdays: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
b. On Sundays and Legal Holidays, the activities restricted by this Section
3-8.3(a) and (b) shall be permitted from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. by:
1. Persons who both own and reside on the premises;
2. Occupants of the premises; or
3. Relatives of 1 or 2.
The operation of Heavy Equipment, as restricted by Section 3-8.3(c), is not
permitted on Sundays and Legal Holidays by any Person.
a. Activities confined within a wholly enclosed building or structure.
b. Activities conducted pursuant to and within the terms of a permit
issued by the Township Administrator, or his designee, where he finds
§ 3-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-8.5
AO:69
§ 3-8.6. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
Any Person, including owners and occupants of the premises, engaging in
Construction Activity shall comply with all of the following requirements:
that the public health and safety will be enhanced by the work or will
be harmed by failure to perform the work at the time indicated therein.
c. Activities necessary to prevent injury to persons or property, including
snow removal.
d. Activities conducted by or for any government unit or agency, or for
work by public utilities.
e. Grass cutting on golf courses which may commence at 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and Legal Holidays.
a. Shall maintain the construction site in an orderly manner during the
duration of any Construction Activity, including by being maintained in
such a manner as to comply with the requirements of Chapter 10,
entitled Property Maintenance, including, but not limited to, the
removal of brush, weeds, obnoxious growth, garbage and debris. Within
ten (10) days of the conclusion of Construction Activity, all equipment
and unused construction material shall be removed from the premises,
or stored in an appropriate manner.
b. Shall provide toilet facilities for all persons engaged in construction
activity at the construction site, in compliance with Occupational Safety
and Health Administration regulations.
c. For all Construction Activity requiring a Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil
Conservation District permit, shall install chain-link temporary fencing
with solid colored screening, which shall not have signage or symbols,
around the perimeter of the construction site, adequate to block the
sight of ground level Construction Activity from neighboring properties,
and to mitigate the effects of dust and debris leaving the premises.
Temporary fencing installed for the purpose of complying with this
Section 3-8:
1. Must not exceed six (6) feet in height, in compliance with
Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance subsection 609.6;
2. Is permitted in the front yard as a permissible exception to
Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance subsection
609.6(a) as to prohibiting fences in front yards;
3. Must be removed within ten (10) days of the conclusion of
Construction Activity; and
4. Does not alleviate the requirement for temporary fencing, pursuant
to Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance subsection
608.5 (steep slope areas), where required.
§ 3-8.5 MILLBURN CODE § 3-8.6
AO:70
d. Shall keep dumpsters used during Construction Activity on the same
property where the Construction Activity is occurring, or receive and
comply with a permit from the Police Department for placement on the
roadway, and such dumpsters shall be properly maintained, including,
but not limited to, removal when full.
e. Shall take reasonable precautions to mitigate dust, silt and debris
resulting from Construction Activity from leaving the premises, which
includes:
1. Wetting down the structure daily during demolition activity to
prevent dust from leaving the perimeter of the property;
2. Use of tracking mats, in such locations approved by the Township
Engineer, as to minimize the tracking of mud and dirt outside of the
perimeter of the property;
3. Installation of inlet filter bags in any Township inlet directly in the
front of the property and the first downstream inlet on the street
from the property to trap waterborne sediment from entering the
storm sewer, and:
(a) Inlet filter bags shall be maintained throughout construction,
and replaced as necessary; and
(b) Removed within ten (10) days of the conclusion of Construction
Activity; and
4. Washing of trucks and equipment by spraying with a hose before
leaving the construction site; and
5. Keeping the roadway and adjacent sidewalk free and clear of
materials being tracked off site during construction.
f. Shall comply with all of the requirements of Chapter 11, entitled Tree
Preservation, including, but not limited to, obtaining a Tree Removal
Permit and submitting a Millburn Tree Restoration Plan, where
applicable.
g. Prior to commencing any new construction, in addition to the
requirements of this section concerning protective measures at
construction sites, the Construction Code Official shall be authorized to
require an applicant for a permit related to Construction Activity to
submit how he/she intends to comply with the Standard Division
Specifications of the Construction Specifications Institute.
h. The Township Construction Code Official, Health Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, Township Forester, Township Engineer, Police
Department, Township Administrator, or his designee, shall have
authority to discern compliance with this section and the authority to
secure compliance with this section with regard to certain actions taken
by Persons engaged in Construction Activity to ensure that neighbors
are not unreasonably subjected to noise, dust, unsanitary or unsightly
§ 3-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-8.6
AO:71
§ 3-8.7. Violations. [Ord. No. 2518-18]
If any of the requirements of this Section 3-8 are not complied with:
§ 3-9. through § 3-16. (RESERVED)
§ 3-17. DEFECATING OR URINATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED.
[New]
No person shall defecate or urinate in any public street, alley, park or other
public place in the Township or any area to which the public is invited in the
Township.
§ 3-18. PICKETING A RESIDENCE PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 2-91 § 1]
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the
residence or dwelling of any individual in Millburn Township.
§ 3-19. ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BY
INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS.
§ 3-19.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2284-07 § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms have the meaning indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Shall mean alcoholic beverage as defined in the
New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
COMMISSION — Shall mean the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of an
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
PERSON UNDER THE LEGAL AGE — Shall mean a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years and includes the term underaged person.
conditions, or other violations of the provisions of this section.
Enforcement by the Police Department is limited to enforcement of
Section 3-8.4 (Enforcement of permissible hours and days of
construction activity) and Section 3-8.6(d) (Location of dumpsters).
a. The Township Construction Code Official may issue a stop work order,
pursuant to his/her authority under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.31, which shall
remain in full force and effect until the violation is remedied to the
satisfaction of the Township Official; and/or
b. The Township may initiate prosecution for a violation pursuant to
Chapter 1, Section 1-5 General Penalty, as applicable; and/or
c. Such other actions may be initiated as permitted by law; and/or
d. The Township shall also have the right to commence litigation in a court
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 3-8.6 MILLBURN CODE § 3-19.1
AO:72
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any noncommercial premises used for
either residential or recreational purposes.
RELATIVE — Shall mean an adult who is related to a person under the legal
age by blood, marriage, or adoption.
§ 3-19.2. Possession or consumption on private premises
prohibited. [Ord. No. 2284-07 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
furnish, serve or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverage to or by a
minor on any private premises.
§ 3-19.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2284-07 § 1]
§ 3-19.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2284-07 § 1]
a. Nothing herein shall prohibit a person under the legal age from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite or from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian, or relative who has attained the legal
age to purchase and to consume alcoholic beverages.
b. Nothing herein shall prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any person under the legal age while such person is actually engaged in
the performance of employment by a person who is licensed under
N.J.S.A. 33:1 et seq. or while actively engaged in the preparation of food
while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a
county vocation school or post-secondary education institution, except
that this section shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section or pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33-1.81, or any other
section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
a. Upon the conviction of any person under the legal age for a violation of
this section, the court shall impose a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the first offense and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00)
for any subsequent offense.
b. In addition, the court may suspend or postpone for six (6) months, the
driving privileges of the person under the legal age and the suspension
or postponement of such person's driver's license, the court shall
forward a report to the Commission stating the first day and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to this section. If, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, such
person is less than seventeen (17) years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
§ 3-19.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19.4
AO:73
§ 3-19.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2284-07 § 1]
The Police Department shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of
this section.
§ 3-20. (RESERVED)
§ 3-21. SELLING AND DELIVERING MERCHANDISE FROM PARKED
VEHICLES PROHIBITED. [1967 Code § 15-1-21.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the lines of any
street or public way in the Township for the purpose and during the process
of selling and delivering thereat and therefrom, to a consumer, goods, wares
and merchandise.
§ 3-22. VENDING MACHINES RESTRICTIONS.
§ 3-22.1. Restriction on Selling Food or Beverages from Vending
Machines. [1967 Code § 15-1-10]
It shall be unlawful in the Township to sell or dispense food or beverages
from a mechanical vending device; however, the sale or dispensing of either
food or beverages from a mechanical vending device located in a store,
factory, school, office, club, lodge, community center, recreational building,
charitable institution, personal service establishment or building of public
assembly shall be permitted.
It shall be unlawful to erect, operate or maintain, within the Township, any
mechanical vending device for the sale of food or beverages in any location
other than those permitted by the provisions of this section.
of operation a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six (6) months after
the person reaches the age of seventeen (17) years.
c. If at the time of the imposition of a sentence the convicted person has a
valid driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey, the court shall
immediately collect the license and forward same to the Commission,
along with the report required hereunder. If for any reason the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete
name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person, as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
court.
d. If a person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privileges of the person and submit the required report to the
Commission. The court shall not collect the license of a nonresident
convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the
Commission shall give required notice to appropriate officials in the
licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 3-19.4 MILLBURN CODE § 3-23
AO:74
§ 3-23. HUMAN-POWERED VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS; USE OF
SKATEBOARDS, SLEDS, BICYCLES, ETC.27
§ 3-23.1. Regulations Concerning Operation of Human-Powered
Vehicles. [1967 Code § 15-1-6.1; Ord. No. 3-87 § 1; New]
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any human-powered
vehicle or device, including, but not limited to, skateboard, skates, bicycle,
sled, toboggan, skis, or any other locomotion vehicle or device:
§ 3-24. GRAFFITI PROHIBITED. [New]
No person shall commit an act of graffiti in the Township. For purposes of
this section, "act of graffiti" means the drawing, painting or the making of
any inscription on a bridge, building, public transportation vehicle, rock,
wall, sidewalk, street or other exposed surface on public or private property
without the permission of the owner. Any person violating the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
a. In or upon any street, sidewalk, parking lot, park or other public place
in the Township in a careless manner without due caution and
circumspection so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property; and
b. In any manner in the public place known as The Courtyard which is
designated as part of Lot 28 in Block 1212 on the Millburn Township
Tax Map and more specifically described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the westerly sideline of Main Street being
distant 83.45 feet along said sideline from the point of curve leading
into the southerly sideline of Essex Street and running thence:
1. Along lands designated as Lot 12, in Block 1212, south 76 degrees -
59 feet west 150.0 feet to a point; thence
2. Through lands designated as Lot 28, in Block 1212, south 12
degrees - 48 feet - 37 inches east 50.33 feet to a point; thence
3. Along lands designated as Lot 10, in Block 1212, north 77 degrees -
34 feet east 97.0 feet to a point; thence
4. Along lands designated as Lot 11, in Block 1212, north 11 degrees -
31 feet - 30 inches west 41.26 feet to a point; thence
5. Still along lands designated as Lot 11, in Block 1212, north 78
degrees - 28 feet - 30 inches east 51.36 to a point in the westerly
sideline of Main Street; thence
6. Along the westerly sideline of Main Street north 10 degrees - 38
feet west 11.50 feet to the point and place of beginning.
27.Editor's Note: For additional bicycle regulations, see Section 3-2.
§ 3-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-25
AO:75
§ 3-25. DISORDERLY PERSONS OFFENSES. [New]
Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be deemed to have
committed the offense of disorderly conduct:
a. With purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or
recklessly creating a risk thereof:
1. Engages in fighting or threatening, or violent or tumultuous
behavior; or
2. Creates a hazardous or physically dangerous condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose.
b. Uses offensive language which is spoken loudly, in a public place, and is
likely to incite the hearer to an immediate breach of the peace.
c. With purpose to harass another:
1. Makes, or causes to be made, a communication(s) anonymously or
at extremely inconvenient hours or in an offensively coarse
language, or any other manner likely to cause annoyance or alarm;
2. Subjects another to striking, kicking, shoving, or other offensive
touching, or threatens to do so; or
3. Engages in any other course or alarming conduct or of repeatedly
committed acts with the purpose to alarm or seriously annoy such
other person.
d. Having no legal privilege to do so, purposely or recklessly obstructs any
highway or other public passage whether alone or with others.
e. In a gathering, refuses to obey a reasonable official request or order to
move:
1. To prevent obstruction of a highway or other public passage; or
2. To maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in a
dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard; or
3. Except when the person's speech or other lawful behavior attracts
the obstructing audience and the obstruction can be readily
remedied by police control of the size or location of the gathering.
f. Is a retailer, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2c:34-3.1, and displays or permits to
be displayed at his business premises any obscene material, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2c:34-3(1), at a height of less than five (5') feet or without a
blinder or any other covering placed or printed in front of the material
displayed. The public display of obscene material constitutes
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted
the display.
§ 3-25 MILLBURN CODE § 3-25
AO:76
g. Obstructs, molests or interferes with any person in a public place or
private place, by obstructing or interfering with the movement of any
person lawfully on the street, or by unwarranted, intervening or
intermeddling in the activities of others.
h. With purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or
gathering, does an act tending to obstruct or interfere with it physically.
i. Purposely defaces, damages or pollutes any public monument, insignia,
symbol, or structure, or place of worship or burial.
j. Casts, shoots or throws anything at, against or into any vehicle, railroad
car, airplane, or other facility of transportation, or places any stick,
stone or other substance upon any street railway track, trolley track or
railroad track, or who unlawfully climbs into or upon any railroad car,
either in motion or standing on the track of any railroad company in this
state.
k. Is under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, and knowingly
possesses alcoholic beverages without legal authority, or knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverages in any school, public conveyance,
public place or place of public assembly, or motor vehicle.
l. Is of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages, and knowingly and
without the express written permission of the school board, its
delegated authority, or any school principal, brings or possesses any
alcoholic beverages on any property used for school purposes which is
owned by any school or school board.
m. Whether on foot or in a motor vehicle:
1. Wanders, remains or prowls in a public place for the purpose of
unlawfully obtaining or distributing a controlled dangerous
substance or controlled substance analog; and
2. Engages in conduct that, under the circumstances, manifests a
purpose to obtain or distribute a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog.
n. Purposely, knowingly or recklessly defaces, damages, obstructs or
otherwise impairs the operation of any railroad crossing warning signal
or protection device, including, but not limited, to, safety gates, electric
bell, electric sign, or any other alarm or protection system authorized
by the commissioner of transportation.
o. Sells, leases, gives or otherwise provides a remotely activated paging
device to a person under eighteen (18) years of age, except when given
by a doctor during the course of treatment or by an owner/operator of a
commercial enterprise during hours of employment.
p. While enrolled as a student of an elementary or secondary school,
knowingly and without express written permission of the school board,
its delegated authority, or any school principal, brings or possesses any
§ 3-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-25
AO:77
§ 3-26. RESTAURANT CLOSING HOURS. [1967 code § 8-6-7]
Every restaurant shall be and remain closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. of every day, except on January 1 annually.
§ 3-27. CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS CLOSING HOURS. [1967
code 8-10-7]
Every catering or similar business establishment shall be and remain closed
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m., prevailing time, every day.
§ 3-28. WEAPONS.28
§ 3-28.1. Discharge of Weapons Prohibited; Exception. [1967 Code
§ 25-1-1; New; Ord. No. 2174-00 § 1]
No person, other than a sworn Police Officer, in the performance of his/
her official duties, shall discharge a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow
within the Township, except as authorized by resolution of the Township
Committee for purposes of wildlife management.
§ 3-28.2. Weapons Prohibited. [1967 Code § 15-1-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or have in his possession for sale,
or to carry or use in any public street or place, in the Township, any bean
shooter, blow pipe or metal pointed darts.
remotely activated paging device on any property used for school
purposes, at any time and regardless of whether school is in session or
other persons are present.
q. Refuses or knowingly fails to obey an order to disperse, made by a
peace officer or other public servant engaged in executing or enforcing
the law, where five (5) or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct likely to cause substantial harm.
r. Is guilty of simple assault, for:
1. Attempting to cause or purposely, knowingly or recklessly causing
bodily injury to another; or
2. Negligently causing bodily injury to another with a deadly weapon;
or
3. Attempting by physical menace to put another in fear or imminent
serious bodily injury;
4. Except when committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual
consent, in which case it is a petty disorderly person's offense.
28.Editor's Note: For State law as to weapons generally, see N.J.S.A. 2c:58-6.1.
§ 3-25 MILLBURN CODE § 3-29
AO:78
§ 3-29. PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 3-29.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2429-14]
As used in this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Shall include all structures owned, leased,
rented and/or operated by the Township of Millburn, and/or occupied by
Township employees and used for official business of the Township.
PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Shall include all
public parks, playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the
Township of Millburn and all property owned or leased by the Township
of Millburn upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is
permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including
all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any
parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke
from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, marijuana joint or
any other matter or substance which contains tobacco, or marijuana or any
other matter that can be smoked.
§ 3-29.2. Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places. [Ord. No.
2429-14]
§ 3-29.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2429-14]
The enforcement authority of this section shall be the Police Department,
Fire Department, Recreation Department, Public Works Department and
Health Department of the Township of Millburn.
§ 3-29.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2429-14]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
offense, five hundred ($500.00) dollars for the second offense and one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense. Any municipal
employee found in violation of this section may also be subject to discipline
in accordance with the provisions of the City of Millburn's policies and
procedures.
a. Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined
herein.
b. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities
owned or leased by the Township of Millburn.
c. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the Township
of Millburn.
§ 3-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-30
AO:79
§ 3-30. FIREWORKS — POSSESSION, USE OF AND PUBLIC
DISPLAY.
§ 3-30.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
To protect the health and safety of the residents of The Township of Millburn
by regulating the possession, use and public and/or private display of
fireworks on private premises.
§ 3-30.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
§ 3-30.3. Possession or Use Prohibited; Exception. [Ord. No.
2449-15]
The possession and use of fireworks for public or private display shall be
prohibited in the Township unless a permit is obtained in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 21:3-3 which authorizes a municipality to issue a permit for the
same and as provided herein by this section.
§ 3-30.4. Permit Required; Fee. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
A resolution authorizing a permit shall be obtained from the Township
Committee prior to the discharge and display of any fireworks within the
Township. The fee for such permit shall be $750.00 and shall hereby be
incorporated into the Township Fee Schedule.
§ 3-30.5. Permit Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
a. Township shall mean the Township of Millburn, in the County of Essex,
and State of New Jersey.
b. Fireworks shall mean and include any combustible or explosive
composition, or any substances, or combination of substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall
include skyrockets, Roman candles or other devices of like construction
and any device containing any explosive or flammable compound, or
any tablets or other devices of like construction and any device
containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or
other devices containing any explosive substance, except that the term
"fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in
excess of an average of .25 grain (16.2 mg) of explosive content per cap,
and toy pistols or other devices for use of such caps, the use of which
shall be permitted at all times.
c. Fire Official shall mean the Chief of the Fire Department of the
Township, his/her designee, the Fire Marshal, or his/her designee.
§ 3-30 MILLBURN CODE § 3-30.5
AO:80
§ 3-30.6. Conditions for Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
a. An application for a permit may be obtained from the Township Fire
Chief and must be submitted to the Fire Official at least forty-five (45)
days prior to the date of the display or discharge of fireworks.
b. All such applications for permits shall set forth the following:
1. The date, time, and place of making such proposed display or
discharge;
2. The name, address, telephone number, I.D. or social security
number of any person making the display and/or in charge of
igniting, firing, setting-off, exploding, or causing to be exploded
such fireworks;
3. The experience of any person making the display and/or in charge
of igniting, firing, setting-off, exploding or causing to be exploded
such fireworks, including references;
4. Whether any person making the display and/or in charge of
igniting, firing, setting-off, exploding or causing to be exploded
such fireworks, has ever been convicted of a crime, indicating the
date and type of conviction; and
5. A list of the fireworks to be displayed or discharged, and manner
and location where same are to be stored prior to the display or
discharge.
c. The following shall be submitted with the application for the fireworks
permit:
1. A site plan of the display area with a plan of discharge which shows
the set-up, discharge, disposal of unfired fireworks and emergency
plan;
2. The permit fee of $750.00 payable to the Township;
3. A certified true copy of a Certificate of Insurance with an
endorsement naming the Township as a coinsured pursuant to a
Hold Harmless Agreement stating that the insured shall indemnify
the Township and hold the Township harmless. The types and
amounts of coverage shall be no less than:
(a) Workers Compensation/Employer's Liability - $1,000,000.
(b) General Liability - $5,000,000.00
(c) Automobile Liability - $1,000,000.00
(d) Umbrella Liability — $5,000,000.00
No policy of insurance containing a deductible attributable to the
Township of Millburn will be accepted.
§ 3-30.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-30.6
AO:81
§ 3-30.7. Disposal of Unfired Fireworks. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
Unfired fireworks and trash remaining after the display or discharge is
concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a safe manner approved by
the Fire Official.
§ 3-30.8. Seizure of Fireworks; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2449-15]
The Fire Official shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, or other person, all stocks of fireworks for display,
stored or held in violation of this section. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 21:3-8 or as otherwise provided by law.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-1.1. Findings and Declarations. [1967 Code § 8B-1-1; Ord. No.
33-79 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds and declares that:
a. The display and/or discharge of fireworks shall be handled by a
competent operator approved by the Chiefs of the Police and Fire
Departments. Such display shall be of such a character, and so located,
discharged, or fired, as in the opinion of the Chiefs of the Police and
Fire Departments, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person(s). The location of the storage place of
the fireworks shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Official. Prior
to the issuance of a permit, the application for same, including the
Certificate of Insurance must be reviewed and approved by the
Township Risk Manager. The possession and use of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful under the terms and conditions approved with
the permit and for that purpose only. No permit issued hereunder shall
be transferable. Upon issuance of the permit, the Fire Department shall
immediately notify the Police Department of same.
b. The display and/or discharge of fireworks pursuant to this section shall
be linked to one 4th of July fireworks display/discharge between June 24
to July 11, between the hours of 8:30 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. and for a
duration of no more than thirty (30) minutes.
a. Alarm systems and devices to detect and report emergencies such as
burglary and fire have been installed in numerous residential,
commercial and industrial premises in the Township.
b. Many alarm companies have contracted with the owners and occupants
of premises in the Township for the sale or leasing, installation,
§ 3-30.6 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.1
AO:82
§ 4-1.2. Purpose. [1967 Code § 8B-1-2; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards, procedures and
regulations for various types of burglar, fire and other private alarm systems
or warning devices which require a response by the Police Department, Fire
Department or other Township agency.
§ 4-1.3. Scope. [1967 Code § 8B-1-3; Ord. No. 33-70 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person, other than the
Township, who operates, maintains or owns any private alarm system or
warning device designed to summon the Police, Fire Department or other
Township agency to any location in response to the signal of any type of
emergency alarm. This section shall not be construed to prohibit alarm
companies from providing alarm services to other offices within or without
the Township so long as such services are not connected to the alarm
register at the fire headquarters or the alarm panel at the law enforcement
building. No person shall have premises protected by a private alarm
system or warning device unless the alarm system or warning devices is
registered in accordance with this section.
§ 4-1.4. Definitions. [1967 Code § 8B-1-4; Ord. No. 33-79, § 1]
As used in this section the following terms shall include the meanings given
herein.
ALARM PANEL — Shall mean the component of the communications
console in the Township's law enforcement building which indicates the
existence of any emergency.
ALARM REGISTER — Shall mean the panel in the Township's fire
headquarters which indicates the existence of a fire.
COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE — Shall mean the console or control panel
located in the Township's law enforcement building which gives either
visible and/or audible indications of alarms.
operation and maintenance of private alarm systems, which contracts
provide for the connection of the private alarm systems to central alarm
panels in the Township's law enforcement building or fire headquarters.
c. Unless the various systems and devices of the many alarm companies
are uniformly regulated there will be an unnecessary drain on the
manpower, time, space, facilities and finances of the Township and its
public safety departments; deterioration of the quality of, and
inefficiency in, the service to persons subscribing to the alarm services;
and confusion or inequities among the alarm companies of the
Township.
d. The public interest, therefore, requires the enactment of standards,
procedures and regulations to control the use of private emergency
alarm systems and devices in the Township.
§ 4-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.4
AO:83
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the actuation of an alarm system or warning
device by causes other than those to which the alarm system or warning
device was designed or intended to respond, or the testing of alarms
required by law or practice without prior notice to the police department.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person obtaining the license to install, operate
and maintain the alarm panel in the law enforcement building.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any device installed to serve an improved
property and designed to sound an alarm by a bell, horn, siren or other
noisemaking instrument located upon the property where the device is
installed and audible beyond the limits of the property in the event of
the presence of fire, smoke or similar hazards, unauthorized entry, the
commission of an unlawful act, or any one or more of the foregoing, but
is not connected to the alarm panel in the law enforcement building or
alarm register in the fire headquarters. Any equipment which combines the
characteristics of a private alarm system and a warning device shall be
classified as a private alarm system for the purpose of this section.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean and include any partnership, corporation or
association, or any other legal entity, as well as a natural person.
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any system installed to serve an
improved property and designed or used for detection of fire, smoke or
similar hazards, the detection of unauthorized entry, the commission of
an unlawful act, or the detection of any one or more of the foregoing, or
for reporting any emergency, which system communicates or causes the
communication of information to the alarm panel in the Township's fire
headquarters. A private alarm system includes, but is not limited to, any one
of the following types:
§ 4-1.5. Alarm Panel License. [1967 Code § 8B-2-1; Ord. No. 33-79,
§ 1]
Lease line system which provides direct connection by a telephone
lease line from a specific location to the alarm panel or alarm register
with a visible or audible signal.
a.
Tape dialer system which automatically selects a telephone trunk line
and then reproduces a prerecorded message to a special telephone
device rather than to the alarm panel or alarm register.
b.
Telephone call system which automatically alerts a person, beyond the
limits of the property served, who is engaged in the business of relaying
information by telephone to the Township Police Department or Fire
Department or reacting independently of the Police or Fire department.
c.
a. There is hereby established an alarm panel license, which shall be
granted upon recommendation of the Township Committee in
accordance with subsection 4-1.6.
b. Except for use by the Township Police Department, the licensee shall
have exclusive use and control of the alarm panel in the
§ 4-1.4 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.5
AO:84
§ 4-1.6. Procedures and Requirements for Issuance of Alarm Panel
License. [1967 Code § 8B-2-2; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1; Ord. No. 34-83
§ 1; Ord. No. 21-94 § 1]
communications console in the law enforcement building as provided in
the specifications for the alarm panel. The licensee shall be responsible,
at no cost to the Township, for the furnishing, installing, operating
and maintaining of the alarm panel which shall contain the equipment
approved by the Township Committee. The licensee shall, at no cost
to Millburn Township, locate the panel and, if necessary, relocate the
panel, under the supervision of the Chief of the Township Police
Department.
a. Specifications. The Chief of Police shall prepare written specifications
covering the alarm panel.
b. Qualifications. Persons desiring to bid for the license shall complete and
submit the qualifications questionnaire attached to the bid proposal.
Proposals that are not accompanied by a completed qualifications
questionnaire shall be rejected. The questionnaire shall include the
following information concerning the bidder's ability to comply with the
requirements of this section and the Local Public Contracts Law:
1. Financial and personal references;
2. The location of the bidder's office in the Township or within a
fifteen (15) mile radius thereof;
3. The personnel available to service said equipment on a twenty-four
(24) hour basis; and
4. A list of the equipment conforming to the bid specifications.
c. Advertisement for Bids. Upon adoption of this section the Township
Committee shall authorize the Township Clerk to publish an
advertisement inviting sealed proposals for the installation, operation
and maintenance of the alarm panel in accordance with the provisions
of this section and of the specifications.
d. Submission of Proposals. The proposals shall be in the form prescribed
by the specifications and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. A description of the alarm panel to be installed.
2. A guarantee that the licensee will complete the installation and
have it in working order on or before the date stated in the
specifications.
3. A deposit of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars in cash or by
certified or cashier's check to guarantee installation and good
working order within the specified time, or in default thereof, to
reimburse the Township for damages incurred, including expense
§ 4-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.6
AO:85
of maintenance of any temporary alarm system the Township
deems necessary.
4. A certificate of consent of a surety company licensed to transact
business in the State of New Jersey, to issue a twenty-five thousand
($25,000.00) dollar non-cancellable performance bond to
guarantee performance of the contract by the successful bidder
during the term of the license.
5. A certificate by an insurance company licensed to transact business
in the State of New Jersey agreeing to issue an annual noncancellable
comprehensive general liability insurance policy
(including contractual and products liability) in the minimum
amount of five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars per person
and one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars per occurrence for bodily
injury and two hundred fifty thousand ($250,000.00) dollars for
property damage.
6. Any alarm panel licensee or retransmission fire alarm register
licensee may not charge a service connection fee to a subscriber
who is already connected to the panel or register when a license
contract with the Township is executed. Connection fees may be
charged up to the limit of the bid to any one who subscribes after
the license contract is executed with the Township.
e. Award of License. The Township Committee reserves the right to reject
any and all bids, to waive informalities and technical defects therein
and to award a license and contract to the person whose bid is most
advantageous to both the permittees and the Township.
f. Remittance to Township. The contract shall provide that the licensee
shall remit to the Township of Millburn annually, not later than the
ninetieth (90th) day after the anniversary date of the execution of the
original contract, a sum equivalent to fifteen (15%) percent of the gross
revenues payable to the licensee by permittees in the Township
(inclusive of the amounts, if any, payable to the licensee for business
conducted as a permittee). The contract shall further provide that the
books and accounts of the licensee shall be open to inspection by the
Township Auditor or other duly designated representatives of the
Township for the purpose of verifying the amount due to the Township
under this provision.
g. Term of License. The licensee's obligation to maintain and operate the
alarm panel shall continue until the expiration date or earlier
termination of the license at which time the licensee shall cooperate in
the transfer of the operation to the successor licensee so that there will
be no interruption in the protection of the permittees. Except for prior
revocation on thirty (30) days' written notice by the Township in event
of default by the licensee or in the event the Township cancels the
license, the term of the license shall be for a period of three (3) years.
§ 4-1.6 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.6
AO:86
§ 4-1.7. through § 4-1.9. (Reserved)
§ 4-1.10. Permit Required for Private Alarm System. [1967 Code
§ 8B-3-1; Ord. No. 33-79, § 1]
No person shall install, maintain, use, or cause or permit to be used any
private alarm system within the Township unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief of the Township in accordance
with the provisions of this section. No person shall use a private alarm
system during any period when the permit therefor has expired or is
suspended.
§ 4-1.11. Application for Permit for Private Alarm System. [1967
Code § 8B-3-2; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1]
Any person desiring to use a private alarm system upon improved property
owned or occupied by such person shall submit a written application to the
Chief of Police for a permit to connect such system to the alarm panel or
to the Fire Chief for a permit to connect such system to the alarm register.
The application shall be on forms to be furnished by the Chief of Police and
Fire Chief which shall require the following information over the signature
of the applicant;
h. Indemnification of Township. The licensee shall assume all liability and
shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the Township of Millburn,
its officers, agents and employees for or on account of any acts or
omissions directly or indirectly related to the installation, operation or
maintenance of the alarm panel.
i. Disconnections from Panel. The licensee shall notify the Chief of Police
or his authorized representatives in writing three (3) days prior to
disconnecting any private alarm system from the alarm panel.
j. Installation of Annunciator Panel. The licensee shall install an
annunciator panel having a minimum of nine hundred ninety-nine (999)
zones, which panel shall be approved by the Underwriters Laboratories.
k. Renewals of License. Renewals of the license or award of new licenses
after expiration or cancellation shall be accomplished by following the
procedure of this section.
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
b. The location of the property to be served.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the company which will
furnish and maintain the private alarm system.
d. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty
private alarm system at any time when no one is present on the
property served by the system.
§ 4-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.11
AO:87
§ 4-1.12. Fees Required for Private Alarm System. [1967 Code
§ 8B-3-3; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1; Ord. No. 16-88 § 1; Ord. No. 21-94 § 3]
§ 4-1.13. Investigation and Issuance of Permit. [1967 Code
§ 8B-3-4; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1]
The Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall issue a permit for a private alarm
system unless they find that the system covered by the application does
not meet applicable standards. Whenever the Chief of Police and Fire Chief
e. The particular type of private alarm system for which the permit is
sought.
f. An agreement to release the Township, its officers, agents and
employees, from any and all liability or damages which may flow or
result from any and all actions of the Township, its agents, servants or
employees, and, further, to indemnify and save harmless the Township
of Millburn, its officers, agents and employees, for or on account of any
acts of omissions directly or indirectly related to the installation,
operation or maintenance of the alarm panel and alarm register and the
connection of the applicant's private alarm system thereto.
g. Consent to inspection of the premises on which the private alarm
system is installed at reasonable hours by the Chief of Police and/or Fire
chief, or their designated representatives.
a. To the Township. At the time an application is submitted and by January
15th of each year as long as the permit is in force, the permittee shall
pay to the Township of Millburn an annual fee for the privilege of
connection to the panel or register in the amount of forty ($40.00)
dollars.
b. To the Licensee. The permittee shall pay to the licensee a connection
fee and a monthly service charge not in excess of the amounts stated in
the licensee's bid.
c. No Proration Delinquent Fees. Any permit issued between January 1
and October 15 shall require the same fees, no portion of which shall be
prorated, but these fees shall be refunded to the applicant in the event a
permit is not issued. Any permit issued between October 15 and
December 31 shall be valid until December 31 of the following year. If
the permittee shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the permittee's
obligation to pay the annual fee, connection fee or monthly charge to
the Township and/or licensee, and shall remain in such default for thirty
(30) days, the Chief of Police and/or Fire Chief or their designated
representatives are authorized, on five (5) days' notice to such
permittee, to disconnect the permittee's alarm system from the panel or
register. In such event, the alarm system shall not be reconnected
except upon payment of all arrearages as well as the renewal fees,
which shall be the same as the initial fees.
§ 4-1.11 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.13
AO:88
shall refuse to issue a permit, they shall advise the applicant in writing of
the reason or reasons for refusal.
§ 4-1.14. Expiration of Permit. [1967 Code § 8B-3-5; Ord. No. 33-79,
§ 1]
Every permit issued for a private alarm system shall expire on December
21 of the year in which it was issued, with the exception of those issued
between October 15 and December 31 which shall be valid until December
31 of the following year.
§ 4-1.15. Terms and Conditions of Permit. [1967 Code § 8B-3-6; Ord.
No. 33-79 § 1]
All permits for a private alarm system shall be issued upon the following
terms and conditions:
§ 4-1.16. Suspension of Permit. [1967 Code § 8B-3-7; Ord. 33-79
§ 1]
Any permit issued for a private alarm system may be suspended by the Chief
of Police of Fire Chief if it shall appear that:
a. A permit shall be issued for each separate improved property, store,
building or other facility, and no permit shall be transferred or assigned
in any manner.
b. If required, an applicant shall furnish complete information and
specifications for the system. Such information shall include specific
data relating to testing procedures and the prevention of false alarm.
c. Any private alarm system connected directly to the alarm panel or
alarm register shall have a voltage compatible therewith.
d. Each person or separate business entity shall have a single permit. If
the alarm covers an area of more than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet unless waived by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief, the applicant
shall provide an annunciator mechanism at a place approved by the
Chief of Police or Fire Chief indicating the location of the emergency.
e. Every permit shall be subject to rules and standards which may be
promulgated by the Chief of Police with respect to private alarm
systems. Such rules shall be in writing and shall be given to each
permittee at the time of issuance or renewal of any permit or at the time
of promulgation or amendment.
a. The permittee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit or has failed to comply with rules and standards promulgated by
the Chief of Police with respect to private alarm systems;
b. The permittee or his agents knowingly installed or maintained a faulty
private alarm system; or
§ 4-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.16
AO:89
§ 4-1.17. Tape Dialer Systems. [1967 Code § 8B-3-8; Ord. No. 33-79
§ 1; Ord. No. 16-88 § 2]
c. The permittee or his agents failed to comply with a request by the Chief
of Police or Fire Chief to render necessary services to a faulty private
alarm system within eight (8) hours after such request is made or failed
to disconnect such system within such period and until such system has
been repaired.
Three (3) false alarms within any calendar year shall constitute prima facie
evidence that a private alarm system is faulty and is in violation of this chapter.
In the case of false alarm any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police or Fire Department. In addition, in the case of
false alarms the Chief of Police and/or Fire Chief shall cause an investigation
to be made and keep a record of said alarms on file. If in the event of a false
alarm the Police Department or Fire Department are advised of the name,
address, preassigned code number, and that the alarm is false before Police or
Fire vehicles or personnel arrive at the scene, the false alarm may not, in the
discretion of the Police or Fire Chief or their designee, be deemed to be a false
alarm. If in the event of the testing of a private alarm system or local alarm the
Police or Fire Department receive prior notice of at least five (5) minutes before
each test, the alarm will not be deemed a false alarm.
Where the investigation of the Police and/or Fire Department discloses
continued abuse of the privilege of connection to the alarm panel or register
and a disregard by the permittee to take remedial steps to avoid false alarms,
the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief may suspend the permit for a limited or
permanent time provided that no such permit shall be revoked or suspended
without giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause before the Police
or Fire Chief why such action should not be taken. A suspension shall be
terminated by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief when he is satisfied that the
conditions stated in the notice of suspension have been corrected.
a. Prohibition Against New Tape Dialer Systems No application for initial
permits shall be filed or accepted for any tape dialer system. This
prohibition against new tape dialer systems shall have no effect upon
the renewal of a permit for any such system as to which an initial permit
has previously been issued to the same person.
b. Regulations on Renewal of Tape Dialer Permit. No renewal permit for a
tape dialer system shall be issued unless the system complies with the
other provisions of this section and is also:
1. Approved by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief after approval thereof
by the Bell Atlantic—New Jersey and the performance of a test
alarm conducted by or on behalf of the applicant.
2. Coded to dial a special number which shall be provided by the Chief
of Police or Fire Chief; no tape dialer system shall be coded to dial
the number of the general Police switchboard of the Township.
§ 4-1.16 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.17
AO:90
3. Coded to notify a relative, neighbor, or other third party who shall
be named in the registration required by this section.
4. Capable of being disconnected by the owner to permit a call to the
Police switchboard in the event that a false alarm occurs.
5. Worded in an intelligible format approved by the Chief of Police or
Fire Chief and complying with the following requirements:
(a) No message shall be transmitted more than three (3) times as a
result of a single stimulus of the mechanism.
(b) Messages shall not exceed fifteen (15) seconds and the time
gap between delivery shall be approximately ten (10) seconds.
(c) The messages shall contain in the following order (a) the alarm
number provided by the Police Department, (b) the name of the
resident or business and (c) the street address of the premises
alarmed.
6. Adjusted so as to suppress false indications and not to be actuated
by impulses due to pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes
of light, wind, noises, rattling, or vibration of doors or windows or
other forces unrelated to general alarms.
7. Provided with an automatic line seizure device in the event the line
is busy with an incoming or outgoing call.
c. Fees for Renewal of Tape Dialer Permit. The permittee of each tape
dialer system shall pay to the Township an annual fee of twelve ($12.00)
dollars to cover the cost of registration and testing, and to amortize the
cost of the special telephone line or lines required in the law
enforcement building and Fire Department along with ancillary tape
devices necessitated by these systems. If any permittee shall fail,
neglect or refuse to pay the annual fee and shall remain in such default
for thirty (30) days, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or designated
representative is authorized, on five (5) days' notice to such permittee,
to disconnect the permittee's alarm system.
d. Terms and Conditions of Renewal of Tape Dialer Permit.
1. If any person has a tape dialer system in existence at the time of the
passage of this section, he shall have thirty (30) days in which to reprogram
the equipment to comply with the terms of this section
and in which to pay the annual fee. Any person failing to comply
therewith shall be in violation of this section.
2. If any type dialer system shall hereafter be found to be dialing the
general Police or Fire Headquarters number rather than the special
telephone number reserved for tape dialers, the occupant of the
building or other person in whose name the telephone is listed shall
be sent a notice in writing by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief
requiring compliance with the terms of this section. If the occupant
§ 4-1.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.17
AO:91
§ 4-1.18. Fee for Alarm Master Box. [Ord. No. 21-94 § 4]
The line maintenance fee for an alarm master box shall be forty-eight
($48.00) dollars per year, except that there shall be no fee for alarm master
boxes in governmental facilities.
§ 4-1.19. through § 4-1.21. (Reserved)
§ 4-1.22. Registration of Local Alarms. [1967 Code § 8B-4-1; Ord.
No. 33-79 § 1]
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a local alarm within the
Township shall notify the Chief of Police of such device by completing and
filing with the Chief of Police a form to be furnished by the Chief of Police
providing for the following information:
§ 4-1.23. Proper Maintenance of Private Alarm Systems or Local
Alarms. [1967 Code § 8B-5-1; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1]
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a private alarm system or
warning device to serve an improved property within the Township shall
maintain it in good repair and proper working condition, shall meet the
or telephone subscriber shall fail within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the notice to comply, he shall be in violation of this
section.
3. Effective January 1, 1990, the tape dialer system of alarm will not
be a permitted alarm system with the Township of Millburn.
a. The name, address and telephone number of the owner or occupant of
the property served by the warning device.
b. The location of the property served and the location of the device on the
property.
c. The name, address and telephone number of any company installing of
maintaining the warning device.
d. The type of device.
e. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty
local alarm at any time when no one is present on the property served
by the local alarm.
Owner of local alarms upon registration shall be deemed as having consented
to inspection of the premises in which the alarm devices are installed at
reasonable hours by the Chief of Police and/or Fire Chief, or their designated
representatives. Owner of local alarms shall be governed by the false alarm
procedure set forth in subsection 4-1.16. All local alarms shall be equipped with
a time relay or battery to limit the sounding of alarms to thirty (30) minutes or
less.
§ 4-1.17 MILLBURN CODE § 4-1.23
AO:92
standards which may be promulgated by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief to
prevent faulty systems or devices, and shall promptly correct or disconnect
any faulty system or device upon notice from the Chief of Police or Fire
Chief that the system or device is sounding an inordinate number of false
alarms.
§ 4-1.24. Sounding Device Cut Off After Fifteen Minutes; Minimum
Fine. [1967 Code § 8B-5-2; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1; Ord. No. 16-88 § 3;
Ord. No. 21-94 § 5]
Every sounding warning device shall be equipped with a cut-off mechanism
which will terminate the sound after fifteen (15) minutes. If the sound
does not terminate after fifteen (15) minutes, the Police shall have the
right to use minimal necessary force to disconnect the sounding device.
The minimum fine for violation of this section shall be twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars.
§ 4-1.25. Appeals. [1967 Code § 8B-5-3; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or Fire Chief in
the issuance, denial or suspension of a permit for a private alarm system
or with respect to the installation, operation or maintenance of any alarm
equipment shall have the right of appeal to the Township Business
Administrator. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Administrator,
within fourteen (14) days after the notice of the action complained or has
been mailed to the person's last known address, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for appeal. The Administrator shall set a time and
place for the hearing of the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given
to the appellant by certified mail to his/her last known address at least five
(5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of the Chief of
Police or Fire Chief shall be affirmed, modified or reversed, and the reasons
therefor shall be set forth in a letter to the applicant.
§ 4-1.26. Disclaimer of Responsibility. [1967 Code § 8B-5-4; Ord.
No. 33-79 § 1]
The Township and the Township Police and Fire Departments shall not
assume any responsibility whatsoever to any licensee, permittee or other
person with respect to the adequacy, operation or maintenance of the
alarm panel, alarm register or any private alarm system or warning device.
No action taken by either the Township or the Township's Police or Fire
Departments pursuant to the provisions of this section shall create any
liability upon either the Township or the Township's Police or Fire
Departments by reason of any failure of any private alarm system or
warning device, any failure to respond to any private alarm system or
warning device. Every permittee who accepts a permit for a private alarm
system or registers a warning device agrees to hold and save harmless the
Township and its Police and Fire Departments, their agents and employees
from any liability whatsoever in connection with the alarm system or
warning device. The alarm panel and register and allied equipment shall
§ 4-1.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.26
AO:93
be maintained at the will of the Township Committee and are subject
to termination at any time by cancellation of the system by resolution
duly adopted by the Township Committee. Any individual permit issued
hereunder may be revoked at will by the Township Committee upon
recommendation of the Business Administrator provided that thirty (30)
days' notice is given in writing to the permittee.
§ 4-1.27. Penalties. [1967 Code § 8B-5-5; Ord. No. 33-79 § 1; Ord.
No. 16-88 § 4; Ord. No. 23-89 § 1]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
The following shall be the minimum fine for either a residential property or
a business property within a period of one (1) calendar year:
Upon sixth false alarm $50.00
Upon seventh false alarm $75.00
Upon eighth and each false alarm
thereafter
$100.00
The alarm panel and register and allied equipment shall be maintained
at the will of the Township Committee and are subject to termination
at any time by cancellation of the system by resolution duly adopted by
the Township Committee. Any individual permit issued hereunder may be
revoked at will by the Township Committee upon recommendation of the
Business Administrator, provided that thirty (30) days' notice is given in
writing to the permittee.
§ 4-2. RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
§ 4-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
The following terms when used in this Section shall have the meaning
indicated:
ANTICIPATED MUNICIPAL EXPENSES — Means the cost of processing
an application for a Right-of-Way Permit, including, but not limited to, all
professional fees such as engineer and attorney costs to the Township.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — Means the Governing Body of the Township of
Millburn.
TOWNSHIP NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Means the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4,
OR-1, OR-2, OR-3, CMO, CD and CE, zones as designated in Article 6 of the
Township of Millburn Development Regulations.
TOWNSHIP RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Means the R-O, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6,
R-7, and R-8, of the Township of Millburn Development Regulations.
CABINET — Means a small box-like or rectangular structure used to
facilitate utility or wireless service from within the Municipal Right-of-Way.
§ 4-1.26 MILLBURN CODE § 4-2.1
AO:94
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — Means the part of the electric
system, after the transmission system, that is dedicated to delivering
electric energy to an end user.
EXISTING POLE — Means a pole that is in lawful existence within the
Municipal Right-of-Way.
GROUND LEVEL CABINET — Means a Cabinet that is not attached to an
Existing Pole and is touching the ground.
MUNICIPAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means the surface of, and the space above
or below, any public street, road, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk,
alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, and the like, held by the Township as an
easement or in fee simple ownership. This term also includes any other
area that is determined by the Township to be a right-of-way in which the
Township may allow the installation of Poles, Cabinets and Antennas, as well
as rights-of-way held by the County of Essex where the Township's approval
is required for the use of same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6.
POLE — Means a long, slender, rounded support structure constructed of
wood or metal located in the municipal right-of-way.
POLE MOUNTED ANTENNA — Means a device that is attached to a Pole
and used to transmit radio or microwave signals and shall include, but
not be limited to, small cell equipment and transmission media such as
femtocells, picocells, microcells, and outside distributed antenna systems.
POLE MOUNTED CABINET — Means a Cabinet that is proposed to be
placed on an Existing Pole or Proposed Pole.
PROPOSED POLE — Means a Pole that is proposed to be placed in the
Municipal Right-of-Way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY AGREEMENT — Shall mean an agreement that sets forth
the terms and conditions for use of the Municipal Right-of-Way and includes,
but is not limited to, municipal franchise agreements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT — Means an approval from the Township
Committee setting forth applicant's compliance with the requirements of
this section.
SURROUNDING STREETSCAPE — Means Existing Poles within the same
right-of-way which are located within five hundred (500) feet of the
Proposed Pole.
UTILITIES REGULATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES — Means
companies subject to regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
under Chapter 48 of the Revised Statutes.
UTILITY SERVICE — Means electric, telephone or cable service.
§ 4-2.2. Pole Mounted Antennas, Access to Right-of-Way, Right-of-
Way Agreements. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
a. No person shall operate or place any type of Pole Mounted Antenna
within the Municipal Right-of-Way without first entering into a Right-of-
§ 4-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.2
AO:95
§ 4-2.3. Application to Utilities Regulated by the Board of Public
Utilities, Other Entities. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
§ 4-2.4. Right-of-Way Permits, Siting Standards for Poles, Antennas
and Cabinets in the Right-of-Way. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
Way Agreement with the Township pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
b. The terms of said Right-of-Way Agreement shall include:
1. A term not to exceed fifteen (15) years;
2. Reasonable insurance requirements;
3. A fine for unauthorized installations;
4. A reference to the siting standards set forth in this Section; and
5. Any other items which may be reasonably required.
a. Notwithstanding any franchise or Right-of-Way Agreement to the
contrary, all facilities proposed to be placed within the Municipal Rightof-
Way by a Utility Regulated by the Board of Public Utilities and all
other entities lawfully within the Municipal Right-of-Way shall be
subject to the standards and procedures set forth in this section and
shall require Right-of-Way Permits for the siting of Poles, Antennas and
Cabinets in the Municipal Right-of-Way.
a. No Pole, Antenna or Cabinet shall be installed within the Municipal
Right-of-Way without the issuance of a Right-of-Way Permit.
b. Pole Siting Standards.
1. Height. No Proposed Pole shall be taller than thirty-five (35) feet or
one hundred ten (110%) percent of the height of Poles in the
Surrounding Streetscape, whichever is higher.
2. Distance from curb line. No Proposed Pole shall be farther than
eighteen (18) inches from the curb line.
3. Location, Safety and Aesthetics. No Proposed Pole shall be erected
in the Right-of-Way unless it:
(a) Is replacing an Existing Pole; or
(b) Approved pursuant to a land development application by either
the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board pursuant to
a land use application; or
(c) Located on the opposite side of the street from the Electric
Distribution System; and
§ 4-2.2 MILLBURN CODE § 4-2.4
AO:96
(d) For sites in the Residential Zones is a minimum of two hundred
(200) linear feet from any other Existing Pole or Proposed Pole
along the same side of the street, or for sites in the Non-
Residential Zones is a minimum of one hundred (100) linear
feet from any other Existing Pole or Proposed Pole along the
same side of the street; and
(e) Is not located in an area with underground utilities; and
(f) Does not inhibit any existing sight triangles or sight distances;
and
(g) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and re-pass
across, along and through the Right-of-Way; and
(h) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties.
c. Ground Level Cabinet Siting Standards.
1. Ground Level Cabinets are prohibited in the Municipal Right-of-
Way in the Residential Zones and any future residential zones.
2. Ground Level Cabinets are permitted in the Non-Residential Zones
provided that such Ground Level Cabinet:
(a) Is less than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted so as to blend in compatibly with its
background and so as to minimize its visual impact on
surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit any existing sight triangles or sight distance;
and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across,
along and through the Municipal Right-of-Way.
d. Pole Mounted Antenna and Pole Mounted Cabinet Siting Standards.
1. Pole Mounted Antennas are permitted on Existing Poles, provided
that each Pole Mounted Antenna:
(a) Does not exceed three (3) cubic feet in volume; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit any sight triangles or sight distance; and
§ 4-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.4
AO:97
§ 4-2.5. Application Process. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across,
along and through the Municipal Right-of-Way.
2. Pole Mounted Cabinets are permitted on Existing Poles in all
Residential Zones and Non-Residential Zones provided that each
Pole Mounted Cabinet:
(a) Does not exceed sixteen (16) cubic feet; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit any sight triangles or sight distance; and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the Municipal Right-of-Way.
3. The Township may also require that an applicant provide a
certification from a Licensed Professional Engineer attesting to the
structural integrity of any Pole Mounted Antenna or Pole Mounted
Cabinet.
a. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to making a formal application with the
Township for use of the Municipal Right-of-Way, all applicants are
advised to schedule a meeting with the Township Engineer to review
the scope of the applicant's proposal.
b. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove
every Right-of-Way Permit application based on the recommendations
provided to it pursuant to paragraphs e and f below.
c. All applications made under this section shall be expedited so as to
comply with the shot clocks set forth in the FCC Order entitled
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to
Infrastructure Investment," WT Docket No. 17-79; "Accelerating
Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to
Infrastructure Investment," WC Docket No. 17-84.
d. Every application made pursuant to this section must include a signed
and sealed survey prepared by a New Jersey Licensed Professional
Land Surveyor demonstrating that any Proposed Pole and/or Proposed
Ground Level Cabinet is located within the Municipal Right-of-Way. Any
such application which does not include such a survey shall
immediately be deemed incomplete.
e. New Poles and Ground Level Cabinets.
1. The Planning Board shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(B)(3),
review applications for the placement of New Poles and Ground
§ 4-2.4 MILLBURN CODE § 4-2.5
AO:98
§ 4-2.6. Right-of-Way Permit Fees and Deposits Towards Anticipated
Municipal Expenses. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
Level Cabinets within the Municipal Right-of-Way and advise the
Township Committee of its recommendation to approve or
disapprove same.
(a) If the Planning Board recommends the disapproval of a Rightof-
Way Permit, it shall set forth the factual basis for such a
disapproval in writing.
f. Pole Mounted Antenna and Pole Mounted Cabinets.
1. The Township Engineer shall review applications to place Pole
Mounted Antenna and Pole Mounted Cabinets within the Municipal
Right-of-Way and advise the Township Committee of his or her
recommendation to approve or disapprove same.
(a) If the Township Engineer recommends the disapproval of a
Right-of-Way Permit, he or she shall set forth the factual basis
for such a disapproval in writing.
g. If the Township Committee denies any application for a Right-of-Way
Permit under this section, it shall do so in writing and set forth the
factual basis for the denial.
h. Waiver. The Township Committee may waive any siting standard set
forth in Section 4-2.5 where the applicant demonstrates that the strict
enforcement of said standard:
1. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting any interstate or
intrastate telecommunications service pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§ 253(a); or
2. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless
service pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II); or
3. Will violate any requirement set forth in the FCC Order entitled
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WT Docket No. 17-79;
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WC Docket No. 17-84; or
4. Will prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, the ability of an
entity to provide Utility Service to any prospective customer within
the Township .
a. Every Right-of-Way Permit application shall include a Right-of-Way
Permit Fee in the following amounts:
1. One (1) to five (5) sites - $500.00
2. Each additional site - $100.00
§ 4-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.6
AO:99
§ 4-2.7. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. No. 2522-18]
§ 4-3. AMUSEMENTS.
For State law authorizing the Township to license and regulate amusement
places and businesses, see N.J.S.A. § 40:52-1(f).
PART I. PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS
§ 4-3.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 4-1-1]
As used in this section:
b. Deposit Towards Anticipated Municipal Expenses.
1. In addition to the Right-of-Way Permit Fee, the Township Engineer
may, in his or her sole discretion, require the posting of a two
thousand dollar ($2,000.00) Deposit Towards Anticipated
Municipal Expenses related to an application made pursuant to this
Article.
2. Any applicant's Deposit Towards Anticipated Municipal Expenses
shall be placed in an escrow account. If said deposit contains
insufficient funds to enable the Township to perform its review, the
Township's Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall provide
applicant with a notice of insufficient balance. In order for review
to continue, the applicant shall, within ten (10) days of said notice,
post a deposit to the account in an amount to be mutually agreed
upon.
3. The Township's Chief Financial Officer shall, upon request by the
applicant, after a final decision has been made by the Township
Committee regarding the pending Right-of-Way Permit application,
refund any unused balance from the applicant's Deposit Towards
Anticipated Municipal Expenses.
a. Any Right-of-Way Permit approved pursuant to this section does not
relieve the applicant from receiving consent from the owner of the land
above which an applicant's facility may be located as may be required
by New Jersey law.
b. In addition to receiving a Right-of-Way Permit, an applicant must also
receive all necessary road opening permits, construction permits and
any other requirement set forth in the "Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Millburn", or New Jersey statute.
c. The Township's consent for use of County Roads, as required pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6, shall take the form of a Right-of-Way Permit subject
to the standards and application process set forth in this section. No
such applicant shall be required to enter into a Right-of-Way Agreement
with the Township.
§ 4-2.6 MILLBURN CODE § 4-3.1
AO:100
PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS — Shall mean and include travelling or other shows,
circuses, public plays, public dances, concerts, theatrical performances,
motion picture shows, street parades and the theatres, showhouses, opera
houses, concert halls, dance halls, grounds or other structures or
equipment wherein or whereon the same may be produced, shown or
participated in.
§ 4-3.2. License Required; Exceptions. [1967 Code § 4-1-2]
Except as provided in this section, no public exhibition as defined in
subsection 4-3.1 shall be produced, presented or participated in within the
Township unless a license shall have been duly issued and shall be in effect
authorizing the same. No license shall be required for any public exhibition
given under the direction of the Board of Education of the Township or
the Board of Recreation Commissioners thereof; nor shall any license be
required for any public exhibition, other than a circus or a carnival, given
by and for the sole benefit of a religious or charitable organization or school
organized and conducted not for pecuniary profit.
§ 4-3.3. Issuance. [1967 Code § 4-1-3]
The licenses required by this section shall be issued by the Township Clerk.
Such licenses shall be issued only for such public exhibitions as shall not
appear to be likely to affect injuriously public health, safety or welfare.
§ 4-3.4. Classes. [1967 Code § 4-1-4]
Licenses under this section shall be of two (2) classes, as follows: Class A
and Class B.
Class A licenses shall authorize the licensee to conduct or participate in the
conduct of the character of public exhibition for which the same shall issue
as part of the regular business of the licensee substantially continuously, at
or in an established place or premises, shall expire on December 31 next
ensuing the issuance thereof, and may be renewed from year to year upon
payment of a fee similar in amount to that required for the original issuance
thereof and for similar purposes.
Class B licenses shall entitle the licensee to conduct or produce only the
number of public exhibitions for which the same shall have been applied and
issued. Not more than three (3) exhibitions in any one (1) month nor more
than twelve (12) in any calendar year shall be given or produced under a
class B license.
§ 4-3.5. Fees. [1967 Code § 4-1-5; New]
The fees for licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall be as
follows:
a. For all theatres, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a class A
license, and ten dollars ($10.00) for a class B license.
§ 4-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.5
AO:101
§ 4-3.6. Suspension or Revocation. [1967 Code § 4-1-6]
Any license issued pursuant to this section, after issuance may be
suspended or revoked by the issuing authority, upon affording the licensee
an opportunity to be heard by the Township Committee when it has been
made to appear that the public exhibition or the place or premises in or on
which the same is or will be conducted thereunder is or will be injurious to
public health, safety, or welfare.
§ 4-3.7. Inspection of Equipment and Premises. [1967 Code § 4-1-7]
The holder of any license issued under the authority of this section shall
permit the inspection within reasonable hours by any department or official
of the Township or of the Board of Health thereof or of the Board of
Adjustment thereof, of the building, buildings, lands, premises and
equipment used or intended to be used by the licensee in connection with
any such public exhibition, as well as the exhibition in the course of the
actual production thereof.
§ 4-3.8. Part I Not to Affect Part II of This Chapter. [1967 Code
§ 4-1-8]
Nothing contained in this Part I shall be deemed to affect nor shall the
subject matter hereof be controlled by the provisions of Part II of this
section.
§ 4-3.9. through § 4-3.19. (Reserved)
PART II. PREMISES UPON WHICH AMUSEMENT AND
RECREATIONAL DEVICES ARE OPERATED
§ 4-3.20. License to Use-for-Profit Required; Exceptions. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-1]
No person shall use, operate or maintain, for pecuniary profit, either to
the owner or tenant thereof, any lands, building, structure or premises in
the Township, to which members of the public at large are expressly or
implicitly invited, upon, in or appurtenant to which is maintained, operated
or kept for use by persons invited thereto, any amusement or recreational
device, instrumentality or equipment in the operation or use of which any
such invitee is expected, permittee or required to participate, unless a
license, as hereinafter provided, shall have been duly issued and remain
in force and effect therefor; provided, however, that no license or payment
b. For circuses and carnivals, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day,
irrespective of whether the license applied for is a class A or class B
license.
c. For all others, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a class A license or a
class B license.
§ 4-3.5 MILLBURN CODE § 4-3.20
AO:102
of fee therefor shall be required for amusement or recreational devices,
instrumentalities or equipment owned, maintained or used by the Millburn
Board of Recreational Commissioners or by any college, school, academy,
seminary, church or other educational, charitable or religious organization,
association or corporation, in, upon, appurtenant to or in connection with
lands, buildings, or other premises while actually being used for and
devoted to educational, charitable, or religious purposes, where any charge
or charges made for, or the pecuniary avails from the use of such devices,
instrumentalities or equipment shall be wholly applied to educational,
charitable or religious purposes.
§ 4-3.21. Application for License for Premises Containing
Amusement Devices. [1967 Code § 4-2-2; Ord. No. 3-82 § 1]
Applications for licenses as provided in subsection 4-3.20 shall be filed with
the Township Clerk upon forms to be provided by the Township and every
such application shall set forth:
a. Date of application.
b. Name and address of applicant (if a corporation, the State of its
incorporation, location of principal office in New Jersey and name and
address of the person in New Jersey upon whom service of process or
notice against or to such corporation shall be deemed sufficient), and
the trade name and address of the location at which the device,
instrumentality or equipment shall be operated.
c. Name of each amusement or recreational device, instrumentality or
equipment, together with brief description thereof and of the manner of
operation of the same, kept, maintained or used or intended to be kept,
maintained or used in the premises for which the license applied for is
desired; also the name and address of the manufacturer, distributor,
owner, lessor and lessee of each of the devices, instrumentalities and
equipment.
d. Location, character and nature of any business other than that of
providing, maintaining and operating amusement and recreational
devices, instrumentalities and equipment being or intended to be
conducted upon the same premises or any part thereof.
e. Nature and extent of applicant's interest or estate in the building or
premises for which the license is applied for and in each of the devices,
instrumentalities and equipment to be provided, maintained and
operated therein.
f. Jurisdiction, court and date of every conviction of applicant of crime
and nature of crime of which convicted.
g. Schedule of rates of charge which applicant intends to make for the use
of the devices, instrumentalities and equipment aforesaid and which
the rates shall not be exceeded.
§ 4-3.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.21
AO:103
§ 4-3.22. Issuance or Denial Generally; Fee; Expiration Date. [1967
Code § 4-2-3; Ord. No. 24-82 § 1; Ord. No. 19-83 § 1]
For every parcel of land, building, structure, premises or portion thereof
used or intended to be used, maintained or operated as a place or means
of maintaining, housing, or otherwise providing any amusement or
recreational device, equipment or facilities as hereinbefore described, a
license shall be required which shall be issued by the Township Clerk. For
every such license there shall be a fee or fees paid to the Township as
follows:
h. Location of each amusement or recreational device, instrumentality or
equipment within the designated premises.
i. Number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses, where applicable.
j. Name and address of the entity from whom each device is to be
purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
k. Terms of any and all agreements governing the acquisition, installation
and rental of all such devices.
l. Information indicating whether the distributor of the device, any
applicant, and any lessee, owner or operator of the premises in which
the device is to be located has ever been convicted of any crime or
found guilty of the violation of any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance
pertaining to gambling or gaming.
m. Information concerning whether or not the applicant has been
previously licensed by any public or governmental authority to maintain
recreational or amusement devices or has previously applied for such a
license, and whether or not such a license has been denied, revoked, or
suspended, and the reason therefor.
n. The above-named applicant (by its president, if a corporation) vouches
for the truth and recognizes the materiality of all of the statements and
representations made in this application and undertakes that the
amusement and recreational devices, instrumentalities and equipment
hereinbefore described and only those shall be kept, used and operated
upon the premises for which license is hereby applied for, and that each
of such devices, instrumentalities and equipment is constructed and
designed and shall be kept and used in accordance with the laws of the
State and the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the
Township.
Such application shall be signed and sworn to by each individual
applicant and, if applicant is a corporation, by an executive officer
thereof thereunto duly authorized, before an officer authorized by the
laws of the State to administer an oath.
§ 4-3.21 MILLBURN CODE § 4-3.22
AO:104
Equipment, Device or Facility License Fee
1—5 $250.00 each
6—10 $150.00 each
11 or more $100.00 each
§ 4-3.23. Investigation of Applicant and Location of Devices;
Issuance Denied for Commission of Crimes, etc. [1967 Code § 4-2-4;
Ord. No. 3-82 § 2; Ord. No. 24-82 § 2]
The Township Clerk shall transmit one (1) copy of the application provided
for in subsection 4-3.21 to each of the following Township Officials who shall
cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and a report thereon to
be made to the Township Clerk:
§ 4-3.24. Display of License. [1967 Code § 4-2-5]
Every license issued pursuant to this section shall, while in effect, be kept
conspicuously displayed in or on the portion of the licensed premises for
which it was issued in proximity to the amusement and recreational devices,
instrumentalities and equipment therein or thereon maintained, operated
or used.
§ 4-3.25. Revocation of License. [1967 Code § 4-2-6; New]
The alteration, maintenance or use of any amusement or recreational
device, instrumentality or equipment in or on any premises licensed
pursuant to this section, in violation of the provisions of this section or
of any law of the State or of the United States shall ipso facto work a
revocation of such license. Any license issued pursuant to this section may
be revoked by the Township Committee, upon affording to the licensee an
a. The Chief of Police, who shall determine whether or not the applicant
has ever been convicted of a crime or a violation of any provision of this
section.
b. The Fire Subcode Official, who shall review the proposed location and
arrangement of the devices within the designated premises for
purposes of insuring fire safety.
c. The Construction Official, who shall determine whether or not the
premises are in compliance with the construction regulations in effect
in the Township.
d. The Zoning Official, who shall determine whether or not the premises
are in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
No license shall be issued to any applicant who shall have been
convicted of a crime or of the violation of any provision of this section
or where the premises are not safe from fire or do not comply with the
Construction Regulations or Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
§ 4-3.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.25
AO:105
opportunity to be heard, whenever, in the exercise of its sound discretion,
the public welfare may so require. Such revocation may occur for the
following reasons, among others:
§ 4-3.26. Offering Prizes or Premiums Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-8]
No prize, premium or reward shall be offered, promised or given by or
for the account of the applicant for any license pursuant to this section
for success in playing or operating any amusement or recreational device,
instrumentality or equipment in the premises or portion thereof for which
such license shall have been issued.
§ 4-3.27. Use of Gambling Devices Not Authorized. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-10]
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to, legalize
or authorize the possession, sale, purchase, use or operation of any "slot
machine" or similar or gaming or gambling device not or hereafter
prohibited by the State or the United States law; nor shall any amusement
device be used for or devoted to gambling.
§ 4-3.28. Hours of Operation of Devices, etc. [1967 Code § 4-2-11;
Ord. No. 3-82 § 4]
Licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
permit the operation in or on the premises licensed of any amusement and
recreational devices, instrumentalities and equipment between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., unless an Alcoholic Beverage Control license
has also been issued for the premises in which case the hours of operation
for the A.B.C. license shall be the hours of operation for the amusement or
recreational device.
§ 4-3.29. Inspections of Premises. [1967 Code § 4-2-12]
The members of the Police Department shall be entitled and it shall be their
duty to inspect all premises licensed pursuant to this section.
a. Gambling on the premises;
b. False or incorrect material on the application or information furnished
by the applicant;
c. Failure to maintain good and safe conduct on the premises;
d. Violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey, or this or other
ordinances of the Township;
e. The presence of the machines resulting in gambling, obscene and loud
language disturbing to the public or to other patrons of the premises,
creating of a nuisance, excessive noise, litter or breach of the peace by
the patrons.
§ 4-3.25 MILLBURN CODE § 4-3.30
AO:106
§ 4-3.30. Alteration of Devices in Violation of Laws. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-13]
No license issued pursuant to this section shall permit the keeping,
maintenance, use or operation of any amusement device which shall have
been made, altered, kept or used, or is designed or intended in violation of
or contrary to any provision of this section or of the laws of the State or of
the United States.
§ 4-3.31. Seizure and Disposal of Devices. [1967 Code § 4-2-14]
Any amusement or recreational device, instrumentality or equipment which
is being maintained or used in violation of the provisions of this section or
of the laws of the State or of the United States, whether located in premises
licensed hereunder or otherwise, shall forthwith be seized and removed by
any member of the Police Department who may discover the same.
Any amusement or recreational device, instrumentality or equipment being
maintained or used in violation of this section, or any State or Federal
law and which shall have been seized as hereinbefore provided shall be
disposed of as the Township Committee, after opportunity to be heard shall
have been given to the owner or bailee therefor, may determine.
§ 4-3.32. Part II Not to Affect Part I of This Section. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-15]
Nothing contained in Part II shall be deemed to affect the provisions of Part
I of this section.
§ 4-3.33. Premises Containing More than Four Devices. [1967 Code
§ 4-2-16; Ord. No. 24-82 § 4; Ord. No. 19-83 § 3]
A license for more than four (4) devices for any one (1) location shall not be
issued unless:
§ 4-4. through § 4-7. (RESERVED)
a. The applicant provides supervisory adult (over eighteen (18) years of
age) employees in the numbers indicated below in paragraph 1, which
employees shall have no substantial duties other than supervision of the
licensed premises and patrons therein. These employees shall be on the
premises at all times during the hours of operation.
1. The number of supervisory employees to be provided shall be as
follows:
(a) One (1) such employee for up to twenty-one (21) devices.
(b) Two (2) such employees for twenty-one (21) or more devices.
§ 4-3.30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8
AO:107
§ 4-8. CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND
PEDDLERS.
PART I. CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS [1967 Code §§ 8-1-1
through 8-1-9, 7-16.63; Ord. No. 6-18-73; Ord. No. 3-84; New;
amended in its entirety 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2526-19]
§ 4-8.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS — Any individual, organization, group,
association, partnership, corporation or any combination of them who, in
person or by representation by one or a group of volunteer or professional
workers, without invitation, calls or applies at homes, dwellings, residences
or business establishments in the Township with the intent or for the
purpose, actual or implied, of soliciting from an occupant or the owner of
any such home, dwelling, residence or business establishment the payment,
contribution or donation of, or undertaking to pay money, the purchase,
sale, acceptance or donation of any goods or orders for the same, or
subscriptions to, or endorsement of, any publication, undertaking, project,
cause, or candidacy, or for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale
a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not he is collecting
advance payment on such sales or services; provided that the term
"canvasser" or "solicitor" shall not be deemed to include any duly accredited
representative of any municipal or governmental authority or agency
thereof, nor any person who, by or under any ordinance of the Township or
law of the state, or of the United States, is licensed or otherwise authorized
to engage in any of the activities hereinbefore enumerated, nor any person
engaged in delivering to any home, dwelling or residence in the Township
goods, wares or merchandise previously ordered or requested by an
occupant or the owner of the premises or in exchange for any such goods,
wares or merchandise, nor any person engaged in making, receiving or
lawfully endeavoring to obtain payment for goods, wares, merchandise or
other property or services sold or rendered to or by any such occupant or
owner.
§ 4-8.2. Permit Required; Term of Permit.
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of canvasser or
solicitor without first having obtained a permit therefor. The permit shall be
issued for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
§ 4-8.3. Commercial Permit Application and Fee.
Every person applying for a commercial permit under this section shall
file with the Township Clerk a sworn application, in writing, on a form
to be furnished by the Township. The form shall contain the following
information:
§ 4-8 MILLBURN CODE § 4-8.3
AO:108
§ 4-8.4. Issuance of Permit.
The Township Clerk shall issue a commercial permit within 20 days after
receipt of a complete commercial permit application and fee per Subsection
4-8.3 hereof. Upon issuance of the permit, the Township Clerk shall provide
the permittee with a copy of the nonsolicitation list per Subsection 4-8.6.
§ 4-8.5. Regulations Governing Canvassing and Soliciting.
a. The name of the applicant. If the applicant will be canvassing or
soliciting on behalf of an organization, then the application shall also
contain the name and address of the organization.
b. The address of the applicant to which all notices and communications
are to be addressed.
c. A copy of a form of photo identification, such as a driver's license,
passport or other similar identification.
d. Payment of an application fee of $25 per applicant for the use of the
Township to defray the cost of processing and issuing the permit.
a. No commercial canvassing or soliciting shall be done except between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
b. Upon going onto any premises in the Township, canvassers and
solicitors shall first examine any notice, as described below, which may
be attached to said property and shall be governed by the statement
contained on any such notice by immediately and peacefully departing
from the premises.
c. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for
any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near
any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract
the attention of the occupant of such a residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engaging in
canvassing or soliciting, as herein defined, in defiance of any notice as
defined below.
d. Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by this
Subsection 4-8.5 shall notify the Township of his or her desire to be
placed on the nonsolicitation list maintained by the Township Clerk and
may also exhibit at the front edge of the property or upon or near the
main entrance door to his or her residence a notice indicating the words
"no solicitors" or "no soliciting." The letters shall be at least one inch in
height, and the notice shall be at least three inches by six inches in size.
e. The permittee shall carry and exhibit his/her permit at all times while
canvassing or soliciting.
f. The permit shall be signed and sealed by the Township Clerk, or
designee, and shall show:
§ 4-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.5
AO:109
§ 4-8.6. Nonsolicitation List.
§ 4-8.7. Unauthorized Canvassing or Soliciting.
No person shall canvass or solicit:
§ 4-8.8. Nonprofit Canvassing or Soliciting.
The requirements of this section shall not apply to any canvassing or
solicitation conducted by any political candidate or a religious, charitable,
civic, political, veteran or fraternal organization or association, service club,
1. The name and address of the permittee, with a copy of the photo
identification produced by the applicant pursuant to Section 4-8.3c;
2. The date of issuance of the permit and the date the permit shall
expire;
3. The kind of goods to be sold or services to be furnished or
performed;
4. The amount of fee paid.
a. The Township Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Township that he or she does not wish for any solicitor or
canvasser to enter upon his or her property for solicitation or
canvassing purposes.
1. To be included on this nonsolicitation list, residents must complete
a form which will be made available by the Township and must
submit the completed form to the Township Clerk.
2. This list shall be available to the general public.
3. No canvasser or solicitor shall enter upon any private property that
is included upon the nonsolicitation list.
4. In the event that a new owner/occupant of a property identified on
the nonsolicitation list desires to have that address removed from
the list, the Township Clerk shall remove the same upon receipt of a
written request from the new owner/occupant.
a. Under any permit issued to him/her as a canvasser or solicitor for any
other person, organization, society, association or corporation for whom
or for which he/she is not, at the time of such canvassing or soliciting, a
duly authorized canvasser or solicitor; or
b. Under any permit issued to him/her as the result of any material
misrepresentation; or
c. Under a permit not issued to him/her.
§ 4-8.5 MILLBURN CODE § 4-8.8
AO:110
or volunteer fire or first aid company, provided that the requirements of
Subsection 4-8.6 shall apply.
§ 4-8.9. Violations and Penalties.
If any of the requirements of this section are not complied with:
§ 4-8.10. (Reserved)
PART II. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS29
§ 4-8.11. Definitions. [1967 Code § 8-2-1]
As used in this section:
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS — Shall mean and
include persons, corporations or partnerships, principal or agent, who
engage in a merchandising business in the Township with intent to close out
or discontinue such business within a period of one (1) year from the date
of commencement, and including those who for the purpose of carrying on
such business, hire or lease or occupy any land, building or structure for
the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the sale
of fruits, vegetables and farm products, such as meat, poultry, butter and
eggs, if the vendor is duly licensed according to law.
§ 4-8.12. Declaration Required. [1967 Code § 8-2-2]
All transient merchants or itinerant vendors, before offering for sale any
goods, wares, merchandise or inventory, shall under oath, make a
declaration to the Township Clerk, of the number of days they propose
to engage in such business, together with a specific statement as to the
location of such goods, wares, merchandise or inventory by street and
number or other appropriate description and whether on the premises from
which it is to be sold or in warehouses or storage.
§ 4-8.13. License Required; Fee. [1967 Code § 8-2-3]
All transient merchants or itinerant vendors, as defined in this section,
before offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or inventory, shall
pay to the Township Clerk, for the use of the Township, a sum of one
a. The Township may initiate prosecution for a violation pursuant to
Chapter 1, § 1-5, General Penalty, as applicable; and/or
b. The Township shall have the right to commence litigation in a court of
competent jurisdiction; and/or
c. Such other actions may be initiated as permitted by law.
29.For State law as to transient merchants, or itinerant vendors generally, see N.J.S.A.
§§ 45:24-1 to 45:24-8.
§ 4-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.13
AO:111
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and upon payment of such sum the merchant
or vendor shall be entitled to apply for and receive a license which shall
continue in favor of the person to whom it is issued for the period of one
hundred eighty (180) days from the day of issuance.
§ 4-8.14. Application. [1967 Code § 8-2-4]
All applications for the license referred to in subsection 4-8.13 shall be
sworn to and shall disclose the name or names and residences of the owners
or persons in whose interest such business is conducted; and shall further
state the average quantity and kind, as nearly as can be, and the value of
the stock of goods, wares, merchandise or inventory intended to be sold
or exposed for sale in the Township. Such applications shall also give the
names and post office addresses of the persons from whom goods making up
the stock were or are to be purchased and the Township Clerk in arriving at
the valuation may require the submission of bills or invoices of such goods,
wares, merchandise or inventory.
§ 4-8.15. Same—Separate License for Each Place of Business;
Business Restricted to Place Indicated in License. [1967 Code
§ 8-2-5]
A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or
separate place of business in which the trade, following, profession or
occupation of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor is carried on, and
each license shall authorize the person obtaining it to carry on, pursue or
conduct the business of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor only at the
location or place of business which it is indicated thereby.
§ 4-8.16. Bond. [1967 Code § 8-2-6]
No license required by subsection 4-8.13 shall be issued until the applicant
shall execute and deliver to the Township Clerk a good and sufficient
bond with good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the Township
Attorney, equal in the amount to twenty-five (25%) percent of the value
of the stock of goods, wares, merchandise or inventory as shown in the
declarations and disclosures required under the provisions of this section
but in no event shall the bond be less than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
The bond shall remain in force for one (1) year, and be conditioned to
indemnify and pay the Township any penalties or costs incurred in the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, and which shall also
by its terms be so conditioned as to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser
of goods, wares, merchandise or inventory in a sum equal to at least the
amount of any payment such purchaser may have been induced to make
through the misrepresentations as to the kind, quality or value of such
goods, wares, merchandise or inventory whether the misrepresentations
were made by the owners or their servants, agents or employees, either at
the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character
whatsoever printed or circulated with reference to the stock of goods,
wares, merchandise or inventory or any part thereof.
§ 4-8.13 MILLBURN CODE § 4-8.17
AO:112
§ 4-8.17. Appointment of Township Clerk as Agent for Service of
Process. [1967 Code § 8-2-7]
No license required by subsection 4-8.13 shall be issued until the applicant
shall file with the Township Clerk an instrument in writing nominating and
appointing the Township Clerk his/her true and lawful agent with full power
and authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf
of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of
the license and the bond given as required by the provisions of subsection
4-8.16 or for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any
breach thereof, which instrument in writing so nominating and appointing
the Township Clerk as such agent shall contain recitals to the effect that the
applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notice or
process may be made upon the agent and when so made shall be taken and
held to be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the
license under this section according to the laws of this or any other State,
and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of
service or manner of service or by reason of failure to receive notice of such
service.
§ 4-8.18. Submission of Sales Tax Certificate Required. [New]
No license referred to in subsection 4-8.13 shall be issued without the
submission to the Township Clerk of a copy of a valid certificate of authority
issued to the transient merchant or itinerant vendor pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:32B-15, empowering the merchant or vendor to collect sales tax.
§ 4-8.19. Exempt Organization. [1967 Code § 8-2-8]
Nothing in this section shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license by
any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of goods, wares,
merchandise or inventory when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to the
payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or religious object for
which such charitable or religious society exists.
§ 4-8.20. False Statements; False Representation of Merchandise.
[1967 Code § 8-2-9]
No transient merchant or itinerant vendor of goods, wares, merchandise
or inventory, as defined in this section, shall make a false or fraudulent
representation in any statement required to be filed under this section
or falsely represent, by advertising or otherwise, that such goods, wares,
merchandise or inventory are in whole or in part damaged goods saved from
fire, or make any false statement as to the previous history or character of
such goods, wares, merchandise or inventory.
§ 4-8.21. through § 4-8.34. (Reserved)
PART III. HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS30
§ 4-8.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.35
AO:113
§ 4-8.35. License Required for Hawkers and Peddlers.31 [1967 Code
§ 8-3-1]
No person shall sell or offer for sale within the Township any goods, wares,
or merchandise from a pack, or cart or on foot without a license as provided
in this section.
§ 4-8.36. Issuing/Denial of License. [1967 § 8-1-5; Ord. No. 6-18-73
§ 5; New]
§ 4-8.37. Revocation or Suspension of License. [1967 Code § 8-1-8;
Ord. No. 6-18-73 § 8]
Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Township
Committee, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
a. Township Clerk to Issue. All licenses for hawking and peddling required
by subsection 4-8.35 shall be issued by the Township Clerk.
b. Denial of License. If the Township Clerk shall find the applicant's
character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, which
determination shall be based on one of the following findings or other
evidence:
1. Conviction of crime involving moral turpitude;
2. Prior violation of a hawkers or peddlers ordinance;
3. Previous fraudulent acts or conduct;
4. Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
The Township Clerk shall deny the application in writing, and shall send a
copy, plainly marked "Not approved," to the Police Department.
c. Issuance of License. If the Township Clerk shall find the applicant's
character or business responsibility satisfactory, the Clerk shall issue
the license.
a. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on business as a hawker or peddler.
c. Any violation of this section.
30.For State law as to hawkers and peddlers generally, see N.J.S.A. §§ 45:24-9 to 45:24-13. As
to loud, unnecessary noises caused by hawkers and peddlers, see subsection 3-7.2f of this
code. As to sales in public parks, see subsection 8-2.1f of this code.
31.For State law authorizing the Township to license and regulate hawkers and peddlers, see
N.J.S.A. § 40:52-1(c).
§ 4-8.35 MILLBURN CODE § 4-8.37
AO:114
§ 4-8.38. Expiration Date; Numbering; Renewal. [1967 Code § 8-3-4]
All licenses granted under the provisions of this section shall expire on
December 31 following issuance, and shall be numbered consecutively. All
licenses, not revoked or suspended, may be renewed annually, subject to the
same conditions and charges as the original license.
§ 4-8.39. License Fee. [1967 Code § 8-3-5; Ord. No. 12-21-70 § 1;
New]
Every person licensed under the provisions of this section shall pay an
annual license fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00).
§ 4-9. CIRCUSES.32
§ 4-10. LICENSING OF MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS.
§ 4-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
The Township desires to regulate the operation of mobile ice cream vendors,
commonly known as ice cream trucks, within the Township in order to
protect the rights of property owners and residents of the Township and
otherwise promote and protect public health, safety and welfare.
In order to effectively implement such regulation of mobile ice cream
vendors, it is necessary to establish definitions, guidelines and procedures.
§ 4-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT — Shall mean a Person submitting an application for a license
pursuant to this section.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean a member of the Police
Department, Health Department or Code Enforcement Official of the
Township.
d. Conviction of the permittee of any crime or disorderly persons offense
or violation of an ordinance which renders him or her an unfit person to
hold a permit based upon business responsibility and moral character.
e. Conducting the business of hawking or peddling in an unlawful manner
or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute
a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
Pending such hearing, the Township Committee shall have the power to
suspend the license for a period of not more than seven (7) days.
32.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning Circuses, see Amusements, Section 4-3.
§ 4-8.37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.2
AO:115
ICE CREAM — Shall mean a smooth, sweet, cold perishable food prepared
from a frozen mixture of milk products or juices and sometimes containing
colloidal materials and emulsifiers.
MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDOR — Shall mean and include a peddler or
solicitor who transports and sells ice cream, frozen or chilled snacks, water,
soda, juice and items typically provided on ice cream trucks for sale in the
Township by vehicle, such food or beverage to be sold to individual patrons
while the vehicle is stopped or parked.
OPERATOR — Shall mean an individual employed by and who drives a
mobile ice cream vendor truck throughout the Township and sells ice cream
products pursuant to a license issued pursuant to this section.
PERSON — Shall mean and include the singular and the plural and any
person, firm or corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any
other organization performing the peddling or soliciting activity.
VEHICLE — Shall mean and include, motor trucks, motor vehicles, or other
similar types of conveyance.
§ 4-10.3. License Required. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
§ 4-10.4. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
All applicants shall pay the license fee required by subsection 4-10.6 if
applicable, and file with the Health Officer a sworn written application,
on forms to be furnished by the Township, which shall give the following
information:
a. It shall be unlawful for any mobile ice cream vendor to engage in such
activity within the Township without first obtaining a license as
provided herein.
b. The Township may issue up to two (2) mobile ice cream vendor licenses
each season as set forth in subsection 4-10.6, with each license
permitting the operation of up to three (3) trucks for a total of up to six
(6) trucks per season. The Governing Body may increase the number of
licenses that may be issued in a season by resolution. In addition to the
license issued to the two (2) successful applicants for the same, each
operator of a truck owned by the applicant business entity to which a
license is issued shall display on the truck a copy of the license and a
photo identification badge issued by the Health Officer pursuant to
subsection 4-10.7a hereof.
a. The name of any operator, including date of birth, driver's license
number and Social Security number.
b. The permanent home/office address of the applicant. If the applicant is
a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
c. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise to be sold.
§ 4-10.2 MILLBURN CODE § 4-10.4
AO:116
§ 4-10.5. Investigation: Denial or Issuance of License. [Ord. No.
2420-14]
d. A description of the vehicle(s) to be used, vehicle license number(s),
and a copy of its insurance and registration card(s).
e. A photograph taken of an operator not more than sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of the application, which photograph shall
clearly show the head and shoulders of the operator and shall measure
two by two (2" x 2") inches.
f. A statement as to whether the applicant, including any officer or
director of a corporate applicant, as well as any operator has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal
ordinance, other than traffic offenses, the nature of the offense and the
punishment and/or penalty imposed.
a. Upon receipt of the application, the Health Officer shall transmit the
same to the Chief of Police.
b. The Health Officer shall cause such necessary and appropriate
inspections to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public welfare. If, as a result of such investigation, the health conditions
of the applicant's business premises or trucks are found to be in
noncompliance with applicable health code provisions or requirements
or otherwise unsatisfactory, the Health Officer shall endorse on the
application his disapproval and shall notify the applicant that its
application is disapproved.
c. If, as a result of such investigation, the health conditions of the
applicant's business premises and trucks are found to be satisfactory,
the Health Officer shall endorse his approval on the application.
d. Each operator shall be fingerprinted, which shall be coordinated
through the Millburn Police Department. All associated fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant. The Chief of Police shall cause to be
made such investigation of the applicant's business and operator(s) as
he deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare.
e. If, upon review of the fingerprinting results, the applicant's/operator's
record or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse on the application his disapproval, and the
Health Officer shall notify the applicant that its application is
disapproved. Any determination by the Chief of Police that an
application is unsatisfactory shall be based upon one (1) or more of the
following findings with respect to the applicant/operator:
1. Conviction of a crime relating adversely to the occupation of mobile
ice cream vendor, shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-2 and set forth in a written
explanation provided to the applicant based upon consideration of
the following factors or any other factors:
§ 4-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.5
AO:117
(a) The nature and duties of the business for which the license is
sought;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the crime;
(c) Circumstances under which the crime occurred;
(d) The date of the crime;
(e) The age of the person when the crime was committed;
(f) Whether the crime was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric
treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or
vocational schooling, successful participation in correctional
work-release programs or the recommendation of persons who
have or have had the applicant/operator under their
supervision.
2. Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance.
3. Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
4. Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
f. If, upon review of the fingerprint results, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant/operator are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall endorse approval on the application.
g. If the Health Officer and Chief of Police shall each have endorsed their
approval on the application, the Health Officer shall deliver to the
applicant the license. The Health Officer shall keep a record of all
licenses and complaints received, if any, concerning each license.
h. The license, and operator identification badge issued hereunder shall
contain the signature of the Health Officer and shall show:
1. The name, address and photograph of the licensee.
2. The class of license issued.
3. The kind of food to be sold or distributed thereunder.
4. The date of issue.
5. The length of time the license shall be operative.
6. The license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in the activity licensed.
§ 4-10.5 MILLBURN CODE § 4-10.6
AO:118
§ 4-10.6. License Fees and Duration. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
The fee for each license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The license
shall be valid between May 1 and the day after Labor Day in the year of its
issuance and on weekends thereafter through October of that year.
§ 4-10.7. Regulations Governing Operations. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
a. Every holder of a mobile ice cream vendor license issued by the Health
Officer under the authority of this section shall be required to display
the license while engaged in the business or activity licensed within the
limits of the Township. The license shall be prominently displayed on or
in the vehicle. Each vehicle used shall display a license tag bearing the
words "Sales License for the Year 20__" and each operator shall display
an Identification Badge.
b. Every such licensee shall restrict his selling activity within the
Township to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and sundown, but no later
than 9 p.m., except that between the day after Labor Day and the end of
October, selling activity shall cease at 7 p.m. and shall notify the Office
of the Police Chief at least once in every week as to the area and streets
in which he plans to conduct the activity, before commencing his selling
activity. No bells, music or other audible advertisement may be utilized
by licensees after 7:00 p.m.
c. Every such licensee shall carry and maintain in force insurance
covering its operations written by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey and rated "A" or better by A.M. Best
Rating, proving the following minimum coverage and language:
1. Comprehensive General Liability — one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) (combined single limit each occurrence).
2. Business Automobile Liability — one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) (each accident).
3. The following wording shall appear on the Insurance Certificate:
(a) "The certificate holder (Township of Millburn) is included as an
additional insured as respects losses arising solely from the
operation of the licensed activity."
4. The Township and its agents shall be indemnified and held
harmless from and against all claims and demands, losses and
expenses, and the like arising from the permission granted.
5. All licensees must obey all State and local parking laws, rules and
regulations.
6. Vehicles moved or parked on public streets in connection with the
licensee's operation must comply with all State, local and motor
vehicle laws.
§ 4-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.7
AO:119
§ 4-10.8. Geographic Limitations. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
§ 4-10.9. License Not Transferable. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
§ 4-10.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
It shall be the duty of any Enforcement Officer of the Township to enforce
provisions of this section and to require any person seen engaging in the
activities covered by the section who is not known by such officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his license and Identification Badge.
§ 4-10.11. Records. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
The Health Officer shall maintain a record of all licenses issued under
the provisions of this section and shall record therein all convictions for
violations of this section and other pertinent circumstances and incidents
reported to the Chief of Police, Health Department and Township Clerk's
office.
§ 4-10.12. Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
7. Licensees must provide for the disposal of garbage and recycling
cans and/or bottles. Licensees are not to use public receptacles for
garbage or recyclables attributable to their operation.
a. Licensee must not inhibit pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
b. Licensees shall not stop or park any vehicle in such a manner as to
block any advertisement, display or entrance to an existing store.
c. Licensees shall not park any vehicle in such a manner as to block any
municipal sign, public receptacle or garage, public bench or other
amenity.
d. Licensees, when in operation within residential areas, shall be
permitted to remain in one location up to one-half (1/2) hour, after
which the licensee shall move at least five hundred (500') feet
therefrom.
e. By no later than May 1st of each season, the Township Clerk shall
prepare a List of Prohibited Areas and Times, which shall set forth the
dates and locations in the Township where the licensee is prohibited
from operating during the specified time periods. Licensees shall
comply with the List.
a. Licenses shall not be transferable or assignable.
a. Licenses issued after the investigation provided for under this section
may be revoked by the Health Officer after reasonable notice and
hearing, if requested, for any of the following reasons:
§ 4-10.7 MILLBURN CODE § 4-10.12
AO:120
§ 4-10.13. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Health Officer or Chief of Police,
in the denial or revocation of a license, shall have the right to appeal
to the Business Administrator. The appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Township Clerk, within thirty (30) days after the notice of the action
complained of has been served personally upon the licensee or mailed,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address given by the licensee in
making application under subsection 4-10.4, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Township Clerk shall set a time
and place of hearing for the appeal, at which time the Administrator shall
conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the action appealed from.
§ 4-10.14. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2420-14]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for penalties not to exceed the maximum
penalties assessable in the Municipal Court pursuant to law.
§ 4-11. through § 4-13. (RESERVED)
§ 4-14. GASOLINE STATIONS; FUEL PUMPS AND TANKS.
§ 4-14.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 8-15-1; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1]
As used in this section:
FUEL — Shall mean any carbon bisulfite, gasoline, any petroleum distillate
having a Reid vapor pressure of four (4) pounds (207 millimeters of
mercury) or greater and used as a motor vehicle fuel ("Reid vapor pressure"
1. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
3. Conviction of any crime or offense relating adversely to the
occupation of mobile ice cream vendor.
4. Conducting the business or licensed activity, whether by licensee or
its agents or employees, in any unlawful manner or in any manner
that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public
health, safety or general welfare.
5. When a hearing is requested, notice of hearing for a revocation of a
license shall be given in writing setting forth the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be
served personally upon the licensee or mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at the address given by the licensee in making
application under subsection 4-10.4 herein, at least five (5) days
prior to the date for the hearing.
§ 4-10.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-14.1
AO:121
means the absolute vapor pressure of a petroleum product at 100°F
(37.8°C) as measured by the standard test method set forth in the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Designation D 323 or approved
equivalent), diesel fuel, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied
petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids
having a flash point below one hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit
(165°F)
GASOLINE STATION — Shall mean any building, structure, or premises,
enclosure or other place within the Township where a container or
containers, tank or tanks, pump or pumps ("Tanks") whether portable or
stationary, containing any fuel are kept or located for the purpose of selling,
offering for sale or distributing any such fuel from such tanks into the
fuel tanks of motor vehicles or otherwise, and services incidental thereto,
provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any
place where such flammable liquids are kept or sold solely for medicinal or
household purposes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any automobile, truck, motorcycle, van,
motor scooter or other self-propelled vehicle not operated on tracks or
trolleys.
§ 4-14.2. License Required. [1967 Code § 8-15-2; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1]
No person shall maintain, conduct or operate as a business a gasoline
station within the Township without first having obtained a license from
the Township in accordance with the provisions of this section. All gasoline
stations, fuel pumps, tanks or other containers for which permits or licenses
have been heretofore granted shall be and become subject to the terms of
this section and amendments thereto; and persons to whom such licenses
have been granted shall apply for a license under the terms and provisions
of this section. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to create
regulations of gasoline stations in addition to existing applicable
regulations, such as, but not limited to, Zoning, Building, Maintenance and
Fire Prevention Code regulations and shall not be deemed to modify or
repeal such existing regulations.
§ 4-14.3. Application for License. [1967 Code § 8-15-3; Ord. No.
9-88 § 1]
a. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing, under oath, be
filed with the Township Clerk two (2) months' prior to the
commencement of the license period and shall contain the following
information:
1. If an individual: the name and address of the applicant.
2. If a partnership: the name and residence of each partner.
3. If a corporation or other organization: the name, address and State
under whose laws such corporation or organization was organized
§ 4-14.1 MILLBURN CODE § 4-14.3
AO:122
§ 4-14.4. Issuance or Denial of License; Appeals. [1967 Code
§ 8-15-4; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1; New]
and the names of the principal officers and local representatives
and their residences and business addresses.
4. The name and address of the operator.
5. The name and address and written consent of the owner or owners
of the land whereon such station is to be operated.
6. The location of the gasoline station and premises.
7. A statement from the Township Zoning Officer and Construction
Code Official as to his/her inspection and approval of the gasoline
station relative to its compliance with the Development Regulations
Ordinance and the Building Code.
8. A statement from the Township Fire Chief or his/her designated
representative as to his/her inspection and approval of the gasoline
station relative to fire safety and its compliance with fire codes in
effect in the Township.
9. A statement from the Township Engineer as to his/her inspection
and approval of the drainage of the gasoline station premises.
10. A statement from the Township Chief of Police as to his/her
inspection and approval of the gasoline station relative to the
gasoline station's effect on traffic safety and control.
b. For any inspection required by subsection 4-14.3a7 through 10
inclusive, any authorized official of the specified Township Department
may make the inspection in lieu of the particular Department head, but
such authorized official must file a written report of his/her inspection
within seven (7) days thereafter with the head of his/her Department for
approval or disapproval by the Department head.
a. If the application complies with the requirements of this section and
other ordinances of the Township, the Township Clerk shall issue a
license upon the payment of the license fees required by this section.
b. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the Township
Clerk may deny the application for a license if the operation of the
gasoline station described in the application is likely, in the opinion of
the Township Clerk, which shall state the Clerk's findings and reasons
in writing, to create an unreasonable fire hazard or an unreasonable
hazard to pedestrians or add an unreasonable burden to the traffic
conditions of the neighborhood described in the application. The
designation of the above grounds shall not be construed in any way to
limit the Township Clerk in refusing to grant any such application on
any other grounds permitted by law.
§ 4-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-14.4
AO:123
§ 4-14.5. License Fee. [1967 Code § 8-15-5; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1]
No license shall be granted except upon payment of a license fee. The fee
for a license for a gasoline station shall be payable at the annual rate of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first tank and twenty dollars
($20.00) for each additional tank. The fees provided in this section shall be
in addition to other fees due to the Township, including, but not limited to,
the fees required by the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 4-14.6. Expiration of License. [1967 Code § 8-15-6; Ord. No. 9-88
§ 1]
All licenses issued under this section shall be issued for a term of not
more than one (1) year, commencing as of January 1 or such later date as
the license is issued and expiring on December 31 following the date of
issuance, unless sooner surrendered or revoked.
§ 4-14.7. No Assignment or Transfer of License. [1967 Code
§ 8-15-7; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1]
No license granted under the provisions of this section shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person except with the consent of the Township
Clerk.
§ 4-14.8. Change of Location. [1967 Code § 8-15-8; Ord. No. 9-88
§ 1]
No license issued under the provisions of this section shall authorize the
maintenance of the business of a gasoline station at any location but the
location specified therein.
§ 4-14.9. Rules and Regulations. [1967 Code § 8-15-9; Ord. No. 9-88
§ 1]
Any person conducting or operating a gasoline station in the Township shall
comply with the following regulations:
c. Licenses denied under this section may be appealed to the Township
Committee for hearing.
a. No repair work on motor vehicles shall be performed in the open on the
premises except for the following incidental repairs or minor parts
replacement:
1. Lubrication and changing of oil.
2. The repair of tires and tubes.
3. The recharging and rental of batteries.
4. Such incidental work as may be necessary in connection with the
installation, mounting or adjustment of accessories herein
§ 4-14.4 MILLBURN CODE § 4-14.9
AO:124
permitted to be sold or in connection with the testing and
adjustment of the fuel and electrical systems of motor vehicles.
b. All parking at gasoline station premises shall be limited so it will not
create hazards or interfere with ingress or egress of motor vehicles
patronizing the gasoline station. No parking or storage of commercial
or bus motor vehicles or campers shall be permitted on the premises
except such temporary parking as may be necessary in connection with
the servicing of such motor vehicles. There shall be no parking of motor
vehicles on the public sidewalk areas adjacent to the gasoline station.
Storage of unregistered motor vehicles or unsightly accumulations of
motor vehicles shall be deemed a violation of this section.
c. No merchandise shall be sold or kept for sale on or from the premises
except fuel, and motor vehicle accessories and supplies reasonably
connected with, or necessary for, the safe or lawful operation of motor
vehicles unless from vending machines located indoors.
d. No oil shall be kept or displayed in tanks or other receptacles outside
the building except for immediate use in servicing motor vehicles; such
oil must be kept in containers neatly racked or stacked, and no such
individual container shall exceed five (5) quarts.
e. Except as provided in subsections 4-14.9c and 4-14.9d above, no
supplies or materials shall be kept outside the gasoline station building
unless stored and concealed in metal or other fire-resistant racks or
cabinets not to exceed seven (7') feet in height; provided, however, no
parts or motor vehicles, nor disabled or inoperative or partially
dismantled motor vehicles and no new or used tires shall be stored at
any time outside the gasoline station building.
f. No junk shall be permitted on any part of the premises except in closed
containers. "Junk" shall include, but not be limited to, all rubbish,
garbage, trash, debris, ashes, refuse, litter, trimmings and clippings,
cigarettes, glass and wood particles, abandoned automobiles and any
machinery and/or equipment or any parts thereof; and other waste
materials which tend to create a danger to the public health, safety and
general welfare.
g. Gauging or vending devices shall be subject to the following
regulations:
1. All fuel gauging or vending devices shall be of approved type and
substantially secured to concrete or masonry foundations suitably
located and of proper design and dimensions normally to prevent
motor vehicles from colliding with the device.
2. Systems wherein continuous pressure is maintained on the fuel
storage tank in connection with fuel gauging or vending devices
shall be prohibited.
§ 4-14.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-14.9
AO:125
3. The use of above-ground fuel storage tanks in connection with fuel
gauging or vending devices shall be prohibited.
4. Devices which discharge by gravity shall be so designed that it is
not possible to retain in the gauging compartment materially more
than ten (10) gallons of liquid and so that it is not possible to lock
the device without draining the gauging compartment.
h. Provision shall be made by grading driveways, raising door sills or some
equally effective means to prevent fuel spills from flowing into the
interior of gasoline station buildings.
i. Electric motors and other spark-emitting devices, if present, shall be
installed in a well-ventilated room where no flammable liquids are
stored or handled unless such devices are approved by the Fire
Department for use in an explosive atmosphere.
j. Drainage from crankcases, liquid coolant waste, and grease drippings
shall be kept in suitable closed metal containers and shall be disposed
of in accordance with Federal and State Environmental Protection Acts.
The liquids shall not be permitted to enter storm drains or seep into the
earth.
k. NO SMOKING signs and STOP MOTOR WHILE FILLING signs shall be
prominently posted so as to be readily visible at points where fuel is
handled.
l. Where flammable liquids are kept, used or handled, dry sand, ashes,
chemical extinguishers or other extinguishing devices or materials shall
be kept as directed by the Fire Department.
m. A reasonable quantity of loose noncombustible absorbents, such as
sand or ashes, shall be kept conveniently for use in case of fuel leakage
or overflow.
n. All motor vehicles on the licensed premises shall be parked or stored in
such manner as to be readily removed in case of fire or other
emergency.
o. Each gasoline station shall be inspected at least once every year by an
official to be designated by the Chief of the Fire Department. It shall be
the duty of the person making such inspection to determine whether or
not the premises are maintained in compliance with this section and
other ordinances of the Township, and to report to the Township
Business Administrator any violation of this section or other ordinances
which may be discovered during such inspection. The Business
Administrator shall then take such steps as are necessary and advisable
to cause such violations to be corrected.
p. No fuel tank or pump of any gasoline station shall be constructed or
maintained on the curb or on the sidewalk of any street in the Township.
No fuel tank, pump, lift, filling, greasing or other service appliance,
§ 4-14.9 MILLBURN CODE § 4-14.9
AO:126
§ 4-14.10. Revocation of License. [1967 Code § 8-15-10; Ord. No.
9-88 § 1]
Any license issued shall be revocable by the Township Committee after
hearing and good cause shown, upon fifteen (15) days' notice in writing
to be given the licensee either by serving the same upon the licensee
personally or by leaving the same at the place of business of such licensee.
§ 4-14.11. New Jersey Underground Storage Tank Law. [1967 Code
§ 8-15-11; Ord. No. 9-88 § 1]
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to alleviate the owner and/or
operator of a gasoline station containing an underground fuel storage tank
from complying with the New Jersey Underground Storage Tank Law, if
applicable, and this section shall not be deemed to supersede or conflict
with the Act; provided however, no license shall be issued unless the
applicant is in compliance with the New Jersey State Underground Storage
Tank Law, N.J.S.A. 58:10A — 21, et seq.
§ 4-15. through § 4-31. (RESERVED)
§ 4-32. DEALERS IN SECONDHAND JEWELRY AND PRECIOUS
METALS.
§ 4-32.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 8-14-1; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
As used in this section:
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, corporation or other entity,
whether permanent or itinerant, who on one (1) or more occasions (through
any means) buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals, gems or
jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
apparatus, racks or cabinets shall be located within five (5') feet of a
side or rear lot line.
q. No electric lights shall be installed or arranged on any poles which
exceed sixteen (16') feet in height, and all such illumination shall be
shaded properly so as to protect adjoining properties and property
owners therefrom.
r. Each gasoline station shall be conducted and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of the ordinances of the Township.
s. All signage on the premises shall be in conformity with all rules,
regulations and ordinances of the Township.
t. Each gasoline station located within two hundred (200') feet of a
residence shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except that this
provision shall not apply to a gasoline station which abuts Morris
Turnpike.
§ 4-14.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-32.1
AO:127
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean any business conducted
intermittently within the Township or at varying locations.
MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PERMANENT BASED BUSINESS — Shall mean any business conducted on
a year-round basis and housed in a single structure, such as a store or
residence.
§ 4-32.2. License Required; Investigation; Issuance or Denial of
License. [1967 Code § 8-14-2; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
a. Each dealer in secondhand jewelry and precious metals conducting
business within the Township shall first obtain a license to do so and
shall apply therefor to the Township Clerk. The application shall contain
the following information:
1. The name and permanent address of the applicant.
2. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business
entity, the names and addresses of each person having more than a
ten (10%) percent interest in the applicant.
3. The address of the applicant's place of business within the
Township and any other business location of the applicant.
4. The applicant's photograph.
b. The Chief of Police shall cause such investigation to be made of the
applicant's business and moral character as he/she deems necessary for
the public good. Such investigation shall include fingerprinting of the
applicant.
c. The Chief of Police, after inserting thereon his/her recommendations
and results of any investigations relative to the license applied for, shall
forward the application to the Township Clerk.
d. If the finding of the Chief of Police is that the applicant's business or
moral character is unsatisfactory based on one (1) or more of the
following findings or on other evidence:
1. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
2. Prior violations of an ordinance regulating dealers in used jewelry
and precious metals;
3. Evidence of previous fraudulent conduct;
4. Evidence of bad character;
the Township Clerk shall deny the application in writing, and shall send a
copy, plainly marked "Not Approved," to the Police Department.
§ 4-32.1 MILLBURN CODE § 4-32.2
AO:128
§ 4-32.3. License Fees; Expiration of License. [1967 Code § 8-14-3;
Ord. No. 37-83 § 1; New]
§ 4-32.4. Recordkeeping Required; Inspection of Records. [1967
Code § 8-14-4; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale
including the amount paid; description of item; any identifying numbers;
name, residence, age and description of the persons from whom the items
were purchased, received or sold; and requiring such person to sign a
receipt for each item. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized Police Officer of the Township. The dealer shall maintain such
records for at least two (2) years after each transaction.
§ 4-32.5. Notice of Transaction to Police; Time Limit. [1967 Code
§ 8-14-5; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
Each dealer doing business in the Township shall deliver to the Chief of
Police the description of all items purchased, received or sold, within fortyeight
(48) hours of the completion of the transaction, on forms prescribed
by the Chief of Police.
§ 4-32.6. Waiting Period Prior to Changing Form of or Selling
Articles. [1967 Code § 8-14-6; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
No dealer shall sell, melt or change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within three (3) days of the date of purchase, and
all such items shall be made available to the Chief of Police or any Police
Officer of the Township upon request, for at least three (3) days.
§ 4-32.7. Dealing with Minors or Intoxicated Persons. [1967 Code
§ 8-14-7; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom it is
transacting business; and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
herein defined, and also with any individual who is in an intoxicated state
e. If the finding of the Chief of Police is that the applicant's business and
moral character are satisfactory, the Township Clerk shall issue a
license to the applicant.
a. Upon issuance of a license, the fee shall be based as follows:
1. Permanent-based business: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
year.
2. Itinerant business: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day of business.
b. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
the license is issued.
§ 4-32.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-32.7
AO:129
and/or is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, hallucinogenic
or habit-producing drugs.
§ 4-32.8. Revocation of License; Notice of Hearing. [1967 Code
§ 8-14-8; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
§ 4-32.9. Inapplicability. [1967 Code § 8-14-9; Ord. No. 37-83 § 1]
This section shall not be applicable to any person, partnership, corporation
or entity who receives secondhand gold, silver, precious metals, gems or
jewelry as a gift.
§ 4-33. through § 4-35. (RESERVED)
§ 4-36. TAXICABS AND AUTOMOBILE LIVERIES.33
PART I. REGULATIONS
§ 4-36.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 23-1-1]
As used in this chapter:
a. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by
the Township Committee after hearing on notice for any of the following
causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious
metals, gems and jewelry.
3. Any violation of this section.
4. Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons' offense involving
moral turpitude.
5. Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his/her last known address at least five (5) days' prior to
the date set for the hearing.
33.Editor's Note: For State law as to taxicabs, etc., generally, see N.J.S.A. §§ 48:16-1 to
48:16-28.
§ 4-32.7 MILLBURN CODE § 4-36.1
AO:130
AUTO LIVERY — Shall mean any automobile or vehicle engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire and operating from private
property only, either by the trip, hour, day or other fixed period, or to
transport passengers to a specified place, or which charge a fare or price
agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger and which
does not solicit or accept passengers for hire upon the public streets,
taxicab stands or any other public places of or within the Township.
DRIVER — Shall mean the chauffeur, driver or operator of either a taxicab
or an auto livery.
OWNER — Shall mean the person in whose name a vehicle is registered
with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
TAXICAB — Shall mean any automobile or motor vehicle licensed to engage
in the business of carrying passengers for hire and offered, announced or
advertised to operate or run as a taxicab from a public stand, hotel, motel,
station, street, highway or other public place within the Township.
VEHICLE — Shall mean both a taxicab and an auto livery, unless otherwise
specifically designated.
§ 4-36.2. Compliance with Chapter; Misrepresenting Vehicles as
Licensed. [1967 Code § 23-1-2]
No motor vehicle shall be offered or operated for the transportation of
passengers for hire within the Township except in compliance with the
regulations prescribed by this section, and unless such vehicle and the
operator thereof have been licensed as provided in this section. No vehicle
for which a taxicab license has not been issued and is not in full force and
effect shall be used or held out as a taxicab, nor shall any person represent
by word, sign, gesture or by means of the color or model thereof or the
shape or appearance of any sign thereon that any vehicle which has not
been licensed as a taxicab pursuant to the provisions of this section is or is
authorized to be used as a taxicab. All licenses, if any, which may have been
issued to an owner for any vehicle not licensed for use as a taxicab which
shall nevertheless be used as or represented to be such, shall, upon proof
of such use and misrepresentation, be revoked after reasonable opportunity
to the owner to be heard with reference to such revocation.
§ 4-36.3. Applicability. [1967 Code § 23-1-3]
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to autobuses.
No vehicle of a category regulated by this section, which is licensed by any
other municipality for the uses to which the regulations in this section apply,
shall be required to have a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section, but shall be subject to the other regulations imposed hereby.
§ 4-36.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-36.4
AO:131
§ 4-36.4. Liability Insurance. [1967 Code § 23-1-4; Ord. No. 5-2-78
§ 1; Ord. No. 2231-04 § 1]
No license provided for by this section shall issue or remain valid unless
the owner of each licensed vehicle shall have on file in the office of the
Township Clerk an effective policy of automobile liability insurance issued
by a financially sound insurance corporation of or authorized to transact
business in the State, insuring the owner, every driver and any operator
of such vehicle against liability imposed by law for damages because of
bodily injury, including death, sustained by any person and injury to or
destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof, caused by accident
and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the motor vehicle
for which such license is sought or has been issued. For taxicabs, the
amount of the limits of liability coverage to be afforded by such policy shall
be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury to each
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injuries in
each accident and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property
damage in each accident. For automobile liveries, the amount of the limits
of liability coverage to be afforded by such policy shall be one million
five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) for bodily injury or death
suffered by any person and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for
property damage in each accident. Every such policy of insurance shall
contain a provision that no cancellation of the policy shall become effective
until after the expiration of ten (10) days' written notice, plus three (3) days'
mail service, of such proposed cancellation forwarded by the insurance
company to the Township Clerk.
§ 4-36.5. General Regulations in Operation of Vehicles. [1967 Code
§ 23-1-5; New]
The following provisions shall be observed in the general operation of
vehicles licensed under this section:
a. All vehicles, particularly the interior thereof, shall be kept clean and in
good condition.
b. Every taxicab shall display on the back of the front seat a rate card
showing the approved fares as provided by subsection 4-36.7.
c. Every taxicab shall carry upon its exterior a sign bearing the word
"Taxi" or "Taxicab," so located, constructed and illuminated as to be
readily observable by pedestrians and other members of the public
whose transportation is solicited by the owner or driver of the vehicle.
d. Any commercial radio in the vehicle shall be operated only at the
discretion of the passenger. This does not include the operation of a
short-wave radio.
e. A receipt book of forms, showing the driver's full name and driver's
license number shall be carried. A receipt shall be given to any
§ 4-36.4 MILLBURN CODE § 4-36.5
AO:132
§ 4-36.6. Condition of Vehicles; Inspection of Vehicles; Suspension
of Licenses Pending Correction of Unsafe Conditions. [1967 Code
§ 23-1-6; New]
No vehicle shall be operated upon the streets of the Township unless
mechanically and otherwise safe to operate, with brakes, lights, windshield
wipers, signaling devices, steering apparatus, door fasteners and other
mechanical equipment in good working condition. Inspection of the
condition of every vehicle may be required by the Chief of Police as deemed
passenger showing the fare charged whenever requested or if there is
a dispute over the fare.
f. Drivers shall keep a trip record by days of all trips made by the vehicle.
Such trip record shall be kept by owner for at least six (6) months from
the date of compilation and shall be subject to inspection at any time by
the Police Department or someone authorized by the Township
Committee. The daily trip record must contain the following
information:
1. The state registration number of the vehicle.
2. The name and license number of the driver.
3. The time and location of the beginning of each trip and termination
time and place of each trip.
4. The amount of fare collected.
g. A driver shall not operate a vehicle while, to any degree, under the
influence of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
h. There shall be no smoking in any vehicle.
i. Disrespectful conduct or the use of abusive or insulting language to
passengers is prohibited.
j. Drivers shall not solicit patronage for restaurants, night clubs,
cabarets, dance halls, hotels or like places, nor solicit for any place
maintained in violation of the law.
k. A driver shall thoroughly search the interior of the vehicle immediately
after the termination of each trip and ascertain whether the passenger
has left any article therein. Any property so found shall be taken to
Police headquarters and turned over to the officer in charge within
twenty-four (24) hours after discovery, and a receipt therefor
requested.
l. Drivers of taxicabs shall solicit fares only from the driver's seat or in a
position within five (5') feet therefrom.
m. A driver of a taxicab entering a taxi stand shall do so by taking his/her
position at the rear of any taxicab already at the stand.
§ 4-36.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-36.6
AO:133
necessary. The Chief of Police shall cause every vehicle licensed under this
section to be removed from service and its license temporarily suspended
correction of any mechanical or otherwise unsafe condition found upon
inspection, and he/she shall withhold such license until these conditions are
corrected to his/her satisfaction.
§ 4-36.7. Fares. [1967 Code § 23-1-7; Ord. No. 3-18-68 § 1; Ord. No.
2-1-71 § 1; Ord. No. 8-74 § 1; Ord. No. 7-78 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 37-79;
Ord. No. 30-81 § 1]
The maximum fares which may be charged for transportation from and to
points within the Township shall be in accordance with schedules posted
in licensed vehicles and in dispatchers' offices, and as filed in the office of
the Township Clerk by each licensed taxi-livery owner. The fare schedules,
and subsequent amendments thereto, shall become effective thirty (30)
days after filing and acknowledgment by the Township Clerk. Notice of
prospective amendments of fare schedules, and effective dates, shall also
be posted as above.
Fares which may be charged for transportation by taxi-liveries shall be as
follows:
a. Zone One. A posted fare for each passenger from or to any point within
zone one, whose boundaries are as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of South Terrace and Morris and
Essex Turnpike; thence northeasterly by way of South Terrace to its
intersection with Twin Oak Road; thence northerly and then easterly
by way of Twin Oak Road to its intersection with Taylor Road; thence
northerly by way of Taylor Road to its intersection with Western Drive;
thence westerly by way of Western Drive to Moraine Place; thence
northerly by way of Moraine Place to its intersection with Minnisink
Road; thence easterly by way of Minnisink Road to its intersection
with Stewart Road; thence northerly by way of Stewart Road to its
intersection with Highland Avenue; thence northerly by way of
Highland Avenue to its intersection with Hartshorn Drive; thence
northeasterly by way of Hartshorn Drive to Wildwood Drive; thence
northerly by way of Wildwood Drive to its intersection with Great
Hills Road; thence in an arbitrary and direct line to the intersection
of Old Short Hills Road and Fairfield Terrace; thence easterly by way
of Fairfield Terrace to its intersection with Fairfield Drive; thence
southerly by way of Fairfield Drive to Sinclair Terrace; thence easterly
by way of Sinclair Terrace to its most northern intersection with the
South Mountain Reservation boundary line.
b. Zone Two. A posted fare for each passenger from or to any point in zone
one to or from any point in zone two, or from or to any two points within
zone two, the boundaries of zone two being described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of Hobart Gap Road and Morris
and Essex Turnpike; thence northerly by way of Hobart Gap Road to
§ 4-36.6 MILLBURN CODE § 4-36.7
AO:134
§ 4-36.8. Refusal to Accept Passengers. [1967 Code § 23-1-8]
No owner or driver of any vehicle licensed as a taxicab shall refuse
conveyance, during operating hours shown upon his license application, to
any orderly person, unless such owner or driver is previously engaged.
White Oak Ridge Road; thence northeasterly by way of White Oak Ridge
Road to Farmstead Road; thence northerly by way of Farmstead Road
to its intersection with White Oak Ridge Road; thence northerly by way
of White Oak Ridge Road to its intersection with the southerly line of
the Township of Livingston; thence easterly and then northerly along
the Livingston line to its intersection with South Orange Avenue; thence
easterly by way of South Orange Avenue to its intersection with the
South Mountain Reservation boundary line.
c. Zone Three. A posted fare for each passenger from or to any point in
zones one and two to or from any point in zone three, or from or to any
two points within zone three, the boundaries of zone three being the
area of the Township westerly of zones one and two.
d. The above maximum rates shall be in effect twenty-four (24) hours a
day.
e. Children of five (5) years and under, when in the charge of a passenger
paying fare, shall be carried free. Children above such age shall pay full
fare.
f. Every passenger shall be allowed to have carried and conveyed upon
any taxicab, without charge, his/her ordinary traveling baggage, not
exceeding in any case forty (40) pounds of baggage.
g. A charge of twenty-five cents ($.25) shall be made for each piece of
baggage other than hand baggage when in excess of forty (40) pounds.
h. For delivery of packages from one (1) location to another location,
without passengers, the same rates shall prevail as are described in
paragraphs a through d.
i. Additional passengers who are traveling to the same point from the
same point within the Township as the first passenger shall be charged
no more than the filed and posted rate for each such additional
passenger.
j. The maximum rates in this section and all maximum fares to the three
(3) major airports in the New York Metropolitan area shall be posted in
the taxicabs and in the dispatcher's office.
k. Citizens over sixty-five (65) years of age who reside in Millburn
Township shall be conveyed within the Township for the lowest zone
fare within the Township between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
on weekdays.
§ 4-36.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-36.9
AO:135
§ 4-36.9. through § 4-36.11. (Reserved) [For State law authorizing
the Township to license and regulate vehicles used for the
transportation of passengers, etc., see N.J.S.A. § 40:52-1. As to
necessity of Township consent before operating taxicabs, see
N.J.S.A. § 48:16-2.]
PART II. LICENSES
§ 4-36.12. Owner's Licenses Required; Contents. [1967 Code
§ 23-2-1]
No passenger vehicle for hire shall be operated upon the streets of the
Township unless the owner thereof shall first obtain a license for such
purpose as provided in this section. Such license shall contain the following:
§ 4-36.13. Transferability; Reporting Loss or Theft. [1967 Code
§ 23-2-3]
Owner's licenses issued under this section are nontransferable and loss or
theft thereof must be reported promptly to the Chief of Police.
§ 4-36.14. Driver's Licenses Required; Contents; Display of Driver's
Licenses. [1967 Code § 23-2-2]
No person shall drive a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the Township
unless he/she shall first obtain a license as provided in this section. Such
license shall contain the following:
§ 4-36.15. Applications. [1967 Code § 23-2-4; New]
All applications for owner's and for driver's licenses under this section
shall be made in writing to the Township Clerk on forms provided by
the Township and available upon request. Such applications shall be
accompanied by the fee as required by subsection 4-36.19. Every such
application shall disclose the following facts, which shall be deemed
material representations, for falsity of which the license applied for shall be
denied, or if issued, revoked:
a. The owner's name, place of business, name of company, if any,
residence and signature.
b. Municipal license number and date of issue. Such license shall be kept
within the applicable vehicle.
a. The name, residence, age and photograph of the licensee.
b. The municipal license number and date of issuance.
Such license shall be kept by the licensee at all times when engaged in actual
operation of a licensed vehicle, and shall be exhibited to any passenger or
Police Officer upon request.
§ 4-36.9 MILLBURN CODE § 4-36.15
AO:136
§ 4-36.16. Investigation of Applicants. [1967 Code § 23-2-5; Ord.
No. 2363-10]
All applicants for licenses under this section shall be transmitted to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause the necessary investigation to be made
and report to the Township Committee his recommendations based on
such investigations, together with the proof of fingerprinting by the Motor
Vehicle Commission and photographing of the applicant and investigation
of such fingerprints with all criminal records.
§ 4-36.17. Filing; Notification of Rejections. [1967 Code § 23-2-6]
All applications shall be filed by the Township Clerk after being acted upon
by the Township Committee and applicants notified as to the action taken.
In case of denial of an application, the applicant shall be notified by the
Township Clerk in writing.
a. Owner's Application.
1. Name, age, residence and business address of the applicant owner.
2. Type of license requested (taxicab or livery).
3. Manufacturer's name, year, body type and passenger capacity of
each vehicle for which a license is sought.
4. Address of place where each vehicle will be garaged and proof of
garage owner's consent.
5. Current valid State motor vehicle registration number issued for
each vehicle.
6. Convictions, both motor vehicle and criminal, of the applicant.
b. Driver's Application.
1. Name, age and residence of the prospective driver for which a
license is sought.
2. Number of currently valid State motor vehicle driver's license
issued to such prospective driver.
3. Driving experience of the applicant.
4. Convictions, both motor vehicle and criminal, of the applicant.
5. Applicants shall provide two (2) passport-size photos.
Applications by drivers shall be made in person.
§ 4-36.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-36.18
AO:137
§ 4-36.18. Qualifications of Licensees. [1967 Code § 23-2-7; New;
Ord. No. 2363-10]
Applicants for license under this section shall have the following
qualifications:
§ 4-36.19. Fees. [1967 Code § 23-2-8; Ord. No. 7-78 § 3]
There shall be paid to the Township Clerk, for the use of the Township, with
the filing of every application for a license under this article, the following
amounts:
a. Owner's License. An applicant to be approved for a vehicle license must
have the following qualifications:
1. No conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
2. No prior violation of an ordinance regulating taxi owners;
3. No evidence of previous fraudulent conduct;
4. No evidence of bad character;
5. A resident of the State;
6. At least twenty-one (21) years of age.
b. Driver's License
1. No conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
2. No prior violation of an ordinance regulating taxi drivers;
3. No evidence of previous fraudulent conduct;
4. No evidence of bad character;
5. A resident of the State;
6. At least eighteen (18) years of age;
7. Of sound physique and fit for the safe operation of a motor vehicle.
If there is any doubt as to the applicant's physical condition, the
Township Committee may require the applicant to undergo a
physical examination at the applicant's expense, by a mutually
agreed-upon local physician.
8. A holder of a current State motor vehicle driver's license and must
have had such for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the
granting of a license.
9. Applicants for a license under this subsection shall provide proof
from the Motor Vehicle Commission of their qualification to operate
a limousine in New Jersey.
§ 4-36.18 MILLBURN CODE § 4-36.19
AO:138
§ 4-36.20. Display, Transferability or Loss of Licenses. [1967 Code
§ 23-2-9]
Each licensed driver shall be provided with a numbered driver's license,
which shall be conspicuously displayed at all times.
Drivers' licenses are nontransferable and loss or theft thereof shall be
reported promptly to the Chief of Police and shall be surrendered to him/
her upon termination of employment.
§ 4-36.21. Maximum Number of Taxicab Licenses. [1967 Code
§ 23-2-10]
No more than twenty-five (25) taxicab licenses shall be in effect at any time.
§ 4-36.22. Terms; License Renewals; Revocation. [1967 Code
§ 23-2-11]
All licenses under this section shall expire on March 31 annually. Such
licenses may be renewed annually, subject to compliance with all
requirements for their original issuance. The Township Committee may
suspend or revoke any such license after hearing or reasonable opportunity
to be heard, upon fair notice accorded to the licensee, for violation of or
failure to comply with the regulations prescribed in this section.
§ 4-37. THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES AND SHOWS.34
§ 4-38. (RESERVED)
§ 4-39. VEHICLE TOWING AND STORAGE SERVICES.
§ 4-39.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No.
11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 1]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — Shall mean a one-time fee per vehicle for the
purpose of compensating the licensee for inspecting the vehicle, allowing
owners to retrieve personal property from the vehicle, and for the
preparation of additional paperwork beyond the initial towing bill.
CRUISING — Shall mean the operation of a tow truck in and upon a
roadway within the Township of Millburn to solicit vehicle towing and/or
storage business except in response to a police request.
a. Taxicabs, forty dollars ($40.00), per vehicle.
b. Auto liveries, forty dollars ($40.00), per vehicle.
c. Drivers, twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
34.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning Theatrical Performances and Shows, see
Amusements, Section 4-3.
§ 4-36.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.1
AO:139
HEAVY DUTY — Shall mean a tow truck with dual wheels, capable of towing
large trucks, and shall meet the following minimum requirements: G.V.W. -
30,000 lbs.; G.C.W.R. - 80,000 lbs.; boom rating - 50,000 lbs.; winch rating
- 50,000 lbs.; cable size and length - 5/8 inch and 200 feet; equipped with a
chassis lift; under-reach-retracted rating - 30,000 lbs.; and extended rating
- 15,000 lbs.
LABOR — Shall mean the additional work done at the scene by the tow
truck operator which is beyond that required to perform a basic tow or any
additional manpower needed to complete a recovery, winching, or towing of
a vehicle. Labor charged for additional manpower shall be based on a per
man, per hour basis.
LEASE — Shall mean a vehicle leased by the licensee, through a leasing
company, and showing the licensee on the registration as the owner or
lessee. If the registration is such that the lessee is not listed the licensee
will be required to show a lease agreement.
LICENSE — Shall mean the document approved and issued by the Township
of Millburn granting the privilege to tow and store vehicles and perform
other towing operations for the Township of Millburn.
LICENSEE — Shall mean a towing operator having a license granted by the
Township pursuant to the provisions of this section.
LIGHT DUTY FLAT BED — Shall mean a car carrier of the rollback and
tilt type, with dual wheels, capable of removing and transporting passenger
cars damage free and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
G.V.W. - 14,500 lbs.; G.C.W.R. - ; winch rating - 8,000 lbs.; cable size and
length - 3/8 inch and 50 inches; bed length - 16 feet; bed width - 84 inches
inside side rails; wheel lift-retracted rating - 6,000 lbs.; and extended rating
- 3,000 lbs.
LIGHT DUTY WRECKER — Shall mean a tow truck with dual wheels,
capable of towing passenger cars and shall meet the following minimum
requirements: G.V.W. - 14,000 lbs.; G.C.W.R. - 18,000 lbs.; boom rating -
8,000 lbs.; winch rating - 8,000 lbs.; cable size and length - 3/8 inch and 100
feet; wheel lift-retracted rating - 6,000 lbs.; and extended rating - 3,000 lbs.
MEDIUM DUTY FLAT BED — Shall mean a car carrier of the roll back
and tilt type, with dual wheels, capable of removing and transporting small
trucks, full size vans, or large passenger cars damage free and shall meet
the following minimum requirements: G.V.W. - 18,000 lbs.; G.C.W.R. - ; winch
rating - 8,000 lbs.; cable size and length - 3/8 inch and 50 inches; bed length
- 19 feet; bed width - 84 inches inside side rails; wheel lift-retracted rating -
6,000 lbs.; and extended rating - 3,000 lbs.
MEDIUM DUTY WRECKER — Shall mean a tow truck with dual wheels,
capable of towing small trucks and shall meet the following minimum
requirements: G.V.W. - 18,000 lbs.; G.C.W.R. - 30,000 lbs.; boom rating -
16,000 lbs.; winch rating - 16,000 lbs.; cable size and length - 1/2 inch and
200 feet; wheel lift-retracted rating - 10,500 lbs.; and extended rating -
8,500 lbs.
§ 4-39.1 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.1
AO:140
OWNER — Shall mean an individual or entity who or which owns or leases,
and/or operates, parks or abandons a vehicle within the Township.
POLICE — Shall mean the Police Department of the Township of Millburn or
of any jurisdiction having authority in the subject matter.
PRINCIPAL LOCATION — Shall mean the business office of an applicant/
licensee, where licensee shall conduct business associated with the towing
and storage of vehicles under authority of the towing license issued by the
Township of Millburn.
RECOVERY — Shall mean when the tow truck operator applies his training
and knowledge in a skillful manner to preserve the condition of the vehicle
while moving it to a towable position. This can be accomplished in various
ways including, but not limited to, winching and rigging.
ROAD SERVICE — Shall mean a service provided at the scene to enable a
vehicle to be driven away, including, but not limited to, the changing of a flat
tire, jump start of a vehicle, or the delivery of fuel. There will be a separate
charge for the fuel at its face value.
ROUTINE CALLS FOR SERVICE — Shall mean a police request for road
service of a disabled vehicle, i.e., dead batteries, flat tires, out of gas, or
other services that do not require towing.
STORAGE SERVICES — Shall mean the storage, housing or holding of
vehicles, indoors or outdoors by a licensee under authority of this section.
TEMPORARY LICENSE — Shall mean a towing license, authorized by the
Chief of Police, and issued by the Township of Millburn for the purpose
of replacing a current licensee, whether that replacement be due to the
closing of the business or the revocation of the licensee's towing license for
a violation of this section. This license is for emergency situations only and
the cost will be prorated on a monthly basis.
TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean an individual or entity engaged in the
business of providing towing and storage services.
TOWING SERVICES — Shall mean the towing service and/or on-site vehicle
repair, including tire changes, jump starts or furnishing fuel, rendered by a
towing operator.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported upon a highway, excepting devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or
motorized bicycles.
WAITING TIME — Shall mean the time a licensee has equipment and
personnel waiting at a scene to perform a towing operation.
WINCHING — Shall mean the process of moving a vehicle by the use of
the tow cable from a position that is not accessible for direct hook up
by conventional means for loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching shall not
mean pulling a vehicle onto a flatbed or carrier or lifting a vehicle with a
conventional tow truck.
§ 4-39.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.1
AO:141
YARD CHARGE — Shall mean the relocation of a vehicle from the licensee's
storage facility to a public roadway for removal by another towing company.
It shall not apply to vehicles that are capable of being driven from the
storage facility to the roadway.
§ 4-39.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1;
Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
No towing operator shall operate within the Township for police-requested
towing services and/or storage services unless the towing operator has
obtained a license issued by the Township.
§ 4-39.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No.
11-97 § 1]
§ 4-39.4. Term of License. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord.
No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 1]
Licenses to tow shall be issued for a term of three calendar years
commencing January 1 of the initial calendar year.
§ 4-39.5. Application for License. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93
§ 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
§ 4-39.6. Review of Application. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93
§ 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
a. Owner requested service. No license shall be required for the on-site
repair and/or towing or storage of any vehicle when the request
therefor is received by the towing operator from the owner or the
owner's agent prior to a police request therefor.
b. Towing from private property. No license shall be required by the police
to tow any vehicle from private property without the consent of the
owner and private property owner except on the express instruction of
the police in the event of an emergency.
a. Form; required information. An application for a license shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant on the form furnished by the Township,
and shall contain all information necessary to evidence the applicant's
identity and legal address, compliance with the requirements of this
section and ability to perform the towing services and storage services
contemplated by this section.
b. Filing. Applications shall be filed by October 1 of the year prior to the
license year with the Township Clerk together with the application fee
specified in Paragraph a of Subsection 4-39.8.
a. Reference to Chief of Police. Applications received by the Township
Clerk shall be referred within two business days to the Township Chief
of Police for his review.
§ 4-39.1 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.6
AO:142
§ 4-39.7. Issuance of Not More Than Four Licenses. [Ord. No. 5-90
§ 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 3]
§ 4-39.8. Fees. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97
§ 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 4]
The following schedule of nonrefundable fees is adopted for the obtaining
of a towing license:
b. Inspection/recommendations. After such examination of the
applications and such inspections as the Township Chief of Police may
consider necessary to evaluate the applicant's compliance with, and
ability to continue to comply with, the requirements of this section, the
applications shall be returned to the Township Clerk with the
recommended approval or disapproval of each application by the
Township Chief of Police based upon his examinations, inspections and
evaluations.
Applicants and licensees shall cooperate with any and all investigations
conducted by the Township Chief of Police or his designee or other law
enforcement agency working in conjunction with the Township police.
The requirement of cooperation shall continue throughout the period of
application, and the duration of the license and the storage of vehicles
(even if a license is no longer in effect). A license may be denied for
fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application.
a. Authorization. The Township Committee shall at a public meeting by
resolution authorize the issuance of not more than four licenses after
consideration of the applications and the recommendations of the
Township Chief of Police. Minor irregularities in the application may be
waived by the Township Committee. In the event that more than four
applicants qualify for a license, the names of all qualified applicants
shall be placed in a bowl, on uniform slips of paper with the identity of
every applicant concealed, and the Township Clerk shall draw four slips
from the bowl after all applicants have received at least 10 calendar
days' notice of the time and place where the drawing will occur.
Licenses shall be issued to each of the four applicants selected at the
drawing. Licensees must have the favorable recommendation of the
Chief of Police prior to the new license being issued.
b. Issuance. The authorized license or licenses shall be issued by the
Township Clerk in writing upon payment by the towing operator of the
license fee specified in Subsection 4-39.8b.
a. Application fee: $150.
b. License fee: $1,800 for a three-year license, payable before January 1 of
the initial license year. For a temporary license for a period of less than
the full term of the license, the fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
§ 4-39.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.9
AO:143
§ 4-39.9. Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No.
4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 5]
§ 4-39.10. Equipment. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No.
11-97 § 1]
a. General. The Township Committee shall have the right to suspend or
revoke any license issued under this section for good cause upon
written complaint of the Chief of Police following his determination that
there is probable cause for suspension or revocation based upon
violation of this section.
A license may be denied, suspended or revoked for fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement in the course of conducting the
towing operation, for violation of this section, or for the conviction
of the applicant, its officers or a person or entity holding a 10% or
larger interest in the applicant, of a crime involving moral turpitude
or relating to the towing business. A license may also be denied if the
applicant has had a towing license or contract revoked while working
for any other municipal, county or state agency. Such revocation shall
have occurred within a twelve-month period prior to making application
to the Township of Millburn.
Written notice of such complaint and the basis of the complaint shall
be given to the licensee, and the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing
before the Township Committee prior to final determination of the
complaint by the Township Committee. If, after the hearing, a majority
of the members of the Township Committee present and voting decide
that there has been a violation, they may terminate or suspend the
license.
b. Emergency suspension. A license may be suspended by the Township
Chief of Police whenever the Chief in his reasonable judgment
considers such suspension necessary for reasons of safety, or has
reason to believe that the licensee is not covered by the insurance
required by Subsection 4-39.15a of this section. Such suspension shall
continue until terminated by the Chief, provided that if the suspension
is not terminated within three business days the Chief shall file a
complaint for suspension or revocation pursuant to Subsection 4-39.9a,
and the suspension shall remain in effect pending a determination of
the complaint.
c. Temporary license. In the event of an emergency suspension or other
failure of the licensee to perform its duties under this section, the Chief
of Police may issue a temporary license to a towing operator to operate
during any licensee's failure to perform, should the replacement of said
licensee be deemed necessary. The issuance of a temporary license
shall be reported to the Township Committee immediately upon
issuance. Temporary licenses may be issued for such period of time as is
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.
§ 4-39.9 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.10
AO:144
a. Required equipment. A towing operator, when filing an application for
and at all times while holding a license under this section, shall own, or
lease for use in performing the services required by the license the
following items of equipment:
1. Two light-duty wreckers, or flatbeds, both types to be equipped
with wheel lift.
2. One medium-duty wrecker with wheel lift.
3. Two medium-duty flatbed trucks with wheel lift.
4. One heavy-duty wrecker with chassis lift/under-reach.
(Above-mentioned equipment classes (light/medium/heavy) must meet the
standards as stated in Subsection 4-39.1 of this section.)
5. Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include:
(a) Wheel lift or chassis lift/under-reach.
(b) "J" hooks and chains or tie-downs.
(c) Snatch block.
(d) Two high-test safety chains.
(e) Auxiliary safety light kit (to be placed on rear of towed vehicle
that does not have functioning tail light flashers).
(f) Rotating amber emergency lights mounted on top of truck
(state issued permit required, and must be in truck).
(g) Two white work lights facing the rear of vehicle.
(h) Two safety cones with reflective strip (minimum height 18
inches).
(i) One shovel.
(j) One broom.
(k) Steering wheel tie-down.
(l) Two-way communication system, radio or cellular, with
communication between the licensee's base and all of the
required trucks and from truck to truck.
(m) Jumper cables or jump box.
(n) One fuel can capable of carrying five U.S. gallons of fuel.
(o) Toolbox with assorted hand tools.
b. Tow truck lettering. All tow trucks operated by the licensee shall be
permanently lettered on both sides in accordance with N.J. Statute Title
§ 4-39.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.10
AO:145
§ 4-39.11. Storage and Garage Facilities. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord.
No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 6; Ord. No. 2474-17 § 1]
39 (newly purchased vehicles will be allowed a four-week grace period
during which time a pair of magnetic signs may be used).
c. Required communication. Licensee shall maintain a twenty-four-hour
phone number which is manned by the licensee's personnel. Such
personnel must have constant two-way communication, radio or
cellular, with the licensee's vehicles. Phone calls may be forwarded
from the principal business location to a residence during nighttime
hours as long as two-way communication can be maintained with
licensee's vehicles.
a. Inside building secured storage. Each licensee shall have an indoor
secured storage facility in one location and with sufficient space to
accommodate at least three vehicles for the exclusive use of the Police
Department in connection with vehicles being held as evidence or
under investigation, including, but not limited to, criminal matters
(including the forfeiture process) or death by auto. The indoor secured
storage facility must be solely under the control of the licensee at all
times. All storage areas must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C.
11:3-38.2 (definitions), which states, "Inside buildings means a vehicle
storage facility that is completely indoors, having one or more openings
in the wall for storage and removal of vehicles, and that is secured by a
locking device on each opening." The inside building secured storage
facility must be within six miles, by radius, of the intersection of
Parsonage Hill Road and Hartshorn Drive in the Township. The inside
building storage space shall be capable of being locked/safeguarded
against access by unauthorized person(s) and employee(s). [Amended
6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2535-19]
b. Outside secured storage. Each licensee shall have an outside secured
storage area that is in one location and that will accommodate 50
vehicles at any one time. The outside secured storage area must be
solely under the control of the licensee at all times. The outside secured
storage area must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.2
(definitions), which states, "Outdoor secured" means an automobile
storage facility that is not indoors and is secured by a fence, wall or
other man-made barrier, that is at least six feet high and is equipped
with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site security measure. The
facility is to be lighted at night. The outside secured storage area must
be within six miles, by radius, of the intersection of Parsonage Hill Road
and Hartshorn Drive in the Township.
c. Equipment facility. Each licensee shall have an area and facility
adequate for the storage and servicing of the required equipment
specified in Subsection 4-39.10 of this section when not in use. Such
equipment facility must be within six miles, by radius, of the
intersection of Parsonage Hill Road and Hartshorn Drive in the
Township.
§ 4-39.10 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.11
AO:146
§ 4-39.12. Licensee's Personnel. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 4-93
§ 1; Ord. No. 2146-98 § 7]
d. Location/hours/condition. The required storage and equipment
facilities shall be as follows:
1. Principal location must be within six miles by radius of the
intersection of Parsonage Hill Road and Hartshorn Drive in the
Township of Millburn.
2. Outside secured storage facility (fifty-vehicle capacity) and inside
building secured storage facility (three-vehicle capacity) must be
within six miles by radius of the intersection of Parsonage Hill Road
and Hartshorn Drive.
3. The hours of recovery of vehicles from storage shall be no less than
Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and Saturday 9:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m., and prominently posted at all of the abovementioned
facilities of the licensee and also made available at
Township Police Headquarters. The vehicle shall be made available
by the licensee immediately upon an emergency request by the
Township Police Department. Facilities shall be kept clean and in
good order to accommodate persons who may enter facilities with
respect to any vehicles stored therein. The principal location, in
addition to the above mentioned items, shall have adequate rest
room facilities, with running water, that are clean and in good
working order available to persons who may enter the facility with
respect to any vehicle towed by the licensee.
e. Unsecured outside storage. No unsecured storage area of any kind will
be permitted for use by any licensee for storage of any vehicle towed
under the license.
a. All tow truck drivers must have an appropriate, valid New Jersey
driver's license with no restrictions or conditional endorsements,
except conditions requiring glasses. Each driver/employee shall be of
good moral character, mentally alert, and present a neat appearance at
all times. Drivers and employees shall wear clothing bearing the
licensee's name. Drivers and employees shall behave in a professional
and courteous manner at all times when dealing with the Police
Department and the public. Possession of a commercial license with
appropriate endorsements, when required by law, shall be a minimum
mandatory requirement of this section.
b. Light- and medium-duty drivers must obtain Level 1 driver certification
from a tow truck operators training course. New hires must obtain
certification within nine months from start of employment.
c. Heavy-duty drivers must obtain Level 2 driver certification from a tow
truck operators training course. New hires must obtain certification
§ 4-39.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.12
AO:147
§ 4-39.13. Towing and Storage Services. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No.
4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2362-10]
Towing and storage services shall be governed by the following provisions:
within nine months from start of employment. Heavy-duty drivers must
have CDL endorsement on their license.
d. Recovery Supervisor must obtain Level 3 driver certification from a tow
truck operators training course (within nine months of availability) and
have training from an industry-recognized recovery course. On the
recovery scene, not all personnel need to be recovery qualified, but a
responsible recovery supervisor must have the listed requirements.
e. The licensee must certify that it has provided ongoing training and
education of its employees. The towing operator shall show proof of a
minimum of six hours of training per employee, per year. If good cause
exists to question the training, knowledge, or driving record of any tow
truck driver or other personnel, the Township Police Department shall
inform the applicant or licensee which shall then be given an
opportunity to show cause to the contrary.
f. At the time of the application or at any time a new tow truck driver is
assigned, the licensee shall submit to the Township Clerk, the name,
driver's license number, social security number and date of birth of the
tow truck driver prior to the driver's operation of any tow truck
pursuant to a Township Police Department request.
g. No licensee shall employ directly or indirectly any officers of the
Township Police Department.
a. The schedule when a licensee will be on duty will be set by the
Township Police Department's Traffic Bureau and approved by the
Chief of Police.
b. Licensee will respond to all police requests for towing and/or road
service, when requested by a police dispatcher or any other police
officer expressly authorized to communicate such a request. Licensee
will respond with the number of tow trucks requested to the scene
within a reasonable time. Such reasonable time shall be deemed to be
within 20 minutes under normal atmospheric conditions.
c. If a licensee is wholly or partially unable to respond due to failure of any
equipment or personnel insufficiencies, the licensee will immediately
notify the Police Department, who will contact the next towing company
in the rotation to handle the request. If such an incident occurs, the
licensee will furnish, in writing, within five business days, the details of
the circumstances which caused the failure to respond to the Township
Police Department's Traffic Bureau, which will make a determination if
a follow-up investigation and/or inspection of the licensee's facility is
required.
§ 4-39.12 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.13
AO:148
d. Tow trucks of a licensee shall not cruise roadways within the Township
for business and shall not respond to any scene where towing may be
required except upon request of the Township Police Department or as
permitted under Subsection 4-39.3a of this section.
e. No rotating or flashing lights or sirens shall be used on a tow truck
except as permitted by N.J. D.M.V./D.O.T. (39:3-50), and all vehicles
operated by the licensee shall have a current permit for said lights
issued by the D.O.T. along with all other required vehicle documents.
f. All tow trucks shall be operated in accordance with all existing traffic
regulations and in a safe and prudent manner. Tow truck drivers will
request police assistance when they find it necessary to turn around,
back up, tow in a direction opposite the flow of traffic, cross a median,
or other hazardous situation during the course of providing service or
towing.
g. Each licensee will be responsible for all vehicles and visible contents in
their custody that are towed off the roads under direction of the police
and shall make an inventory at the scene to note such contents of each
vehicle.
h. No vehicle will be removed from any roadway within the Township
without proper authorization from the police at the scene, or the vehicle
owner or operator as the case may be.
i. No licensee shall be required to tow to an area farther than the licensed
storage area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless said
licensee agrees to tow farther. If licensee agrees to tow farther than the
licensed storage area between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., he/she will only
do so if adequate towing coverage will be available to the Township.
j. The investigating officer and/or supervisor at the incident scene is in
complete charge of the incident scene (excluding actual towing
operations), and all tow truck drivers shall comply with the officer/
supervisor's instructions.
k. Each licensee, prior to departing from the scene of towing services,
shall be required to clean and clear the roadway of any debris resulting
from any accident at such scene when rendering towing services, and at
all times carry the necessary equipment to perform such cleaning
services. Such equipment shall minimally include, but is not limited to,
a broom and shovel. The licensee may charge the owner's insurance
company for the services rendered.
l. In the event a licensee refuses to tow or render services at the scene of
an accident or disabled vehicle when requested by the police or vehicle
owner/operator, the officer assigned to the incident shall report the
refusal to his supervisor with all pertinent details.
Police Department S.O.P. will be followed to secure a service to clear the
scene and the report of the refusal shall be forwarded to the Township
§ 4-39.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.13
AO:149
§ 4-39.14. Towing and Storage Charges. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No.
4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2362-10; Ord. No. 2474-17 § 2;
amended 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2535-19]
Towing and storage charges shall be paid by the owner of a vehicle towed
and/or stored by a licensee at police request. Such charges shall be as
follows:
Chief of Police and Township Traffic Bureau as soon as possible for
evaluation and follow-up of the licensee's refusal to perform its
obligation under the license. No towing operator shall be required to
tow any vehicle in an unsafe manner or in such a way as to cause
unnecessary damage to the vehicle towed or that may cause damage to
the towing vehicle.
m. Each licensee shall be required to keep up-to-date records of all
vehicles towed in conjunction with this license. Each licensee shall
provide the Township Police Traffic Bureau with a list every Friday by
12:00 noon of all vehicles towed by order of the police (impounded), or
that continue to remain left in storage for five calendar days. (Owners
of vehicles will be notified by the Police Department that vehicles are in
storage.)
n. Vehicles impounded or confiscated by the police and stored by the
licensee shall not be released by the licensee without written
authorization by the Police Department.
a. Towing services. The following is the fee schedule for towing services
(the fees do not include state taxes):
1. Passenger vehicle rates:
Type Rate
Basic towing service
Day or night rate—light-duty tow $150
Day or night rate—medium-duty
tow
$250
Mileage charges $5 per mile
Mileage charges will only be assessed if the vehicle is to be
towed outside the boundaries of the Township, from the point of
pickup to the point of dropoff.
All charges will be for a minimum
of 1-hour
Road service
Day or night rate (price does not
include the cost of fuel for vehicles
out of gas)
$100
§ 4-39.13 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.14
AO:150
Type Rate
Recovery and/or winching service
(per hour), to be charged in
30-minute increments with a 1/
2-hour minimum
$200
Cleanup and/or labor charge (per
hour)
$75 per hour, 1-hour
minimum, plus absorbent
material used
Municipal vehicles
Towed within municipality $50 flat fee
Towed outside of municipality $150 flat fee
(There will not be a fee for mileage, tow hookup, winching
service, cleanup and/or labor charge, etc.)
Charge for clean-up and/or removal of debris or mechanical work
to ready a vehicle for towing. This charge shall be in effect for
additional manpower needed at scene (per man, per hour), to be
charged in 30-minute increments with a 1/2-hour minimum.
Waiting time (per hour), to be charged in 30-minute increments
beginning after the first 15 minutes on the scene with a 1/2-hour
minimum.
2. Heavy-duty rates (non-passenger vehicles):
Basic towing service (per hour), to
be charged in 30-minute increments
with a 1-hour minimum
$400
b. Storage charges.
Type Charge
Inside secured storage (per calendar day)
Vehicles over 22 feet in length will be
charged double the rate. Outside secured
storage (per calendar day)
$50
Vehicles over 22 feet in length will be
charged double the rate.
$40
Yard charge $40
For relocating a vehicle incapable of being driven from the licensee's
storage facility to a public roadway for removal by another company.
c. The licensee shall accept a minimum of two major credit cards 24 hours
a day and must be able to do so both at the principal location and by
drivers on the road at the time a service or tow is performed.
§ 4-39.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.14
AO:151
§ 4-39.15. Insurance. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
The licensee shall have in effect, prior to application and at all times during
the term of the license, the following insurance.
d. The Township and its Police Department shall not be liable to a licensee
with respect to towing and/or service rendered to any owner pursuant
to the license or otherwise. The licensee shall look to the registered
owner of such vehicle for payment of towing and/or storage service
charges or any other compensation.
e. If a vehicle is towed by a licensee to premises controlled by the Police
Department for the purpose of utilizing the vehicle or its contents as
evidence, or in an ongoing criminal investigation (i.e., processing for
evidence, follow-up investigations), such vehicle shall not be released
from Police Department custody, except to the licensee, unless the
owner of the vehicle furnishes the Police Department with a receipt that
all applicable fees for towing and/or service have been paid in full. A
second fee may be charged if the vehicle is removed to the licensee's
storage area or other destination desired by the police or vehicle owner.
If a vehicle is released by the police to any party other than the licensee
without proper receipt, the Township shall be responsible for all
charges but may pursue its remedy against the owner or other person/s
responsible.
f. A Township processing fee of $20 shall be paid to the Township for each
vehicle towed by the licensee in accordance with this section. This fee is
to be paid by the licensee on a monthly basis upon the filing of monthly
reports in a form satisfactory to the Millburn Police Department Traffic
Bureau. All reports and payments must be received by the 15th of the
next month. Failure to comply shall result in a temporary license
suspension.
g. The licensee shall not charge a storage or towing fee to the Township
when it tows and stores a vehicle designated by the Police Department
to be impounded and/or stored as part of a criminal investigation (i.e.,
vehicle seizure) by the Millburn Police Department or other law
enforcement agency operating within the Township of Millburn, except
that this provision shall not prevent the licensee from seeking
restitution, including storage or towing fees, in a criminal prosecution
resulting from the criminal investigation.
a. Garage keepers' liability policy in the amount of $500,000 for any one
claimant, and $1,000,000 for more than one claimant, with $500,000
coverage for property damage for any one event.
b. Automobile liability insurance issued by a financially sound insurance
corporation of, or authorized to transact business in, the state, insuring
the licensee and every tow truck operator against liability imposed by
law for damages because of bodily injury, including death, sustained by
any person and injury to or destruction of property, including the loss of
§ 4-39.14 MILLBURN CODE § 4-39.15
AO:152
§ 4-39.16. Indemnity. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
The application of any towing operator for a license pursuant to this section
shall include an agreement by the towing operator that upon the issuance
of a license the licensee shall indemnify the Township against all claims of
third parties relating to towing and/or storage service of the licensee.
§ 4-39.17. Motor Vehicle Information. [Ord. No. 5-90 § 1; Ord. No.
11-97 § 1]
The Township Police Department shall provide, when requested, towing
operators with Department of Motor Vehicles information regarding
registered owners and lien holders. The information requested and given
shall be in conformance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A et seq. and shall not in any way
violate the confidentiality that is reposed in the Police Department.
§ 4-39.18. Supplementary Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 5-90
§ 1; Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
§ 4-39.19. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord. No. 11-97 § 1]
The Township Chief of Police is hereby designated to enforce the provisions
of this section in accordance with due process of law.
use thereof, caused by accident and arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the tow trucks of the licensee.
The amount of the limits of liability coverage to be offered by such
policy shall be $500,000 for bodily injury to each person, $1,000,000
for bodily injuries in each accident, and $500,000 for property damage
in each accident.
c. The licensee shall supply a certificate of insurance to the Township
Clerk describing every policy of insurance and identifying the Township
as an insured party. Each such certificate of insurance shall contain a
provision that no cancellation of the policy shall become effective until
after the expiration of 15 days' written notice of such proposed
cancellation forwarded by the insurance company to the Township
Clerk.
a. The Township Chief of Police may issue rules and regulations from time
to time on the operation of towing services and storage facilities to
implement but not exceed the purpose of this section.
b. Such rules and regulations shall be issued by publication in a
newspaper in the Township. Copies shall be mailed to any and all
towing operators licensed by the Township or any interested parties
who request such copies.
c. Towing operators may, in writing, request a hearing before the
Township Business Administrator within 30 days of the issuance of the
rules and regulations.
§ 4-39.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-39.20
AO:153
§ 4-39.20. Copies of Regulations and Fees. [Ord. No. 4-93 § 1; Ord.
No. 11-97 § 1]
Copies of such rules and regulations, this section and the fee schedules of
the licensees shall be made available to the public at the Township Police
headquarters during normal business hours.
§ 4-40. SIDEWALK CAFES.
§ 4-40.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 19-95 § 1]
SIDEWALK CAFE — Shall mean a restaurant, fast-food restaurant or retail
food establishment which is a permitted use under the Township's
Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance and which holds a valid
license to serve food to be consumed by the public at tables located within
the restaurant's lot area or on the sidewalk in front of the restaurant.
§ 4-40.2. License Required; Term. [Ord. No. 19-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2211-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2347-09 § 1]
No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe within the Township without having
first obtained a sidewalk cafe license in accordance with the requirements
of this section. The license shall be issued by the Township Committee and
may contain conditions. The license shall not be transferable and shall be
for the period of January 1st through December 31st of the issuing year. The
license shall, however, be subject to future amendments to this section or
other applicable regulations.
§ 4-40.3. Application for License. [Ord. No. 19-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2211-03 §§ 2-4; Ord. No. 2347-09 § 2]
Each applicant for a sidewalk cafe license shall submit an application to the
Township Clerk on forms furnished by the Township Clerk at least two (2)
months prior to the commencement of the license period together with the
license fee. The application shall set forth:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the owner of the restaurant of which the
sidewalk cafe is a part.
c. The written consent to the application by the owner of the restaurant (if
other than the applicant).
d. A description of the dimensions of the area and all temporary
structures, equipment and apparatus to be used in connection with
operation of the sidewalk cafe, including (but not limited to) tables,
temporary fences and barriers, planters, benches, chairs and umbrellas
(if any).
e. A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk cafe and
of the existing restaurant.
§ 4-39.20 MILLBURN CODE § 4-40.3
AO:154
§ 4-40.4. License Fees. [Ord. No. 19-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2211-03 § 5;
Ord. No. 2347-09 § 3; Ord. No. 2361-10]
The following fees are set for Sidewalk Café Licenses:
Application Fee— $50.00
Café Rates/Fees—
1 to 8 seats with no more than 2 tables $100.00
9 to 12 seats with no more than 3 tables $150.00
13 to 16 seats with no more than 4 tables $200.00
17 to 20 seats with no more than 5 tables $250.00
21 or more seats with 6 or more tables $400.00
§ 4-40.5. Requirements and Specifications. [Ord. No. 19-95 § 1; Ord.
No. 2211-03 §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 2347-09 § 4]
f. A sketch drawn to scale (but not necessarily by a professional) of the
proposed design and location of the sidewalk cafe, including the
location of all appurtenances, demonstrating that pedestrian traffic will
not be impeded and that the provisions of subsection 4-40.5a will be
satisfied. The sketch required by this paragraph shall be reviewed by
the Construction Code Official/Zoning Officer.
g. The entire application shall be reviewed by the Police Department for
public safety and Alcoholic Beverage Control issues, the Fire Official for
public fire safety, and the Health Officer for health issues. The review
and report on the applications shall be completed by Township Officials
and acted on by the Township Committee within one month of filing of
the application.
h. Enforcement of the requirements and specifications for sidewalk cafes
shall be the responsibility of the Police Department, Fire Official,
Health Officer, Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer.
a. All furniture, equipment or decoration used in connection with a
sidewalk cafe shall be located in such a way that there shall be a
minimum of five (5') feet of paved sidewalk for use by the public
between the curb and the operations of the sidewalk cafe and shall not
exceed the width of the storefront unless the owner of the property
adjacent to the sidewalk cafe files a written consent to the application
for the adjacent property.
b. No sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have
first filed with the Township Clerk a copy of an insurance policy or
certificate of insurance, issued by a company duly authorized to
transact business under the laws of New Jersey, providing for the
payment of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to satisfy
all claims for damage by reason of bodily injuries to, or the death of, any
person as a direct or indirect result of the operation of the sidewalk cafe
§ 4-40.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-40.5
AO:155
§ 4-40.6. Revocation of License; Notice of Hearing; Penalty. [Ord.
No. 19-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2211-03 § 8]
or for injury to any person occurring on the premises occupied by
such cafe, and further providing for the payment of not less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to satisfy all claims for property damage
occurring as a direct or indirect result of the operation of such cafe.
The policy and certificate shall name the Township of Millburn as an
additional insured and provide for ten (10) days' written notice plus
three (3) days mail service of any proposed cancellation of the policy to
the Township Clerk.
c. No sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have
first executed and filed with the Township Clerk an indemnification
agreement on the form provided by the Township Clerk pursuant to
which the licensee shall agree to forever defend, protect, indemnify and
save harmless the Township of Millburn, its officers, agents and
employees, from and against any and all claims, causes of action,
injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of, or
which may arise out of, the licensee's operation of such sidewalk cafe.
d. The property shall be maintained as required by applicable Township
regulations including the Property Maintenance Code and Chapter 12
of the State Sanitary Code.
e. Wine and beer are the only alcoholic beverages which may be
consumed at a sidewalk cafe on the condition that table service is
provided.
f. Operating hours shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
g. The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining good order and
control of patrons and the sidewalk cafe premises.
h. Enforcement of the requirements and specifications for sidewalk cafes
shall be the responsibility of the Police Department, Health Officer, Fire
Official, Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer. The review and
report on the applications shall be completed by Township Officials and
acted on by the Township Committee within one month of the filing of
the application.
i. Food preparation, cooking or storage of any food items is prohibited
outside the establishment at all times.
a. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by
the Township Business Administrator after hearing on notice for any of
the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
§ 4-40.5 MILLBURN CODE § 4-40.6
AO:156
§ 4-41. LICENSES FOR COMMERCIAL AND MOVIE FILMING.
§ 4-41.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
FILMING — Shall mean the taking of still or motion pictures, either on
film, videotape, or similar recording medium, for any purpose intended
for viewing on television, in theatres, for advertising purposes, or for
institutional uses.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Shall mean any film which is financed and/
or distributed by a major motion picture studio, including but not limited to
the following:
NEWS STORIES — Shall mean the reporting or summarizing of information
concerning something that has either recently taken place or of current
events of general interest and includes such features commonly known as
newscasts, news bulletins and news anthology programs.
2. Any violation of this section or applicable law or Township
regulation.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
c. The penalty upon an adverse finding for a first offense shall range from
a letter of reprimand to a suspension of from one (1) to thirty (30) days
of the sidewalk cafe license, for a second offense a suspension of from
thirty (30) to sixty (60) days and for a third offense a suspension of sixty
(60) days to one (1) year.
1. Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema,
Village Road Show and Bel-Aire;
2.
3. Paramount, including MTV Films and Nickelodeon Movie;
4. 20th Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight;
5. Sony/Columbia;
6. Disney/Miramax;
7. MGM-United Artists;
8. Dreamworks;
Any film for which the budget is at least five million ($5,000,000.00)
dollars; and
9.
10. Recurrent television series programming.
§ 4-40.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-41.1
AO:157
NUISANCE — Shall mean a condition, activity or situation that interferes
with the use or enjoyment of property.
STUDENT FILMS — Shall mean motion picture or still photography
produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational
institution. The student filmmaker must supply proof that he/she is
currently enrolled.
§ 4-41.2. Permit Required; Issuance. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
a. No person shall film or permit filming within the Township of Millburn
on any public or private property, public right-of-way, facility, and/or
residence without first applying for and receiving a permit from the
Township Clerk of the Township of Millburn. The permit shall be applied
for no less than five (5) working days prior to the requested first day of
filming, provided however, that the Township Clerk may waive the five
(5) working day period if, in his/her judgment, the applicant has
obtained all related approvals, has provided all of the submittals
required by this section, and has obtained the written consent of all
property owners who would be entitled to notice pursuant to subsection
4-41.3. The permit shall set forth the approved location of such filming,
and also the approved duration of such filming, by specific reference to
days and dates set forth the approved location of such filming, and also
the approved duration of such filming by specific reference to days and
dates.
b. Permits shall be obtained in the Office of the Township Clerk and the
permit application shall be in a form approved by the Township Clerk
and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by
this subsection 4-41.10.
c. No permit shall authorize filming for more than three (3) consecutive
days in any one location and in no event shall filming at one location
within the Township exceed ten (10) days in any one calendar year.
Either or both of the three-consecutive-day and the ten-day limitations
may be extended only if the filming requested satisfies the major motion
picture exception defined by subsection 4-41.1 of this section and is
approved by the Township Committee. The hours of filming set forth
within subsection 4-41.4 of this section may be extended only if the
applicant demonstrates that the requirements of subsection 4-41.7 of
this section have been met.
d. Said permit must be readily available for inspection by Township
officials at all times at the site of the filming.
e. If the filming does not take place on the dates specified in the permit
due to inclement weather or other good cause, the Township Clerk may
issue a new permit at no additional fee.
§ 4-41.1 MILLBURN CODE § 4-41.3
AO:158
§ 4-41.3. Conditions for Issuance of a Permit. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
No permit shall be issued for filming within the Township of Millburn unless
the applicant for such permit:
a. Provides proof of insurance coverage including but not limited to:
1. For bodily injury to one person in the amount of one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars and any aggregate occurrence in the
amount of three million ($3,000,000.00) dollars.
2. For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate amount
of three hundred thousand ($300,000.00) dollars.
b. Specifies in writing that the Township of Millburn will be indemnified
and held harmless from any and all liability and damages. Such writing
shall be in a form approved by the Township Clerk.
c. Posts cash or maintenance bond for the value of five thousand
($5,000.00) dollars protecting and insuring that the location utilized for
the filming will be left in a satisfactory condition, free of debris,
rubbish, and equipment, and that due observance of all Township
ordinances and laws will be followed. The Township will return the bond
within seven (7) days of the completion of filming if there has been no
damage to the public property or public expense caused by the filming.
d. Takes all reasonable steps to minimize interference with the free
passage of pedestrians and traffic over public lands and shall comply
with all the lawful directives issued by the Township of Millburn Police
Department, Fire Department, Building Department and other
departments with respect thereto.
e. Provides proof of notice by the applicant to owners of properties
located, within two hundred (200) feet of the property lines of the
premises for which the permit is requested as measured along public
streets. Such notice shall be in writing and shall advise the property
owner of the date or dates upon which filming is to take place. Such
notice shall either be personally served or served by Certified Mail/
Return Receipt Requested upon the property owners entitled to receive
the notice. Upon the written request of the applicant, the Township
shall, within seventy-two (72) hours of such request, make and certify a
list from the current tax duplicates of the addressees of property
located within the Township of Millburn within two hundred (200) feet
of the property lines of the premises for which the permit is requested,
together with the names and addresses of record owners thereof.
Notice to owners of properties in adjoining municipalities shall be given
by personal service or by Certified Mail/Return Receipt Requested to
the Clerk of such adjoining municipality. Failure to give notice to
property owner on the list shall not invalidate the permit if proof of an
attempt is shown. Prior to commencing filming, the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Township Clerk.
§ 4-41.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-41.4
AO:159
§ 4-41.4. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
§ 4-41.5. Denials and Revocation of Permits. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
a. In residential zones, filming shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is
earlier.
b. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming such that the activity does
not create a nuisance, as defined herein. The permit holder shall avoid
any interference with previously scheduled activities upon public lands
and limit, to the extent possible, any interference with normal public
activity on such public lands.
c. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon completion of filming or the expiration of the
permit, whichever comes first.
d. The permit holder shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Township of Millburn Police Department, Fire Department, and
Building Department and comply with all other applicable laws. When,
in the judgment of the Police Chief, Fire Chief or Construction Official,
that the presence of the Police, Fire or Code Enforcement personnel are
required in connection with the filming, the applicant shall reimburse
the Township for the costs of such personnel.
e. The holder of the permit shall not conduct filming in such a manner as
to preclude access to adjoining properties from the public street or to
encroach upon adjoining property without the express written consent
from the owner and occupant thereof.
f. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
right-of-way to the maximum extent permitted. Vehicles should not be
parked so as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the Township of Millburn and the cost thereof shall be
reimbursed to the Township.
g. The holder of the permit shall not permit any lights used in connection
with the filming to shine directly into any windows on any other
property or permit any noise to extend across property lines that is
otherwise in violation of the Township's Noise Restrictions Ordinance at
Section 3-7 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Millburn. In the event of a violation thereof, the Township may abate
such violation and charge the cost thereof to the permit holder.
§ 4-41.4 MILLBURN CODE § 4-41.5
AO:160
§ 4-41.6. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
§ 4-41.7. Waiver of Requirements of Section. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
The Township may authorize filming other than during the hours herein
described. In determining whether to allow an extension of hours under this
subsection, the Township shall consider factors including but not limited to:
a. The Township Clerk may refuse to issue a permit or revoke a permit,
whenever he/she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a
review of the application and input thereon by the Police Department
and/or other agencies impacted, that filming at the location and/or time
set forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance or would
unreasonably interfere with the public's use of public lands,
unreasonably interfere with the public's use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or
welfare.
b. The Township reserves the right to require one or more patrolmen on
site, in situations where the filming may impede the proper flow of
traffic. The cost of said patrolmen shall be borne by the applicant as a
filming cost. Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by
the production, an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required
if the production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
a. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township granting, denying
or revoking a permit may file a written notice of appeal for
consideration by the Township Committee. Such notice of appeal shall
be filed with the Township Clerk and shall set forth the reasons for the
appeal.
b. An appeal from the decision of the Township shall be filed within ten
(10) days of said decision. The Township Committee shall set the matter
down for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of the Notice of
Appeal. The decision of the Township shall be in the form of a resolution
by the second regularly scheduled public meeting, after the hearing of
the appeal. The appellant may agree in writing to a later date for the
decision. If such a resolution is not adopted within the time required,
the decision of the Township shall be deemed to be reversed.
a. Traffic congestion at the location;
b. The applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off public streets;
c. Whether the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming;
d. Nature of the film shoot itself: e.g. indoor or outdoors, day or night, on
public or private lands;
e. Whether there was consultation with the Township Committee.
§ 4-41.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-41.8
AO:161
§ 4-41.8. Copies of Permit; Inspection. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
Copies of the approved permit shall be sent to the New Jersey Motion
Picture and Television Commission, as well as the Township Police, Fire
and Building Departments, before filming takes place. The applicant shall
permit Township inspectors to inspect the site and equipment to be used.
The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued following such
inspections.
§ 4-41.9. Reimbursement of Certain Costs. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
In addition to any and all other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Township for any lost revenue, including but
not limited to, repairs required to public property, and any revenue that the
Township was prevented from earning because of the filming.
§ 4-41.10. Fees. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
§ 4-41.11. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
The provisions of this section relating to the requirements for and the
issuance of permits shall not apply to the filming of news stories and student
films, provided, however, that such filming shall comply with the following
requirements:
a. The fee schedule for permits authorized under this section shall be as
follows:
1. Basic filming permit: one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars except
where applicant requests a waiver pursuant to subsection 4-41.2a
requiring expedited processing of a permit application, in which
case, the basic filming permit fee shall be five hundred ($500.00)
dollars.
2. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit fee:
six hundred ($600.00) dollars per day.
3. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit fee
for a major motion picture: one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars per day.
4. Overnight parking/use of Township property: five hundred
($500.00) dollars per day.
a. In residential zones, the filming shall, to the extent possible, occur only
Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or
sundown, whichever is earlier.
b. Filming shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize the
inconvenience to adjoining property owners or the interference with
previously scheduled activities or normal public activities upon public
§ 4-41.8 MILLBURN CODE § 4-41.11
AO:162
§ 4-41.12. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2371-11]
A person violating any part of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars. In the case of continuing
successive violations, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during on or which a violation of this ordinance occurs or
continues. Any penalty assessed pursuant to this provision is in addition to
and is not affected by the authority of the Township Clerk to revoke the
permit for a violation of the ordinance as hereinbefore provided.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-1. GENERAL.
lands. Recreation Department shall be contacted for all park/recreation
lands and adjacent parking lots for their approval.
c. Filming shall be conducted so as to minimize the creation and spread of
debris and rubbish during filming and, upon the completion of the
filming, those conducting the filming shall remove all equipment, debris
and other rubbish from the filming location.
d. To the extent practical, advance notification shall be furnished to the
Township of such filming.
e. Filming shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Township of
Millburn Police, Fire and Building Departments.
f. Filming shall be conducted in such a manner as to not preclude access
to adjoining properties from the public street or to encroach upon
adjoining property without the express written permission from the
owner thereof.
g. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
right-of-way to the maximum extent permitted. Vehicles should not be
parked so as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the Township of Millburn and the cost thereof shall be
reimbursed by the owner.
h. Lights used in connection with the filming shall not shine directly into
any window or upon other property nor shall any noise from the filming
extend across property lines in excess of the limitation specified in the
Township's "Noise Restrictions" ordinance at Section 3-7 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Millburn.
§ 4-41.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.1
AO:163
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 5-2-3; Ord. No. 2-6-67 § 3; Ord.
No. 12-90 § 1; New; Ord. No. 2249-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2346-09 § 1]
As used in this Chapter:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Millburn Township
Animal Control Officer certified by the State of New Jersey as an Animal
Control Officer who shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species, male, female
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of seven (7) months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOG — Shall mean any member of the domestic canine species, male,
female or altered.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven (7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that pet solid waste is removed at once, without
delay.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Millburn Township Health
Officer who shall administer the issuance of licenses under the provision of
this Chapter.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter or a
pound.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this Chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
§ 5-1.1 MILLBURN CODE § 5-1.1
AO:164
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 5-2. ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.35 [1967 Code
§ 5-1-1]
No owner or person having custody of a live animal, other than a dog or
cat, shall suffer it to run at large or to be upon or in any public place in the
Township; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed
to affect any other provision of this Code.
§ 5-3. CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.36 [1967 Code § 5-1-2]
No person shall inhumanly, cruelly or unnecessarily beat, kick or injure any
dumb animal or fail or neglect to provide the same, if in his/her custody,
with necessary sustenance.
§ 5-4. WILDLIFE FEEDING PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 2249-05 § 2]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers) and
excluding unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers. Any
person who is found to be in violation of this Section 5-4 shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately and shall be subject to the penalties provided
in subsection 1-5.1.
§ 5-5. LICENSING AND VACCINATION OF CATS.
§ 5-5.1. Rabies Vaccination of Cats. [Ord. No. 12-90 § 1]
a. Vaccination and License Requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat of licensing age within the Township unless
such cat is vaccinated and licensed.
The provisions of this section do not apply to cats which are confined
in a room, cage or pen and kept or displayed for sale, or those held
by a State or Federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical, or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
b. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with Recommendations for Immunization
published by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians, except as provided for in paragraph d.
35.For State law authorizing the Township to prohibit or regulate animals running at large,
see N.J.S.A. § 40:48-1.
36.For State law as to cruelty to animals generally, see N.J.S.A. 4:22-15 to 4:22-33. As to
authority of Township to prevent cruelty to animals, see N.J.S.A. 40:146-21.
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.1
AO:165
§ 5-5.2. Licensing Requirements. [Ord. No. 12-90 § 1; Ord. No.
2346-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2458-16 § 1]
c. Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each vaccinated cat on a form recommended by the State.
d. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Animal Control
Authority, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that
because of an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
a. Annual License and License Tag Required; Placing Tag on Cat. Any
owner of a cat of licensing age shall annually, in the month of December,
apply for and procure from the Millburn Health Officer a license and
official license tag with license number, for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar, or other device with
the license number securely fastened thereto. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway
or elastic collars. License tags are not transferable. Licenses shall
be effective for the period commencing January 1 and ending December
31 annually.
b. Time for Applying for License and Tag for Newly Acquired Unlicensed
Cat or for Cat Attaining Licensing Age. The owner of any newly
acquired unlicensed cat of licensing age or of any cat which attains
licensing age shall make application for license and tag for such cat
within ten (10) days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement shall not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Township for no longer than ninety (90) days, providing the owner of
the cat has proof of current rabies immunization.
c. Time for Applying for License and Tag for Unlicensed Cat, or Cat
Licensed in Another State and Brought into the Township. Any person
who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township any
unlicensed cat and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than ten (10) days shall
immediately apply for a license tag for each such cat. This requirement
shall not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the Township for
no longer than ninety (90) days, providing the owner of the cat has
proof of current rabies immunization. Any person who shall bring or
cause to be brought into the Township any cat licensed in another State
for the current year and bearing a license tag and who shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Township for a period of
more than ninety (90) days shall immediately apply for a license and tag
for each such cat.
d. License and Tag Issued in Another New Jersey Municipality. A license
and tag issued by another New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by
the Township as evidence of compliance with this section until
December 31 of the year of issuance of the license.
§ 5-5.1 MILLBURN CODE § 5-5.2
AO:166
§ 5-5.3. Removal of Tag Forbidden; Attaching Tag Wrongfully. [Ord.
No. 12-90 § 1]
e. Application, Contents, Preservation of Information. The application
shall state: the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license is sought; and the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on the application and the license number issued for the cat
shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years by the Township Board
of Health. License numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.
f. License Forms and Tags. The license forms and official tags furnished
and issued by the Township shall be numbered serially, and indicate the
year of issuance.
g. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification of
Exemption; Requirement for License. The Health Officer shall not grant
any such license tag for any cat unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the cat to be licensed has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services, or has been certified
exempt as provided by subsection 5-5.1d. The rabies inoculation shall
be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian, or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same, and the vaccine shall be
valid until October 31st of that licensing year.
h. License Fee Schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of
twenty-one dollars ($21.00) for each unneutered cat and eighteen
dollars ($18.00) for each neutered cat. Persons who fail to obtain a
license as required within the time period specified in subsection 5-5.1
shall be subject to a one-time delinquent fee of ten ($10.00) dollars
after March 1st.
i. Expiration Date of Licenses. Licenses issued by the Township shall
expire on December 31 of each year.
j. Loss of License. If a license tag has been misplaced or lost, a duplicate
may be issued free.
k. Proof of Licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, or other
authorized person.
a. No person, except an officer in the performance of his/her duties, shall
remove a license tag from the collar of any cat without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a tag to a cat for which it was not
issued.
§ 5-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.3
AO:167
§ 5-5.4. Annual Canvass of Cats. [Ord. No. 12-90 § 1]
The Animal Control Officer of the Township or such other person appointed
for the purpose by the Township Committee shall annually cause a canvass
to be made of all cats owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
Township. The Animal Control Officer shall report on or before May 1
of each year, to the Board of Health, the result thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring such cats, the number of licensed cats owned, kept or harbored
by each of the persons, together with a complete description of each of the
unlicensed cats.
§ 5-5.5. Cats Running at Large When Suffering with Contagious
Diseases. [1967 Code § 5-2-2]
No person owning or harboring a cat suffering from an infectious or
contagious disease shall permit such animal to run at large. Any such
diseased animal found running at large shall be seized, impounded and
killed.
§ 5-6. DOGS.37
§ 5-6.1. License and Tag Fees.38 [1967 Code § 5-2-3; Ord. No. 2-6-67
§ 2; Ord. No. 28-81; Ord. No. 2346-09 § 3; Ord. No. 2458-16 § 2]
b. No licensed cat shall be allowed off the premises of the person
harboring or keeping the cat without the metal tag attached to its
collar.
c. Any cat found off the premises of the owner without a metal tag
attached to its collar may be seized and treated in a like manner as
prescribed for dogs.
a. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification of
Exemption; Requirement for License. The Health Officer shall not grant
any such license tag for any dog unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the dog to be licensed has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services, or has been certified
except as provided by subsection 5-6.1e. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian, or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same, and the vaccine shall be
valid until October 31st of that licensing year.
b. License Required. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of
licensing age, which means a dog of seven (7) months or which
37.Editor's Note: For State law as to dogs generally, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 to 4:19-16.
38.Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to fix a license fee for dog license,
see N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.12. As to fee for registration tag, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-15-2.
§ 5-5.3 MILLBURN CODE § 5-6.1
AO:168
§ 5-6.2. Running at Large. [1967 Code § 5-2-6]
For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to be running at large
when it is not either on the premises of its owner or custodian and under
the immediate control or custody of its owner or some person responsible
to the owner, or on leash in the hands of a responsible person.
§ 5-6.3. Prohibited. [1967 Code § 5-2-7; Ord. No. 2-6-67 § 4]
No person owning, harboring or keeping a dog shall permit such dog to run
at large within the Township.
§ 5-6.4. Impounding, etc; Redemption. [1967 Code § 5-2-8; Ord. No.
8-9-68 § 1]
Any dog found running at large shall be taken into custody, impounded and
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. No dog taken into
custody and impounded as aforesaid shall be restored to a claimant therefor
except upon payment to the pound of all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance.
possesses a set of permanent teeth, shall in the month of January,
annually apply for and procure from the Health Officer a license and
license tag for each such dog, so owned, kept or harbored, and shall
place upon each such dog a collar with the license tag securely fastened
thereto.
c. When to Apply. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age,
as hereinbefore described, shall make application for license and tag
for such dog within ten (10) days after such acquirement or age
attainment.
d. Fees. The Health Officer is hereby designated to license dogs and the
sum to be paid annually for a dog license is fixed at twenty-one dollars
($21.00) for each unneutered dog and eighteen dollars ($18.00) for
each neutered dog. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required
within the time period specified in subsections 5-6.1a and b shall be
subject to a one-time delinquent fee of ten ($10.00) dollars after March
1st.
e. Exemption for Seeing Eye Dogs or Therapy Dogs. Dogs used as guides
for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing-eye" dogs or
"therapy dogs" shall be licensed as other dogs except that the owner
shall not be required to pay any fees therefor.
f. Inoculation Exemptions. A dog may be exempted from the requirements
of such vaccination for a specified period of time by the Animal Control
Authority, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that
because of infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy,
the inoculation of such dog shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 5-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.5
AO:169
§ 5-6.5. Barking Dogs. [1967 Code § 5-2-9]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog in the Township which
habitually barks or cries for prolonged periods of time.
§ 5-6.6. Confinement of Dogs for Observation. [1967 Code § 5-2-10]
If a person shall have been bitten by a dog, or in case the Health Officer
or any duly authorized physician shall certify that any dog shall be confined
for observation, it shall, in either of such events, become the duty of the
owner or person having custody of such dog, upon direction of the Police
Department, to either have such dog confined under observation for ten
(10) days in the custody of a licensed veterinarian, or, if such owner or
person produces proof satisfactory to the Police Department that such dog
has been vaccinated against rabies within twelve (12) months last past,
such dog shall be confined for ten (10) days at the home or residence of
the owner or person having custody of such dog. If such owner or person
having custody of such dog shall fail to have it so confined or fail to
confine it to the home or residence of such person in accordance with this
subsection, the Health Officer or any Police Officer shall be required and
deemed authorized to have such dog confined in the custody of a licensed
veterinarian for ten (10) days at the expense of such owner or person having
custody of such dog. If such dog is confined at the home or residence of the
person having custody of it, such person or owner shall, at the end of the
ten (10) day confinement period, submit such dog to a licensed veterinarian
for examination and observation, and such veterinarian shall determine
whether the destruction of such dog is necessary for the public safety. In
either case, that is, whether the dog is confined in the custody of a licensed
veterinarian or in the custody of the owner or person having custody of
such dog, the veterinarian shall determine whether the destruction of the
dog is necessary for the public safety, and if he/she so certifies to the Chief
of Police, the Chief of Police shall cause such dog to be destroyed. If the
veterinarian shall certify that the destruction of such dog is not necessary
for the public safety, it shall be returned to its owner or the person having
custody of the same. All fees and expenses allowed by law incurred under
this subsection shall be paid for by the owner or person having custody of
the dog.
§ 5-6.7. Biting Dogs; Muzzle Required.39 [1967 Code § 5-2-11]
When any dog shall have bitten a person on three (3) separate occasions,
then the owner or custodian of the dog, whether or not the dog has been
vaccinated, shall be required either to cause the dog to be destroyed
forthwith or forever thereafter to keep it muzzled.
39.Editor's Note: For further control of dangerous dogs, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 5-6.5 MILLBURN CODE § 5-6.8
AO:170
§ 5-6.8. Unmuzzled Dogs Running at Large. [1967 Code § 5-2-11.1;
Ord. No. 2-6-67 § 5]
The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Township Committee, whenever
the public safety may require it, issue a proclamation authorizing the killing
of any dog found running at large within the Township without being
muzzled with a wire muzzle securely fastened about the nose.
§ 5-6.9. Illegal Attachment or Removal of License Tags. [1967 Code
§ 5-2-12]
No person shall attach a license tag to a dog for which it was not issued, or
remove a license tag or collar from a dog, without the consent of the owner.
§ 5-6.10. Enforcement; Designation of Pound. [1967 Code § 5-2-13]
The Chief of Police, the members of the Police force, and the Dog Warden by
virtue of their offices, and such assistants as may be appointed or employed
for that purpose, shall have and exercise the powers and authority
necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. The Township
Committee shall designate a pound to which animals seized under the
provisions of this section shall be taken.
§ 5-6.11. Interference with Law Enforcement Officers. [1967 Code
§ 5-2-14]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
§ 5-7. PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. [1967 Code § 5-2-15; Ord. No.
2-6-67 § 6; Ord. No. 3-20-67 § 1]
§ 5-8. PET WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2249-05 § 2]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
a. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, be
liable to the penalty, upon conviction, of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, except that for the first offense of failure to secure a license,
the penalty shall be not less than one dollar ($1.00) and not more than
fifty dollars ($50.00).
b. Any person who shall violate the provisions of subsection 5-5.5, Cats
Running at Large when Suffering with Contagious Diseases, shall be
liable to a penalty of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent
offense, to be recovered in the manner provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19
et seq.
§ 5-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8
AO:171
private, not owned or possessed by that person, except that any owner
or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used
for that purpose. Any person who is found to be in violation of this Section
5-8 shall be subject to the penalties provided in subsection 1-5.1
§ 5-9. PET ESTABLISHMENTS. [Ord. No. 2346-09 § 4]
§ 5-10. KEEPING OF CHICKENS, PERMIT REQUIRED.
§ 5-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
a. License Required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, a pet shop, a shelter, or a pound shall apply to the
Health Department for a license entitling him to keep or operate such
establishment. All licenses issued for such establishment shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, shall expire on the
last day of January of each year and shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
b. License Fees. The annual license fee for a kennel or pet shop shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00). No fee shall be charged for a shelter or
pound.
c. Individual Dog License Not Required. Any person holding such license
shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by
such licensee and kept at such establishments.
d. Dogs Off Premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
shall be permitted off such premises, except on leash or in a crate or
other safe control.
e. Pet shops licenses are issued by the municipality where the operation is
located and a license fee is required. As a prerequisite to licensure, the
facility must obtain a satisfactory inspection from the local Health
Department to ensure the shop meets all the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:23A1.1 through 1.12, Sanitary Operation of Kennel, Pet Shops,
Shelters and Pounds, as well as all zoning and other municipal
ordinances.
a. For the purpose of this section, a chicken (Gallus Domesticus) refers
only to a female chicken.
b. Coop shall mean the covered house, structure or room that is required
in order to provide chickens with shelter from the weather and with a
roosting area protected from predators. No coop shall exceed six (6')
feet in height.
c. Chicken Enclosure shall mean a fenced area that is attached to a Coop
in order to provide an outside exercise area for the chickens free from
predators, and of a size no greater than forty (40) square feet, with a
§ 5-8 MILLBURN CODE § 5-10.1
AO:172
§ 5-10.2. Permit. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
fence not in excess of six (6') feet in height, but sufficiently constructed
to prevent entrance by predators.
d. Repeat Violation shall mean the violation of a provision of this section or
of the Revised General Ordinances, pertaining to the requirements of
the keeping of chickens, by a person who has been found two (2)
previous times, through a code enforcement proceeding or any other
administrative, quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated, or
who has admitted violating, any provision within three (3) years prior to
the current violation.
a. Any person who keeps chickens in the Township of Millburn shall obtain
a permit from the Township prior to acquiring the chickens. The
issuance of permits shall be limited to one (1) per residential property.
Any person who, at the time of the effective date of this section, is
currently keeping chickens at a residential property within the
Township shall apply for a permit within sixty (60) days. Application
shall be made to the Health Officer and the fee for the permit shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00). A separate inspection fee shall be
charged at the time of application in the amount of sixty-five dollars
($65.00). The application shall include a survey and a drawing or
diagram depicting the placement and dimensions of the coop and
chicken enclosure.
b. In the event that a permit application by any person who is currently
keeping chickens is denied, such person shall be obliged to remove any
such chickens, coops and enclosures within 30 days of such denial. Any
such person shall have the right to immediately file a conforming
application so as to obtain a permit, in which case it shall not be
necessary for them to comply with the removal requirements above set
forth.
c. The permit shall be obtained annually in the month of December from
the Health Officer for a permit commencing on the ensuing January 1st.
Failure to obtain an annual renewal permit shall result in a penalty of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each chicken, which shall be collected
as a surcharge to the permit fee hereinabove required. In the event that
a permit application is made after January for a new commencement of
the keeping of chickens at a property, the fee shall be prorated to
December 31st of that year.
d. Permits expire and become invalid on December 31st of each year. A
person who wishes to continue keeping chickens shall have obtained a
new permit on or before the expiration date of the previous permit.
Application for a new permit shall be pursuant to the procedures and
requirements that are applicable at the time the person applies for a
new permit.
§ 5-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.2
AO:173
§ 5-10.3. Private Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by the Township, private
restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and take
precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are not limited
to deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions, neighborhood
association by-laws, and covenant deeds. The interpretation and
enforcement of the private restriction is the sole responsibility of the private
parties involved.
§ 5-10.4. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
A person who keeps or houses chickens on his or her property shall comply
with all of the following requirements:
e. Upon a repeat violation, any permit issued shall be revoked. The holder
of a revoked permit is ineligible from applying for or attaining a new
permit for a period of two (2) years from the date of revocation. Upon
the revocation of any permit, the permit holder shall be obliged to
remove chickens, Coop and Chicken Enclosure immediately thereafter.
a. Shall have received a permit required under subsection 5-10.2 of this
section.
b. Shall keep no more than four (4) chickens.
c. Shall keep chickens only on a property, the principal use of which is as a
single-family dwelling.
d. Shall keep no rooster.
e. Shall not slaughter any chickens.
f. Shall provide the chickens with a chicken enclosure as defined in
subsection 5-10.1c and the chickens must be kept in the coop or
chicken enclosure at all times. No chickens shall be allowed to free
range or be otherwise located outside of the coop and chicken
enclosure areas. The coop and chicken enclosure are subject to all
provisions of the Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance of the
Township, as well as all building, plumbing and electric permitting
requirements, except to the extent addressed by the provisions of this
subsection 5-10.4.
g. Shall not keep chickens in any location on the property other than in the
backyard. For purposes of this section, "backyard" means that portion
of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line and the side lot lines to
the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line
established by the rear of the single-family structure and extending to
the side lot lines.
h. No part of a coop or chicken enclosure shall be closer than twenty (20)
feet to any property line of an adjacent property.
§ 5-10.2 MILLBURN CODE § 5-10.4
AO:174
§ 5-10.5. Permit Examination. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
A person who has been issued a permit for the keeping of chickens pursuant
to this section shall submit it for examination upon demand by any
enforcement officer listed in Subsection 5-10.6 below.
i. Shall provide a coop and chicken enclosure for the keeping of chickens
which shall be so constructed and repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or
other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the
walls of, the enclosure. No part of a coop or chicken enclosure shall not
be located closer than twenty (20') feet to the residential structure on
the property. Coops shall be ventilated and in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
j. Shall protect feed and other items associated with the keeping of
chickens that might attract or become infested with or infected by rats,
mice, or other rodents through the use of rat-proof containers so as to
prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming
into contact with them. All food for immediate consumption shall be
placed in a suitable feeding trough or similar container and all other
food shall be stored in rat-proof containers at all times. No poultry feed
shall be scattered about any premises.
k. For purposes of this section, adjacent property means all parcels of
property that the applicant's property comes into contact with at one or
more points.
l. Nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate the provisions of Chapter
3, Section 3-7 in general, and specifically with respect to the keeping of
any bird which by "frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity" (Subsection 3-7.2a).
m. The selling of eggs by any person keeping chickens pursuant to this
section is prohibited.
n. Any dead chicken must be double bagged and placed in the garbage.
o. Violations. If any of the requirements of this section are not complied
with:
1. The Township Health Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or Animal
Control Officer may revoke any permit granted under this
ordinance and/or initiate prosecution for a violation pursuant to
Section 5-7 "Penalty for Violation", and/or Section 1-5 "General
Penalty", as applicable; and/or
2. Any person residing within the Township may initiate prosecution
for a violation pursuant to Section 5-7 "Penalty for Violation", and/
or Section 1-5 "General Penalty", as applicable; and/or
3. The Township shall also have the right to commence litigation in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 5-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.6
AO:175
§ 5-10.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2509-18]
The Township Health Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or Animal Control
Officer shall have authority to discern compliance with this section and the
authority to direct compliance with this section with regard to requiring
certain facilities or activities by chicken owners to ensure that neighbors of
those who keep chickens are not unreasonably subjected to noise, rodents,
predators, or other violations of the provisions of this section.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1967 Code §§ 3-3-1, 3-1-2; New]
This Chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Millburn in accordance with the provisions of
an Act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages" (Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933), its supplements
and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1967 Code § 3-1-2]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases herein shall have
the same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations
of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1967 Code § 3-1-5; New]
All applications for license, all licenses issued, and all proceedings under
this Chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the state of New
Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1967 Code § 3-1-5]
All licenses required by this Chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without having obtained a license in accordance with the Act referred to
in Section 6-1 and the provisions of this Chapter, except in those cases
provided by law where the licenses in question are issued by the Director of
the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-10.6 MILLBURN CODE § 6-3.4
AO:176
§ 6-3.4. Classes and Maximum Number of Licenses; License Fees.
[1967 Code § 3-1-5; 3-1-12; Ord. No. 7-6-70 § 1; Ord. No. 12-74 § 1;
Ord. No. 20-79 § 1; Ord. No. 31-79 § 1; Ord. No. 12-82 § 1; Ord. No.
36-82 § 1; Ord. No. 22-85 § 1; Ord. No. 15-86 § 1; Ord. No. 2218-03
§ 1]
The classes and maximum number of licenses to be issued by the Township
are hereby fixed as follows and the license fees for the types of licenses
authorized by the provisions of this Chapter shall be as follows:
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1967 Code § 3-1-15; Ord. No. 3-83 § 1]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed in
any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
a. License Year 2004-2005
1. Plenary Retail Consumption Licenses: $2,250.00
2. Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses: $2,250.00
3. Club Licenses: $180.00
b. License Year 2005-2006 and Thereafter
1. Plenary Retail Consumption Licenses: $2,500.00
2. Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses: $2,500.00
3. Club Licenses: $180.00
Notes:
1. For State law authorizing the Township to restrict number of licenses to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail, see N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
2. Plenary retail consumption licenses, twelve (12) including one (1) to a person or entity who
operates a hotel or motel containing at least one hundred (100) guest rooms and including
one (1) upon the approval of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control,
to a nonprofit corporation which conducts musical or theatrical performances or concerts
on premises with a seating capacity of one thousand (1,000) persons or more, for the sale
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only during performances
and the two (2) hours immediately preceding and the two (2) hours immediately following
performances.
3. Every club license shall be deemed to be issued conditioned that the licensed club shall
continue to be a bona fide club and shall be revocable upon the discontinuance of such status.
§ 6-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.2
AO:177
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1967 Code § 3-1-15; Ord. No. 3-83 § 1; Ord. No.
2180-00 § 1]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays, no
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, except
that when December 24 (Christmas Eve) and December 31 (New Year's Eve)
fall on Sunday, no alcoholic beverages may be sold on premises licensed for
plenary retail distribution between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1967 Code § 3-1-15; Ord. No. 3-83 § 1]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when it
falls on a weekday. When January 1 falls on a Sunday, no alcoholic beverages
may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.4. Sales to Certain Persons. [1967 Code § 3-1-18; New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 6-4.5. Closing of Premises During Prohibited Hours of Sale;
Exceptions. [New]
During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed and no person shall be admitted
or permitted to remain thereon except the licensee or bona fide employees
of the licensee; provided, however, that such requirement for the closing of
the premises shall not apply to bona fide hotels or restaurants as defined
in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t) and to clubs eligible for a club license under N.J.S.A.
33:1-12(5) and to other establishments where the principal business is other
than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.6. Regulations Generally Concerning Plenary Retail
Consumption Licenses. [1967 Code § 3-1-6]
The holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall be entitled, subject
to the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises any
alcoholic beverages by the glass or other open receptacle, and also to
sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off the
licensed premises; provided, however, that the sale of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the licensed premises shall not be permitted in or
upon any premises in which a grocery, delicatessen, drugstore or other
mercantile business (except the keeping of a hotel or restaurant, or the sale
§ 6-4.2 MILLBURN CODE § 6-4.6
AO:178
of cigars and cigarettes at retail as an accommodation to patrons, or the
retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages) is carried on.
§ 6-4.7. Regulations Generally Concerning Plenary Retail
Distribution Licenses. [1967 Code § 3-1-7]
The holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall be entitled, subject
to the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the
licensed premises, but only in original containers.
§ 6-4.8. Regulations Generally Concerning Club Licenses. [1967
Code § 3-1-9]
The holder of a club license shall be entitled, subject to the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, to
sell, only to bona fide club members and their guests, alcoholic beverages
intended for immediate consumption on the licensed premises. Club
licenses may be issued only to such corporations, associations and
organizations as are operated for benevolent, charitable, fraternal, social,
religious, recreational, athletic or similar purposes, and not for private gain,
and comply with all conditions which, subject to rules and regulations, may
be imposed by the Director.
§ 6-4.9. Application for Licenses. [1967 Code § 3-1-10]
Applications for licenses required by this Chapter shall be made upon forms
to be obtained from the Township Clerk, promulgated or approved by the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-4.10. Procedure for Issuance of Licenses. [1967 Code § 3-1-11]
Except as otherwise provided by law, all licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages shall be issued only by authority of the Township Committee
evidenced by a resolution duly adopted by that body. Such licenses shall
be executed in the name of the Township by the signature of the Township
Clerk, and the Township seal affixed thereon.
§ 6-4.11. Authority to Issue Less Than Maximum. [1967 Code
§ 3-1-13]
Notwithstanding the maximum number of plenary retail consumption
licenses, plenary retail distribution licenses and club licenses prescribed
by subsection 6-3.4, the Township Committee, as issuing authority, may, in
the exercise of its sound discretion, subject nevertheless to appeal to the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State, limit the
issue of licenses of any or all of the foregoing classifications in any vicinity
or neighborhood of the Township, to such number or numbers as public
necessity and convenience may appear to be required; provided, however,
that nothing in this section contained shall be deemed to authorize the
issuance or continuance in effect of more licenses of any of the foregoing
§ 6-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.11
AO:179
classifications throughout the Township than the maximum prescribed by
subsection 6-3.4.
§ 6-4.12. Display of Beverages or Containers; Exception for
Sidewalk Cafes. [1967 Code § 3-1-17; Ord. No. 19-95 § 2]
No alcoholic beverages or containers thereof shall be displayed or suffered
to remain in, upon or in connection with any licensed premises beyond and
in front of the building line of the premises, except that wine and beer
may be consumed at a sidewalk cafe where table service is provided, as
permitted in subsection 4-40.5e of this Code.
§ 6-4.13. Licensee to Post Copy of This Chapter. [1967 Code
§ 3-1-24]
Every licensee shall keep a copy of this Chapter posted in a conspicuous
place in the rear of the bar on the licensed premises at all times.
§ 6-5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1967 Code § 3-1-25; New]
Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five (5)-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this Chapter.
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 3-1-18; New]
No licensee shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages to persons under the
legal age.
§ 6-6.2. Unlawful Acts by Persons Under Legal Age for Purchase of
Alcoholic Beverages; Disorderly Persons. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81]
It shall be unlawful for:
a. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her,
any alcoholic beverage; or
§ 6-4.11 MILLBURN CODE § 6-6.2
AO:180
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
b. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for him or her any alcoholic beverage; or
c. Any person to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his/her age
have the right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection shall be
deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction thereof,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, as amended, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, the Court shall
suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six (6) months
or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor vehicle in
this State for six (6) months beginning on the date he/she becomes eligible to
obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later. In addition
to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may require any
person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates this
act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment program authorized by
the Department of Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period of
confinement prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has been
convicted.
§ 6-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.2
AO:181

Part I
ON-STREET TRAFFIC REGULATIONS40
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1967 Code § 24-1-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this Chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as may be in
current use in the Township.
§ 7-1.3. Holidays and Parking Meters Defined. [Ord. No. 2520-18
§ 1]
As used in this Chapter:
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Shall mean New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day, Washington's Birthday also referred to as Presidents Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, in accordance with 5 U.S.C.A.
§ 6103(a), as the days observed as federal Legal Holidays.
PARKING METER — Shall mean any mechanical device or meter placed
or erected for the regulation of traffic by authority of this section. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Township, and when operated, shall at all times
indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such
period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [New]
40.Editor's Note: See Schedule Attached To Chapter 7, Entitled Schedule VIIA, Chart For
Approval Requirements Resulting From Passage Of Senate Bill 378 Of 1983. Quoting From
An August, 1983 Letter From P. Norman Deitch, Chief Of The Bureau Of Traffic
Engineering At That Time: "Bill S-378 Is Divided Basically Into Two Parts. The First Part
Of The Bill Allows A Municipality, If It Chooses, To Designate Reasonable And Safe Speed
Limits And To Determine The Need For Stop And Yield Intersections Only On Streets
Under Municipal Jurisdiction And Totally Self-contained Within A Municipality." "Portions
Of Codifications Involving These Matters (Parking, Handicap Parking Spaces, Loading
Zones, Etc.) Will Not Be Reviewed By The Department's Engineering Staff And Are To Be
Handled At The Local Level." "The Second Portion Of The Legislation Gives All
Responsibility For The Investigation Into The Need For, And Eventual Approval Of, Almost
All Parking Prohibitions To Municipal Governments, Without Any Involvement By The
Commissioner Of Transportation. This Portion Of The Legislation Gives The Authority To
Counties And Municipalities For All Streets Under Their Jurisdictional Control, Not Just
Those Totally Self-contained Streets As Described In The Previous Paragraphs." "Subject
To The Provisions Of R.S. 39:4-138 Which Details Statutory Parking Prohibitions Such As
In The Vicinity Of Stop Signs, Fire Hydrants, Intersections, Crosswalks, Etc., In The Case
Of Any Street Under Municipal Or County Jurisdiction, A Municipality Or County Has The
Authority To Investigate The Need And Eventually Approve Parking Prohibitions Without
Any Involvement Whatsoever By The Commissioner Of Transportation."
§ 7-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2
AO:183
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [1967 Code § 24-1-2; New]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this Chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [New]
As provided in the Adopting Ordinance for the Revision of the Township
of Millburn Ordinances, all former traffic ordinances of the Township are
hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
a. The Mayor or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act, the Chief
of Police and, in the event of his/her absence, disability or inability to
act, then the ranking officer of the Police Department, is hereby
authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or
portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he/she finds that such
closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or
welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor and in accordance with
subsection a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-2 MILLBURN CODE § 7-6
AO:184
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE. [New]
The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-8. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
[New]
§ 7-9. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW PLOWING
AND REMOVAL. [New; Ord. No. 12-97 § 1]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
street or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated,
except where on-street parking is permitted in a declaration of a snow
emergency. (See subsection 7-14.1b)
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. An unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any Police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-10
AO:185
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1967 Code §§ 24-2-4.1, 24-2-4,
24-11-3, 24-11-3.1; Ord. No. 21-74 § 3; Ord. No. 1-76 § 2; Ord. No.
18-77 § 14; Ord. No. 22-78 § 4; New; Ord. No. 12-97 § 2; Ord. No.
2341-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2360-10]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Brookside
Drive
a. Westerly All For a distance of 350 feet
northerly from the
prolongation of the
northerly side line of Old
Short Hills Road
b. Easterly All For a distance of 430 feet
northerly from the
prolongation of the
northerly side line of Old
Short Hills Road
Essex Street Southerly All Beginning 180 feet from
the easterly curbline of
Main Street to a point 135
feet east thereof
Main Street a. Westerly All From the N.J. Transit
Railroad bridge southerly
to Essex Street
b. Easterly All From the N.J. Transit
Railroad bridge southerly
for a distance of 81 feet
Millburn
Avenue
Both 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
except
Sundays and
holidays
From Short Hills Avenue
easterly to Blaine Street
Millburn
Avenue
Both All From Parkview Drive to
Vauxhall Road
Old Short
Hills Road
a. Westerly All From the N.J. Transit
Railroad bridge northerly
to Hobart Avenue
b. Easterly All From the N.J. Transit
Railroad bridge northerly
to Brookside Drive
§ 7-10 MILLBURN CODE § 7-10
AO:186
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
c. Easterly All For a distance of 200 feet
northwesterly from the
prolongation of the
westerly side line of
Brookside Drive
Parsonage
Hill Road
a. Northerly All—except
Sundays
From the intersection of
Chapel Hill Road westerly,
to a point 350 feet west of
the westerly side of the
intersection of White Oak
Ridge Road
b. Southerly All—except
Sundays
From the intersection of
Chapel Hill Road westerly,
to a point 350 feet west of
the westerly side of the
intersection of White Oak
Ridge Road
White Oak
Ridge Road
a. Westerly All—except
Sundays
From the southern most
inter-section of Farmstead
Road southerly to a point
50 feet south of the
southern driveway to Gero
Park
b. Easterly All—except
Sundays
From the southern most
intersection of Farmstead
Road southerly to a point
50 feet south of the
southern driveway to Gero
Park
White Oak
Ridge Road
Both All From Byron Road
southerly to Hartshorn
Drive
§ 7-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
§ 7-11.1. Time Limit Parking. [1967 Code §§ 24-2-5, 24-11-4; Ord.
No. 11-20-67 § 1; Ord. No. 12-2-68 § 2; Ord. No. 12-16-68 § 2; Ord.
No. 1-19-70 § 1; Ord. No. 12-21-70 §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 4-5-71 § 6; Ord.
No. 6-5-72 § 3; Ord. No. 8-7-72 § 1; Ord. No. 4-16-73 §§ 3, 4; Ord. No.
6-4-73 § 1; Ord. No. 13-74 § 1; Ord. No. 25-75 §§ 2, 4; Ord. No. 18-77
§ 15; Ord. No. 30-77 § 3; Ord. No. 9-78 § 2; Ord. No. 22-78 §§ 2, 3;
Ord. No. 25-78 § 3; Ord. No. 4-80 § 2; Ord. No. 13-80; Ord. No. 6-81
§ 2; Ord. No. 19-82 § 2; Ord. No. 22-82 § 3; Ord. No. 11-86 § 1; Ord.
No. 14-94 § 1; New; Ord. No. 12-97 § 3; Ord. No. 2148-98 § 1; Ord.
§ 7-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.1
AO:187
No. 2242-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2253 § 1; Ord. No. 2260-05 § 1; Ord. No.
2289-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2298-07 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2304-07 § 3; Ord. No.
2315-08 § 1; Ord. No. 2341-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2360-10; Ord. No.
2364-10; Ord. No. 2398-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2403-13 § 1; Ord. No.
2423-14; Ord. No. 2450-15; Ord. No. 2489-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2499-18
§ 1; Ord. No. 2502-18; Ord. No. 2508-18 § 1; Ord. No. 2513-18;
amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and legal holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described.
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Blaine
Street
East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Bodwell
Terrace
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Campbell
Road
East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Millburn Avenue
to Pine Terrace East
Chatham
Road
North 12 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From a point 25 feet
west of the westerly
side line of Woodland
Road extended to the
north side of Chatham
Road running westerly
210 feet; and from a
point 505 feet west of
the westerly side line
of Woodland Road
extended to the north
side of Chatham Road
running westerly 210
feet
Chatham
Road
North 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From a point 235 feet
west of the westerly
side line of Woodland
Road running westerly
105 feet
Chatham
Road
North 2 hours 9:30 a.m. -
6:30 p.m.
From the easterly
projected line of
Woodland Road
easterly for a distance
of 434 feet
§ 7-11.1 MILLBURN CODE § 7-11.1
AO:188
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Chatham
Road
South 2 hours 9:30 a.m. -
6:30 p.m.
From the
southeasterly corner
of Woodland Road
easterly for a distance
of 387 feet
Chatham
Road
South 15 mins. 8:00 a.m.
-5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday;
8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
Saturday
From the property line
of the U.S. Post Office
(Short Hills) easterly
to the driveway of the
U.S. Post Office (Short
Hills)
Church
Street
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Crescent
Place
North 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Short Hills
Avenue to Great Oak
Drive
Crescent
Place
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Great Oak Drive
easterly for a distance
of 300 feet
Cypress
Street
[Added
11-12-2019
by Ord. No.
2544-19;
amended
12-17-2019
by Ord. No.
2549-19]
Both 2 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From Millburn Avenue
to Milton Street,
excepting a length of
235 feet on the
westerly side north of
Millburn Avenue
Duncan
Street
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Essex Street Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From a point 216 feet
west of Main Street
westerly to Spring
Street
Essex Street South 1 hour 9:30 a.m. -
6:30 p.m.
From the southeast
corner of Main Street
easterly to Holmes
Street
§ 7-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.1
AO:189
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Essex Street Both 1 hour 9:30 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Essex Street with
Main Street westerly
for a distance of 216
feet
Essex Street North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:30 p.m.
From a point opposite
the easterly side line
of Holmes Street, if
projected, easterly a
distance of 372 feet
Essex Street South 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the southeast
corner of Holmes and
Essex Streets, easterly
for a distance of 268
feet
Essex Street North 15 mins. 12:00 a.m.
- 11:59
p.m.
From a point 102 feet
west of the northwest
curbline of Spring
Street running
westerly for a distance
of 120 feet
Ferncliff
Terrace
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Baltusrol Way to
Woodland Road
Forest Drive East 3 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From Chatham Road
southerly to its
terminus
Gapview
Road
[Added
11-12-2019
by Ord. No.
2544-19]
Both 3 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 7-11.1 MILLBURN CODE § 7-11.1
AO:190
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Glen Avenue South 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Lackawanna
Place easterly to a
point 250 feet west of
Sagamore Road
From a point in the
southerly line of Glen
Avenue 352.52 feet
more or less
northwesterly of the
westerly side line of
Lackawanna Place and
extending therefrom
northerly along the
southerly side line of
Glen Avenue 811.96
feet more or less to
the southerly side of
the Essex County
Bridge over the West
Branch of the Rahway
River
Great Oak
Drive
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Crescent Place
easterly for a distance
of 300 feet
Haddonfield
Road
Both 2 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Between Old Short
Hills Road and
Whitney Road
Knollwood
Road
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Hobart Avenue
to Park Place
Lupine Way Both 3 hours 6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Throughout the entire
length of Lupine Way
Main Street Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Taylor Street to
Ridgewood and Rector
Streets
Main Street West 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the northwest
corner of Taylor Street
northerly to Millburn
Avenue
§ 7-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.1
AO:191
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Main Street East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From a point opposite
the northwest corner
of Taylor Street
northerly to Millburn
Avenue
Main Street West 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Ridgewood and
Rector Streets
southerly to a point
170 feet north of the
northwest corner of
Ocean Street
Main Street West 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From the southwest
corner of Ocean Street
southerly to the
Township line at
Springfield
Main Street East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Ridgewood Road
and Rector Street
southerly to the
Township line at
Springfield
Millburn
Avenue
North 3 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From 380 feet easterly
of Morris Turnpike to
Short Hills Avenue
Millburn
Avenue
South 3 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Morris Turnpike
easterly for a distance
of 390 feet and 730
feet easterly from
Morris Turnpike to
Short Hills Avenue
Millburn
Avenue
South 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Millburn Avenue
and Douglas Street
easterly to 100 feet
westerly of Parkview
Drive
Millburn
Avenue
North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Millburn Avenue
and Douglas Street
easterly to Parkview
Drive
§ 7-11.1 MILLBURN CODE § 7-11.1
AO:192
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Millburn
Avenue
South 15 mins. 8:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday;
8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
Saturday
Between its
intersection with
Baltusrol Way and
Farley Place
From Whittingham
Terrace easterly to the
driveway of the U.S.
Post Office (Millburn)
Northerly
Plaza of the
Short Hills
Railroad
Station
South 1 hour 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From the
northeasterly corner of
the station building to
the first roadway
underpass to the east
thereof
Oak Hill
Road
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Oakview
Terrace
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Old Short
Hills Road
East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Marion Avenue
southeasterly for a
distance of 530 feet
Overlook
Terrace
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
From Baltusrol Way to
Short Hills Avenue
Park Place Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From Knollwood Road
to Forest Drive
Parkview
Drive
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Millburn Avenue
southerly to Mountain
View Road
Pine
Terrace
East
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Short Hills
Avenue to Baltusrol
Way
Rawley
Place
East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From Millburn Avenue
to end of Rawley Place
Rector
Street
North 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Rector
Street
South 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From Spring Street to
Main Street
§ 7-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.1
AO:193
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Ridge
Terrace
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
Throughout the entire
length of Ridge
Terrace from Baltusrol
Way to Woodland Road
Short Hills
Avenue
East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From the
southwesterly
projected line of
Chatham Road
southerly along the
easterly side for a
distance of 191 feet
South
Mountain
Road
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Millburn Avenue and
its intersection with
Mountain View Road
Spring
Street
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From Taylor Street to
Millburn Avenue to
Willow Street to Main
Street
Spring
Street
East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Along the easterly side
of the street, starting
150 feet from the
projected northeast
corner of Spring
Street and Millburn
Avenue to the southeast
projected corner
of Spring Street and
Essex Street
Taylor
Street
North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
From Main Street to
Spring Street
The
Crescent
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From the intersection
of Highland Avenue
easterly, to the
intersection of
Crescent Place
Undercliff
Road
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
Between Millburn
Avenue and Mountain
View Road
§ 7-11.1 MILLBURN CODE § 7-11.1
AO:194
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Walnut
Avenue
East 2 hours 8:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Mountain View Road
to a point 500 feet
north
Wellington
Avenue
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From Campbell Road
to Glenwood Drive
Whittingham
Terrace
West 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
except
Sundays
and legal
holidays
From the southwest
corner of Millburn
Avenue and
Whittingham Terrace
southerly to the corner
of Ridgewood Road
and Whittingham
Terrace
Witkop
Place
South 2 hours 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
From Rawley Place to
Whittingham Terrace
Woodland
Road
Both 3 hours 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
From Ridge Terrace to
Wellington Terrace
Wyoming
Avenue
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Millburn Avenue and
its intersection with
Mountain View Road
§ 7-11.2. Metered Time Limit Parking. [Amended in entirety by Ord.
No. 2520-18 § 3; Prior history includes 1967 Code §§ 24-9-1, 24-9-2,
24-9-3, 24-9-4, 24-9-5, 24-9-6, 24-9-7, 24-9-8, 24-9-9; Ord. No.
3-1-71 § 1; Ord. No. 4-5-71 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 8-2-71 §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7; Ord. No. 18-77 §§ 1, 3, 5; Ord. No. 30-77 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 23-83
§ 1; Ord. No. 8-86 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 6-89 §§ 3, 4; New; Ord. No.
2196-02 § 1; Ord. No. 2243-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2253-05 § 2; Ord. No.
2304-07 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2315-08 §§ 2,3; Ord. No. 2341-09 § 3; Ord.
No. 2433-14; Ord. No. 2485-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2508-18 § 2]
a. Purpose of Use of Parking Meters. It is hereby determined and stated
that the control of vehicular traffic upon the public streets of the
Township will be facilitated and the public safety and general welfare
will be enhanced by the use of parking meters as a means of regulation
of parking in and for certain areas of such streets, hereinafter
designated as metered parking zones.
b. Parking Meter Zones—Types; Markings; Signs.
1. Types of Zones. There shall be four (4) kinds of on-street parking
meter or paystation zones: The first kind is designated as a one (1)
§ 7-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.2
AO:195
hour meter or paystation zone in which parking shall be permitted
for one (1) continuous period of sixty (60) minutes. The second kind
is designated as a two (2) hour meter or paystation zone in which
parking shall be permitted for up to one (1) continuous period of up
to two (2) hours. The third kind is designated as a three (3) hour
meter or paystation zone in which parking shall be permitted for
up to one (1) continuous period of three (3) hours. The fourth kind
is designated as a twelve (12) hour meter zone in which parking
shall be permitted for one (1) continuous period of up to twelve (12)
hours.
The fees for one (1), two (2) and three (3) hour spaces controlled by
a meter shall be a range of fifty cents ($.50) to seventy-five cents
($.75) per hour.
The fee set forth for twelve (12) hour spaces controlled by a meter
shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
c. Twelve Hour Zones. The following named streets or parts thereof are
hereby designated as twelve (12) hour zones which require resident
stickers:
Chatham Road, along the northerly side, beginning at a point two
hundred one (201') feet west of the westerly side line of Woodland
Road, if projected, to such northerly side line of Chatham Road and
running westerly for a distance of one hundred seventy-six (176') feet;
and further beginning at a point fifty (50') feet east of the easterly
side line of Forest Drive and running easterly along Chatham Road a
distance of two hundred ninety-five (295') feet.
d. Signs; Installation and Operation of Meters; Manner of Parking. Signs
shall be installed in all metered parking zones specifying the time limits
during which parking is permitted, which signs shall be in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.17. The Chief of Police shall cause lines or
markings to be painted or placed upon the curb and street pavement
adjacent to each parking meter installed pursuant to the provisions of
this section, for the purpose of designating the parking space for which
such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to any such
meter shall be placed within the lines or markings so delineated. No
parking meter shall be installed or placed in any area in which parking
is prohibited by the laws of the State.
e. How Parking Meter and Space to Be Used; Overtime Parking.
1. Parking spaces in the one (1) hour, two (2) hour, three (3) hour, and
twelve (12) hour zones may lawfully be occupied upon depositing in
the meter controlling the parking space the proper coins as
specified in paragraph b of subsection 7-11.2.
2. Overtime Parking. If any vehicle shall, as indicated by the meter
controlling the parking space, remain parked in any such parking
space beyond the parking time limit prescribed in paragraph b of
§ 7-11.2 MILLBURN CODE § 7-11.2
AO:196
§ 7-11.3. On Street Permit Parking. [Ord. No. 2508-18; Ord. No.
2520-18 § 4]
The purpose of this section is to designate on street permit parking areas.
The following are On Street Permit Parking Areas:
subsection 7-11.2 for the coin deposit made, the person who parked
the vehicle in that location, or the registered owner thereof, shall
be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section; provided
further, however, that no motor vehicle shall occupy the same
delineated parking space for more than one (1) period of time for
which parking is permitted in such space and any motor vehicle
that shall be parked for more than one (1) period for which parking
is permitted in such space shall be in violation of this section even
though the required parking fee for the additional period or periods
has been deposited in the meter controlling the parking space in
which the motor vehicle is parked.
When any vehicle remains parked in any parking space beyond
the parking time limit prescribed for such space, each such period
of time that the vehicle remains in such parking space after the
expiration of the initial period of time shall constitute a separate
violation irrespective of whether or not payment has been
deposited in the meter for the additional period or periods of time.
f. Use of Slugs in Meters; Tampering with Meters. Depositing or causing
to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for
the aforesaid United States coin, or defacing, injuring or, without lawful
authorization, tampering with, opening or willfully breaking, destroying
or impairing the usefulness of any parking meter installed pursuant to
this section shall constitute a violation of the provisions thereof, and
upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
g. Hours and Days Meters to Operate. The time limitations and coin
deposit requirements specified by this subsection shall be deemed
effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily, except on
Sundays and Legal Holidays; excepting, however, the east side of Main
Street between Taylor Street and Millburn Avenue between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. when no parking
shall be permitted; and further excepting, the portion of Chatham Road,
along the northerly side, beginning at a point two hundred one (201')
feet west of the westerly side line of Woodland Road, a distance of one
hundred seventy-six (176') feet; and further beginning at a point fifty
(50') feet east of the easterly side line of Forest Drive and running
easterly along Chatham Road a distance of two hundred ninety-five
(295') feet on Saturdays when the meters governing this area shall not
be in operation.
h. (Reserved)
§ 7-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11.3
AO:197
Name of Street Side Permit Type Location
Essex Street North Business For a length of 122 feet on
the northerly side of the
street and starting
approximately 140 feet
easterly of its intersection
with Holmes Street
Millburn Avenue South Business From 400 feet easterly of
Morris Turnpike for a
distance of 300 feet
§ 7-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [New]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle between
the specified hours and days upon any street or parts thereof described.
Name of Street Side
Hours &
Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 5; Prior
history includes 1967 Code § 24-2-2; Ord. No. 6-19-67 § 1; Ord. No.
8-21-67 § 1; Ord. No. 8-19-68 § 1; Ord. No. 12-2-68 § 1; Ord. No.
12-16-68 § 3; Ord. No. 12-15-69 § 1; Ord. No. 2-2-70 § 1; Ord. No.
9-21-70 § 1; Ord. No. 12-21-70 §§ 1, 2, 5; Ord. No. 3-1-71 § 1; Ord.
No. 4-5-71 § 4; Ord. No. 6-5-72 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 9-25-72 § 3; Ord. No.
4-16-73 § 2; Ord. No. 21-74 § 1; Ord. No. 8-75 § 1; Ord. No. 9-75 § 1;
Ord. No. 25-75 §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 5-76 § 1; Ord. No. 22-78 § 1; Ord.
No. 28-78 § 1; Ord. No. 27-79 § 1; Ord. No. 4-80 §§ 1, 3; Ord. No.
22-82 § 2; Ord. No. 8-83 § 1; Ord. No. 20-84 § 1; Ord. No. 5-85 § 1;
Ord. No. 14-85 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 15-88 § 4; Ord. No. 9-94 § 1; Ord.
No. 12-96 § 1; Ord. No. 12-97 § 4; Ord. No. 2164.99 § 1; Ord. No.
2315-08 § 4; Ord. No. 2334-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2341-09 § 4; Ord. No.
2360-10; Ord. No. 2450-15; Ord. No. 2476-17; Ord. No. 2489-17 § 2;
Ord. No. 2499-18 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Baltusrol Way Both From Millburn Avenue northerly a
distance of 210 feet to
Meadowbrook Road
Blaine Street Easterly Entire length
§ 7-11.3 MILLBURN CODE § 7-13
AO:198
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Bleeker Street Southerly Entire length
Campbell Road West From Millburn Avenue to
Meadowbrook Road
Chatham Road a. Northerly For a distance of 245 feet
westerly from Short Hills Avenue
b. Southerly Between Woodland Road and
Forest Drive South
c. Northerly Between Forest Drive South and
Taylor Road South
d. Southerly From the southwesterly corner of
Short Hills Avenue westerly for a
distance of 643 feet therefrom
Crescent Place Southerly From the southeasterly corner of
Short Hills Avenue easterly to the
southwesterly corner of Great
Oak Drive
Crescent, The a. Northerly From Short Hills Avenue westerly
for a distance of 220 feet to the
North Station Plaza
b. Southerly From Short Hills Avenue westerly
for a distance of 232 feet to the
North Station Plaza
c. Northerly For a distance of 290 feet easterly
from Short Hills Avenue
Dogwood Drive North Entire length
Douglas Street Both From Millburn Avenue northerly
to its end
Easement
adjacent to Essex
Street, granted to
the Township
upon lands
immediately
adjacent to 188
Essex Street
Both For a distance of 160 feet
southerly from Essex Street
East Willow
Street
a. Southerly Entire length and on any portion
of the cul-de-sac at the easterly
end of the street
b. Northerly For a distance of 560 feet easterly
from Main Street
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:199
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Essex Street a. Southerly For a distance of 43 feet westerly
from Holmes Street
b. Both Beginning at a point where the
northerly side line of Essex Street
is intersected by the prolongation
in a northerly direction of the
easterly side line of Spring Street;
thence in a southeasterly
direction along the northerly line
of Essex Street 178 feet more or
less to a point in the division line
between lands of Millburn
Township and lands of Irene
Meola
c. Southerly From a point 242 feet easterly
from Holmes Street easterly for a
distance of 556 feet to Millburn
Avenue
d. Northerly From the projected easterly line
of Holmes Street from a point 256
feet easterly for a distance of 645
feet to Millburn Avenue
e. Southerly Running easterly from the
southeast corner of Essex and
Douglas Streets for a distance of
238 feet
f. Northerly Running easterly from the
northeasterly corner of Essex and
Douglas Streets for a distance of
129 feet
g. Southerly Running easterly from the
northeast corner of Spring and
Essex Streets for a distance of 81
feet
h. Northerly Across from the intersection of
Holmes Street and continuing to
the intersection of Lackawanna
Place
Farley Place Easterly and
Northerly
Between the intersection of Farley
Place and Millburn Avenue and
the intersection of Farley Place
and the Morris and Essex
Turnpike
§ 7-13 MILLBURN CODE § 7-13
AO:200
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Fineran Way Easterly From the intersection of Route
124 to and including any portion
of the cul-de-sac at the northerly
end of the street
Forest Drive a. Northerly For a distance of 217 feet easterly
from Knollwood Road
b. Easterly From a point 320 feet southerly
from the southern curbline of
Chatham Road for a distance of
50 feet southerly
c. Easterly From a point 495 feet southerly
from the southern curbline of
Chatham Road for a distance of
25 feet southerly
Glen Avenue a. Northerly Between Sagamore Road and Old
Short Hills Road
b. Southerly In a westerly direction from
Sagamore Road for a distance of
250 feet
c. Southerly Between Brookside Drive and Old
Short Hills Road
d. Both From the intersection of the
southerly side line of Glen Avenue
and the easterly side of Brookside
Drive thence along the southerly
side line of Glen Avenue and
southeasterly for a distance of
464 feet more or less to the
southerly side of the Essex County
Bridge over the west branch of
the Rahway River
e. Both From the intersection of the
southerly side line of Glen Avenue
and the easterly side line of
Lackawanna Place thence along
the southerly line of Glen Avenue
northwesterly 352.52 feet more or
less
Glenwood Drive Easterly From Millburn Avenue northerly
for a distance of 217 feet to
Meadowbrook Road
Great Hills Road Both Entire length
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:201
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Haddonfield Road a. Northerly From a point 191 feet west of the
westerly side of Old Short Hills
Road and extending therefrom
westerly along the side of
Haddonfield Road and northerly
along the eastern side of Whitney
Road 350 feet
b. Southerly From a point 272 feet westerly
from Old Short Hills Road and
extended therefrom along the
easterly side of Whitney Road for
a distance of 287 feet to Midhurst
Road
Highland Avenue a. Westerly From Forest Drive southerly for a
distance of 533 feet
b. Westerly From Hobart Avenue southerly for
a distance of 240 feet to "The
Crescent"
c. Both From the intersection of Western
Drive southerly to the intersection
of The Crescent
Hobart Avenue a. Both From Highland Avenue to Old
Short Hills Road
b. Southerly From North Station Plaza easterly
for a distance of 745 feet to
Highland Avenue
Hobart Gap Road Both From the Morris and Essex
Turnpike to Hobart Avenue
Holmes Street a. Easterly Between Millburn Avenue and
Essex Street
b. Westerly For a distance of 67 feet southerly
from Essex Street
Lackawanna
Place
a. Easterly From Millburn Avenue to Glen
Avenue
b. Westerly Between the intersection of
Lackawanna Place and Essex
Street and the intersection of
Lackawanna Place and Millburn
Avenue
Lake Road a. Easterly For a distance of 640 feet
northerly from Shore Edge Lane
§ 7-13 MILLBURN CODE § 7-13
AO:202
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
b. Westerly For a distance of 640 feet
northerly from Lake Shore Drive
Linden Street Northerly Between Wyoming Avenue and
Myrtle Avenue
Main Street a. Westerly From the southwest corner of
Main Street and Essex Street
southerly to Millburn Avenue
b. Westerly From the northwest corner of
Main Street and Millburn Avenue
northerly for a distance of 100
feet
c. Easterly From the southeasterly corner of
Main Street and Essex Street
southerly to Millburn Avenue
d. Easterly From the northeast corner of
Main Street and Millburn Avenue
northerly for a distance of 60 feet
e. Easterly From the southeast corner of
Main Street and Millburn Avenue
southerly for a distance of 112
feet
f. Both For a distance of 105 feet
northerly from the prolongation of
the northerly side line of
Ridgewood Road
g. Both For a distance of 100 feet
southerly from the prolongation of
the southerly side line of
Ridgewood Road
h. Easterly For a distance of 125 feet
northerly from the prolongation of
the northerly side line of East
Willow Street
i. Easterly For a distance of 125 feet
southerly from the prolongation of
the southerly side line of East
Willow Street
j. Westerly For a distance of 225 feet
northerly from the prolongation of
the northerly side line of Willow
Street
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:203
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
k. Westerly For a distance of 110 feet
southerly from the prolongation of
the southerly side line of Willow
Street
Meadowbrook
Road
Both Between its intersection with
Campbell Road and Glenwood
Drive
Millburn Avenue a. (Reserved)
b. Northerly For a distance of 56 feet westerly
from Holmes Street
c. Northerly For a distance of 22 feet
commencing at a point 118 feet
west of the westerly side of
Holmes street
d. Northerly For a distance of 200 feet
westerly from the northwest
corner of Douglas Street
e. (Reserved)
f. Northerly For a distance of 88 feet easterly
from Farley Place
g. Southerly For a distance of 50 feet directly
opposite the entrance to
Lackawanna Place
h. Southerly From a point 167 feet easterly
from Short Hills Avenue
i. (Reserved)
j. Southerly For a distance of 248 feet
westerly from Spring Street,
except Sundays and Legal
Holidays
k. Northerly From a point 229 feet easterly
from the projected easterly line of
Spring Street, easterly for a
distance of 276 feet
l. Southerly From the driveway of 90 Millburn
Avenue west for 100 feet
m. Northerly From the westerly driveway of lot
5 to the easterly driveway of lot 5
§ 7-13 MILLBURN CODE § 7-13
AO:204
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Mountain View
Road
Along the sides of
the traffic safety
island
At its intersection with
Whittingham Terrace
Mt. Ararat Road Both From the intersection of New
Jersey Route 24 for a distance of
175 feet
Parkview Drive Both For a distance of 135 feet
southerly from Millburn Avenue
Puritan Road North From Old Short Hills Road to
Hamilton Road
Rawley Place Westerly Entire length
Rector Street a. Southerly For a distance of 90 feet westerly
from the westerly side of Blaine
Street
b. Northerly From Spring Street, westerly to
Board of Education property
c. Both For a distance of 88 feet westerly
of the westerly side line of Main
Street
Ridgewood Road a. Northerly From Main Street to Whittingham
Terrace
b. Southerly For a distance of 78 feet easterly
of the easterly side line of Main
Street
Short Hills
Avenue
a. Westerly From Millburn Avenue northerly
or a distance of 640 feet and from
Chatham Road southerly for a
distance of 300 feet
b. Easterly From Millburn Avenue to the
Springfield Township boundary
line
c. Easterly From Millburn Avenue to Pine
Terrace East
Short Hills Northerly From the northerly plaza of the
Short Hills Railroad Station,
westerly from Short Hills Avenue
to The Crescent
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:205
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Southern Slope
Drive
Easterly From Mountain View Road to
Beech Terrace and along the
easterly side of Beech Terrace
from Southern Slope Drive to
Ridgewood Road
Spring Street a. Easterly From Essex Street to Millburn
Avenue
b. Westerly From Millburn Avenue northerly
for a distance of 264 feet
c. Easterly From Taylor Street to Willow
Street
Station Plaza a. Northerly From its intersection with Hobart
Avenue easterly to the
intersection with Short Hills
Avenue
b. Southerly From the northwesterly corner of
the station building to the
northeasterly corner of the station
building
Taylor Road a. Westerly From the N.J. Transit Railroad
property line southerly for a
distance of 600 feet
b. Easterly From Chatham Road southerly for
a distance of 192 feet
Taylor Street Southerly 220 feet westerly of Main Street
to 300 feet westerly of Main
Street
Wells Lane Northerly From the northwesterly corner of
Highland Avenue and Wells Lane
westerly for a distance of 300 feet
White Oak Ridge
Road
a. Easterly From the southerly side of South
Orange Avenue of a distance of
500 feet to the southeast curbline
of Rippling Brook Drive
b. Westerly Running southerly from the
southerly side of South Orange
Avenue for a distance of 500 feet
Whitney Road Westerly From Midhurst Road northerly to
Haddonfield Road and then
westerly along Haddonfield Road
for a distance of 280 feet
§ 7-13 MILLBURN CODE § 7-13
AO:206
7-13 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS
Name of Street Side Location
Whittingham
Terrace
a. Easterly From the southeast curbline of
Millburn Avenue southerly for a
distance of 1,460 feet to the
northeast curbline of Parkview
Drive
b. Westerly From a point 755 feet southerly
from the southeasterly corner of
Millburn Avenue for a distance of
50 feet southerly therefrom
Willow Street a. Westerly From its intersection with Spring
Street southerly to the point
where Willow Street runs in an
easterly direction
b. Northerly For a distance of 100 feet
westerly from Main Street and
along the southerly side of a
distance of 100 feet westerly from
Main Street
Witkop Place Northerly Entire length
Woodland Road Westerly From the intersection of
Woodland Road and Chatham
Road running southerly to a point
opposite the southerly line of
Ridge Terrace
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 6;
Prior history includes 1967 Code § 24-2-3; Ord. No. 12-16-68 § 2;
Ord. No. 6-2-69 § 1; Ord. No. 12-15-69 § 1; Ord. No. 3-1-71 § 1; Ord.
No. 13-74 § 2; Ord. No. 27-79 § 2; Ord. No. 22-82 § 1; Ord. No. 6-89
§ 6; Ord. No. 5-91 § 1; Ord. No. 28-95 § 1; Ord. No. 04-96 § 1; Ord.
No. 12-96 § 1; Ord. No. 12-97 § 6; Ord. No. 2136 § 1; Ord. No.
2160-99 § 1; Ord. No. 2184-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2315-08 § 5; Ord. No.
2328-08 § 1; Ord. No. 2360-10; Ord. No. 2364-10; Ord. No. 2403-13
§ 2; Ord. No. 2438-15; Ord. No. 2489-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2499-18 § 3]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and Legal Holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:207
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All streets Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Addison
Drive
South 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From its intersection with
White Oak Ridge Road,
West for a distance of 350
feet
Baltusrol
Way
a. West 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Chatham Road to
Ferncliff Terrace
b. Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From Ferncliff Terrace to
Millburn Avenue
Beech
Terrace
South 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Except
Sunday and
Legal
Holidays
Entire length
Bodwell
Terrace
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Cambridge
Drive
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Hartshorn Drive to
Falmouth Street
Cypress
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
A distance of 430 feet
westerly from its
intersection with Myrtle
Avenue
Cypress
Street (East
of the
railroad
tracks)
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Edgewood
Terrace
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Elmwood
Place
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Evergreen
Terrace
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Falmouth
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From its intersection with
Hartshorn Drive, South to
its intersection with
Cambridge Drive
§ 7-14 MILLBURN CODE § 7-14
AO:208
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Falmouth
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From its intersection with
Hartshorn Drive, North for
a distance of 425 feet
Ferncliff
Terrace
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From Baltusrol Way to
Woodland Road
Forest Drive South 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
(Legal
Holidays
excepted)
From Chatham Road to
Dogwood Drive
Gilbert Place Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Glenwood
Drive
a. Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
b. Both 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
On the easterly side
between its intersection
with Meadowbrook Road
and its intersection with
Wellington Avenue; and on
the westerly side a
distance of 270 feet
northerly from its
intersection with
Meadowbrook Road
Greenwood
Drive
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Haddonfield
Road
a. South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
except
school
buses
A distance of 250 feet
easterly from Old Short
Hills Road
b. South 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.*
From Old Short Hills Road
westerly to Whitney Road
Haran Circle Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Hartshorn
Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From White Oak Ridge
Road easterly to Falmouth
Street
Hobart
Avenue
Both 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Between Forest Drive and
Station Plaza
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:209
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Ivy Terrace Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Locust
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Main Street East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point opposite the
northerly side line of Taylor
Street, if projected
northerly, for a distance of
262 feet
Meadowbrook
Road
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Millburn
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between South Mountain
Avenue and Walnut Avenue
Milton Street Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Mountainview
Road
a. Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
b. Both 2:00 a.m. to
10:30 a.m.
Between Whittingham
Terrace to Parkview Drive
Myrtle
Avenue
a. Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
b. West 7:00 a.m. to
8:40 a.m.
and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30
p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Between Pine Street and
Cypress Street
Norwood
Terrace
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Oakdale
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Oval Road Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Parkview
Drive (South
of
Mountainview
Road)
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-14 MILLBURN CODE § 7-14
AO:210
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Pine Street South 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.,
Saturday
Between Myrtle Avenue
and Wyoming Avenue
Pine Terrace
East
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Short Hill Avenue
easterly to the westerly
outlet of Winding Way
Pine Terrace
West
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Rahway
Road
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Reeve Circle Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
River Lane Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Rosedale
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Ridgewood
Road
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Southern
Slope Drive
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Spring
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday,
inclusive
Between Taylor Street and
Willow Street
Sunset Drive Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Taylor Street Southerly 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday,
inclusive
Between Spring Street and
a point 300 feet westerly of
Main Street
Undercliff
Road (South
of
Mountainview
Road)
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:211
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Walnut
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Wellington
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Whittingham
Terrace
West 2:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length
Willow
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday,
inclusive
From a point 135 feet
south of Spring Street,
southerly to the point
where Willow Street runs
in an easterly direction
*Parking is permitted for school buses only.
§ 7-14.1. Overnight Parking Prohibited; Emergencies. [1967 Code
§ 24-2-6; Ord. No. 32-78 § 1; Ord. No. 28-80 § 1; Ord. No. 12-97 § 7]
No parking along any street shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as follows:
§ 7-14.2. Residential Parking Zones. [Ord. No. 2520-18 § 7]
Residents with a valid Residential Parking Zone permit are permitted to
park within the Residential Parking Zone in which they reside outside
of the posted time restrictions established within this Subsection 7-14.2.
Residents are not permitted to park where parking is restricted at all times.
a. Parking along a street or road, other than a street under County
jurisdiction and regulation, shall be permitted for not more than
twenty-four (24) hours provided the vehicle is inoperable and cannot be
moved so as to comply with this subsection or the vehicle cannot be
placed in a driveway because the driveway has recently been
resurfaced, and provided also that the parking of the vehicle on the
street is reported forthwith to the Police Department. In the event the
vehicle cannot be placed in a driveway because the driveway has
recently been resurfaced, the exemption from this section shall
continue until the driveway has stabilized.
b. Upon the declaration of a weather emergency by the Mayor, the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Business Administrator or the
Chief of Police and upon notice of such declaration having been
communicated to the Police Department, the provisions of this
subsection shall be suspended throughout the Township for a twentyfour
(24) hour period, but such suspension shall not apply to County
roads.
§ 7-14 MILLBURN CODE § 7-14.2
AO:212
§ 7-15. PARKING OF TRUCKS WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF TEN TONS
PROHIBITED. [New]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of ten (10) tons upon any street between
the hours specified.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-16. MID-BLOCK CROSSINGS. [Ord. No. 2520-18 § 8]
The following shall be designated as Mid-Block Crossings:
Name of Street Location
Millburn Avenue
(CR 527E)
Beginning at a point 233 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Town Hall Plaza and
extending a point 8 feet easterly therefrom
Chatham Road Beginning at a point 235 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Baltusrol Way extending
a point 8 feet westerly therefrom
Essex Street
(CR 577W)
Beginning at a point 205 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Main Street and
extending to a point 8 feet easterly therefrom
a. Residents must establish proof of residency within a Residential
Parking Zone by applying to the Township of Millburn to receive a
resident parking zone permit.
b. It shall be unlawful to sell, rent, transfer, lease or otherwise allow the
use of a residential parking zone permit to any persons that do not
reside on the designated streets of any established zone. Any resident
of a zone that sells, rents, transfers, leases or otherwise allows for the
use of their residential parking zone permit by someone other than a
resident of the zone shall have their permit voided and considered
invalid for a period of one (1) year.
c. Residential parking zone permits must be distinguished differently than
the general resident permit issued by the Township of Millburn.
d. The following are established as Residential Parking Zones:
Name of Zone Streets Included in Zone
Zone 1 Blaine Street, Spring Street, Duncan
Street, Bodwell Terrace, Willow Street,
Meeker Place, Rector Street, Church
Street, Taylor Street
§ 7-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-16
AO:213
Name of Street Location
Brookside Drive Beginning at a point 485 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Old Short Hills Road
and extending to a point 8 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 7-17. TRUCKS OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 9;
Prior history includes 1967 Code §§ 24-3-1, 24-3-2, 24-11-5; Ord.
No. 12-15-69 § 2; Ord. No. 7-6-71 § 1; Ord. No. 6-89 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
11-90 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 4-92 § 1; Ord. No. 10-92; Ord. No. 24-92;
New; Ord. No. 1-96 § 1; Ord. No. 2162-99]
Trucks over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
Baltusrol Way 4 tons From Chatham Road to
Millburn Avenue
Brookside Drive 4 tons From Glen Avenue to Old Short
Hills Road
Cypress Street From Millburn Avenue to
Sagamore Road
Glen Avenue 4 tons From Old Short Hills Road to
Ridgewood Road
Glen Avenue Bridge 6 tons Over West Branch of Rahway
River
Great Hills Road 4 tons From Old Short Hills Road to
White Oak Ridge Road
Hobart Avenue From White Oak Ridge Road to
Old Short Hills Road
Hobart Gap Road From Route 124 to Hobart
Avenue
Lakeview Avenue 4 tons From Hobart Avenue to N.J.
Route 24
Locust Avenue 4 tons From Ridgewood Road to
Millburn Avenue
Main Street 10 tons From Millburn Avenue to Old
Short Hills Road
Myrtle Avenue 4 tons From Millburn Avenue to NJ
Transit Railroad Embankment
§ 7-16 MILLBURN CODE § 7-17
AO:214
Name of Street Weight Location
Old Short Hills Road 10 tons From Main Street to Locust
Avenue
Parsonage Hill Road 4 tons Entire length
Ridgewood Road 4 tons From Main Street to Locust
Avenue
Ridgewood Road From Millburn Avenue to the
Millburn/Maplewood boundary
Town Hall Plaza 4 tons From Essex Street to Millburn
Avenue
White Oak Ridge Road From Hobart Avenue to the
Township Line in the vicinity of
South Orange Avenue
§ 7-18. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1967 Code §§ 24-4-1, 24-11-6; Ord. No.
6-5-72 § 4; Ord. No. 2223-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2485-17 § 1]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Crescent, The Westbound From Short Hills
Avenue to the Station
Plaza of the
Lackawanna Railroad
None
Deerfield Road Eastbound From a point 160
feet west of Old
Short Hills Road to
the intersection of
Deerfield Road and
Old Short Hills Road
None
Douglas Street Southbound From Essex Street to
Millburn Avenue
None
Essex Street* Westbound From a point 556
feet from Millburn
Avenue to Douglas
Street
Both sides
Millburn Avenue* Eastbound From Douglas Street
to Essex Street
Both sides
§ 7-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-18
AO:215
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Short Hills
Avenue
Northbound From the
northwesterly
projected line of
Railroad Station
Plaza to The
Crescent
None
Spring Street Northbound From Millburn
Avenue to Essex
Street
Western side
only
Station Plaza Eastbound From The Crescent
to Short Hills Avenue
None
Taylor Road Northbound From Chatham Road
to Hobart Avenue
None
Town Hall Plaza
[Ord. No.
2485-17§ 1]
Southbound From 60 feet south of
the Essex Street
Intersection to the
Intersection of
Millburn Avenue
Both Sides
Wayside Eastbound From Hemlock Road
to Hobart Avenue
None
Westbound From Hobart Avenue
to N.J. Route 24
None
* See subsection 7-11.2c and 7-11.2d for parking meter zones.
§ 7-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1967 Code §§ 24-5-1, 24-11-7; Ord.
No. 9-25-72 § 2; Ord. No. 12-18-72 §§ 11, 12; Ord. No. 4-2-73 §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 9-17-73 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 24-75 § 1; Ord. No. 14-78 § 1; Ord.
No. 9-78 § 3; Ord. No. 27-78 § 2; Ord. No. 9-91 § 1; Ord. No. 1-92 § 1;
Ord. No. 10-93 § 1; Ord. No. 22-94 § 1; Ord. No. 27-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2396-12; Ord. No. 2452-16; Ord. No. 2462-16]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Baltusrol Way Millburn Avenue to Chatham Road
Chatham Road Taylor Road South to Short Hills
Avenue
The Crescent [Ord. No. 2462-16] Highland Avenue to Station Plaza
§ 7-18 MILLBURN CODE § 7-19
AO:216
Name of Street Limits
Elm Street [Ord. No. 2452-16] Wyoming Avenue to Myrtle Avenue
Forest Drive From Western Drive to Highland
Avenue
a. Old Short Hills Road to Brookside
Drive
b. Lackawanna Place to Sagamore
Road
c. The intersection of Glen Avenue
and Sagamore Road—Glen Avenue,
southerly approach, is designated a
yield intersection. A Yield sign shall
be installed on the westerly
approach of Glen Avenue facing
eastbound traffic
Glen Avenue
d. Wyoming Avenue to Ridgewood
Road
Great Hills Road Old Short Hills Road to a point 50
feet north of the westerly approach
of White Oak Ridge Road
Greenwood Drive From Ridgewood Road to its
western terminus
a. Watchung Road to Parsonage Hill
Road
Hartshorn Drive
b. Parsonage Hill Road to White Oak
Ridge Road
Highland Avenue The Crescent to Hartshorn Drive
a. N.J. Route 24 to Hobart Gap
Road—White Oak Ridge Road
b. White Oak Ridge Road to
Highland Avenue
Hobart Avenue
c. Highland Avenue to Old Short
Hills Road
Lakeview Avenue Route 24 to Hobart Avenue
a. Millburn Avenue to
Springfield—Millburn line
Main Street
b. Essex Street to the N.J. Railroad
Transit bridge
Mohawk Road Hartshorn Drive to White Oak Ridge
Road
§ 7-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19
AO:217
Name of Street Limits
Mountainview Road Whittingham Terrace to Ridgewood
Road
Old Short Hills Road The N.J. Transit Railroad Bridge to a
point 50 feet north of Parsonage Hill
Road
Main Street (Co. Rte. #577) to
Mountainview Road
a. Ridgewood Road—Parkview Drive
to Millburn Avenue
(Co. Rte. #527)
Ridgewood Road—Parkview Drive
Ridgewood Road, easterly leg
b. Millburn Avenue (Co. Rte. #527)
to the Millburn
Township—Maplewood Township
corporate line
Short Hills Avenue Between Millburn Avenue to The
Crescent
Spring Street Millburn Avenue to Main Street
Woodland Road Chatham Road to Meadowbrook
Road
§ 7-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 11-20-67 § 2; Ord. No.
12-2-68 § 3; Ord. No. 6-5-72 § 5; Ord. No. 9-25-72 § 1; Ord. No.
4-16-73 § 5; Ord. No. 1-76 § 1; Ord. No. 10-79 § 1; Ord. No. 28-82
§ 1; Ord. No. 9-86 § 1; Ord. No. 15-88 § 3; Ord. No. 13-90 § 1; Ord.
No. 10-93 § 1; Ord. No. 22-94 § 2; Ord. No. 26-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2171-00 § 1; Ord. No. 2280-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2341-09 § 5; Ord. No.
2360-10; Ord. No. 2388-12; Ord. No. 2396-12 § 2; Ord. No. 2452-16;
Ord. No. 2462-16; Ord. No. 2485-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2488-17 § 1; Ord.
No. 2494-18; Ord. No. 2521-18]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign on:
Addison Drive and Byron Road Addison Drive
Church Street and Blain Street Church Street
The Crescent and Short Hills
Avenue
Short Hills Avenue facing
northbound traffic
The Crescent and Station Plaza The Crescent
Cypress Street and Milton Street Milton Street
Cypress Street and Myrtle Avenue Myrtle Avenue
§ 7-19 MILLBURN CODE § 7-20
AO:218
Intersection Stop Sign on:
Deerfield Road and Andover Drive Andover Drive
Exeter Road and Ross Road Ross Road
Forest Drive and Knollwood Drive Knollwood Drive
Forest Drive South and Lupine Way
[Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2544-19]
Lupine Way facing eastbound
Glen Avenue and Lackawanna Place All way
STOP AHEAD, Type W3-1, 30" x 30"
warning signs shall be installed
along both approaches on Glen
Avenue approximately 300 feet in
advance of intersection.
Glen Avenue and Sagamore Road Sagamore Road
Glenwood Drive and Meadowbrook
Road
Meadowbrook Road
Great Hills Terrace and Troy Lane Great Hills Terrace
Hobart Avenue and Highland
Avenue
All way
STOP SIGN, Type R1-1 (30"), shall
be installed on Highland Avenue
facing northbound and southbound
traffic, approaching the
intersections of Highland Avenue
and Hobart Avenue.
Joanne Way and Lake Road Lake Road
Long Hill Drive and Westview Road Westview Road
Cross Road Symbol, Type W2-1, size
30" x 30" warning signs shall be
installed along both approaches of
Long Hill Drive approximately 300
feet in advance of the intersection.
Lupine Way and Dogwood Drive
[Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No.
2544-19]
Dogwood Drive facing eastbound
Meeker Place and Willow Street Meeker Place facing westbound
traffic
STOP SIGN, Type R1-1 (30"), shall
be installed on Meeker Place facing
westbound traffic, approaching
Willow Street.
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:219
Intersection Stop Sign on:
Meadowbrook Road and Woodland
Road
Woodland Road
Minnisink Road and Stewart Road Stewart Road
Myrtle Avenue and Elm Street Myrtle Avenue facing southbound
traffic
STOP AHEAD, Type W3-1, 30" x 30"
warning signs shall be installed
along Myrtle Avenue, southbound,
approximately 300 feet in advance
of intersection.
Rector Street and Blaine Street Blaine Street
Slayton Drive and Long Hill Drive Slayton Drive
STOP AHEAD, Type W3-1, size 30" x
30" warning signs shall be installed
along both approaches of Slayton
Drive approximately 300 feet in
advance of the intersection.
Slope Drive and Oxford Drive Oxford Drive
Southern Slope Drive and Parkview
Drive
Southern Slope Drive
Spenser Drive and Keats Road Spenser Drive
Spring Street and Rector Street All way
Spring Street and Church Street STOP SIGN, Type R1-1 (30"), shall
be installed on Spring Street facing
northbound and southbound traffic,
approaching the intersections of
Rector Street and Church Street.
Thackeray Drive and Browning
Road
Thackeray Drive
Thackeray Drive and Wordsworth
Road
Thackeray Drive
Town Hall Plaza and Essex Street Town Hall Plaza facing northbound
traffic — Type R-1, 36"
Town Hall Plaza and Millburn
Avenue
Town Hall Plaza facing southbound
traffic — Type R-1, 36"
Troy Drive at Troy Lane Troy Lane
Undercliff Road and Southern Slope
Drive
Undercliff Road
Western Drive and Forest Drive Forest Drive
§ 7-20 MILLBURN CODE § 7-20
AO:220
Intersection Stop Sign on:
Western Drive and Slope Drive Slope Drive
Whittingham Terrace, Ridgewood
Road, and Parkview Drive
All way
§ 7-21. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1967 Code § 24-5-3; Ord. No.
24-11-9; Ord. No. 1-92 § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign On:
Mountain View Road and
Whittingham Terrace
Mountain View Road going in
easterly direction at its intersection
with Whittingham Terrace, in the
northerly portion of the roadway, a
Yield sign shall be installed on the
northerly side of the traffic island
§ 7-22. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [1967 Code § 24-11-14; Ord. No.
8-19-68 § 3; Ord. No. 1-19-70 § 1; Ord. No. 4-16-73 § 1; Ord. No.
22-78 § 5; Ord. No. 28-78 § 2; Ord. No. 25-89 § 2; Ord. No. 19-90
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 24-95 § 1; Ord. No. 15-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2193-01 § 1;
Ord. No. 2341-09 § 6; Ord. No. 2468-16; Ord. No. 2473-16]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Campbell Road and
Millburn Avenue
Left Southbound on Campbell Road
to eastbound Millburn Avenue,
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m. weekdays
Deerfield Road and Old
Short Hills Road
Left Eastbound on Deerfield Road
to northbound on Old Short
Hills Road
Essex Street and Main
Street [Ord. No.
2468-16; Ord. No.
2473-16]
Left Westbound on Essex Street to
southbound on Main Street
except authorized New Jersey
Transit buses servicing Route
70
Millburn Avenue and
Main Street [Ord. No.
2468-16]
Left Eastbound on Millburn Avenue
to northbound on Main Street
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-22
AO:221
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Main Street and Essex
Street [Ord. No.
2468-16]
Left Northbound on Main Street to
Westbound on Essex Street
Old Short Hills Road
and Brookside Drive
Left Southbound on Old Short Hills
Road to eastbound on
Brookside Drive from 4:00 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Old Short Hills Road
and Haddonfield Road
Left Northbound on Old Short Hills
Road to westbound on
Haddonfield Road from 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m. on school days
Old Short Hills Road
and Haddonfield Road
Right Southbound on Old Short Hills
Road to westbound on
Haddonfield Road from 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m. on school days
South Orange Avenue
and Exeter Road
Left Eastbound on South Orange
Avenue to northbound on
Exeter Road
South Orange Avenue
and Andover Drive
Left Eastbound on South Orange
Avenue to northbound on
Andover Drive
South Orange Avenue
and Winthrop Road
Right Westbound on South Orange
Avenue to northbound on
Winthrop Road, weekdays from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., except
school buses
South Orange Avenue
(CR 510) and westerly
driveway to
Congregation B'nai
Jeshurun
Left Eastbound on South Orange
Avenue (CR 510) to the
westerly driveway of
Congregation B'nai Jeshurun,
at all times
Wyoming Avenue and
Glen Avenue
Left Northbound on Wyoming
Avenue to west-bound on Glen
Avenue
No. 1 East Willow
Street, also known as
Block 906, Lot 28, as
shown upon the
Township of Millburn
Tax Maps
Left Onto Main Street in southerly
direction
§ 7-22 MILLBURN CODE § 7-23
AO:222
§ 7-23. NO TURN ON RED. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No.
2520-18; Prior history includes 1967 Code § 24-11-15; Ord. No.
18-76 § 1; Ord. No. 22-78 § 6; Ord. No. 13-90 § 13; Ord. No. 2341-09
§ 7]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
From westbound on Brookside Drive to northbound on Old Short Hills Road
from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days.
From northbound on Old Short Hills Road to eastbound on Brookside Drive
from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days.
From eastbound on Parsonage Hill Road to southbound on White Oak Ridge
Road.
From westbound Ridgewood Road onto northbound Main Street.
From northbound Main Street to eastbound Ridgewood road from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-24. LOADING ZONES. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18
§ 11; Prior history includes 1967 Code §§ 24-6-1, 24-11-10; Ord. No.
5-4-68 § 1; Ord. No. 10-80 § 1; Ord. No. 2498-18]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones, No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated by signage
other than a commercially registered vehicle that is actively loading or
unloading goods related to area businesses.
Name of Street Time Side Location
Essex Street 12:00 a.m. -
11:59 p.m.
South For a length of 116 feet
on the southerly side of
the street and starting
approximately 260 feet
westerly of its
intersection with
Lackawanna Place
Lot 5 12:00 a.m. -
11:59 p.m.
South Along the southerly
curb line, perpendicular
to the Essex Street
entrance/exit, as
indicated by signage
designating the zone.
§ 7-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24
AO:223
Name of Street Time Side Location
Millburn Avenue 12:00 a.m. -
11:59 p.m.
North For a length of 40 feet
on the northerly side of
the street and starting
approximately 10 feet
westerly of its
intersection with
Holmes Street
Millburn Avenue 12:00 a.m. -
11:59 p.m.
South For a length of 50 feet
on the southerly side of
the street and starting
approximately 70 feet
westerly of its
intersection with
Lackawanna Place
§ 7-25. BUS STOPS. [1967 Code § 24-11-12; Ord. No. 5-4-68 § 1;
Ord. No. 12-15-69 § 1; Ord. No. 19-82 § 1; Ord. No. 2520-18 § 12]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy these locations between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
a. Along Main Street, northbound on the easterly
side at:
1. Mechanic Street (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the northerly
curbline of Mechanic Street and extending
90 feet north thereof.
All
2. Willow Street (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Willow Street and extending 90 feet north
thereof.
All
3. Spring Street (near side)
Beginning at the extension of the southerly
curbline of Spring Street and extending 120
feet south thereof.
All
4. Church Street (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the northerly
curbline of Church Street and extending 90
feet north thereof.
All
§ 7-24 MILLBURN CODE § 7-25
AO:224
Street Hours
b. Along Main Street, southbound on the westerly
side at:
1. Millburn Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Millburn Avenue and extending 90 feet
thereof.
All
2. Church Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Church Street and extending 90 feet south
thereof.
All
3. Spring Street (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Spring Street and extending 120 feet north
thereof.
All
4. Willow Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Willow Street and extending 90 feet south
thereof.
All
5. Mechanic Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Mechanic Street and extending 90 feet south
thereof.
All
c. Along Essex Street, westbound on the northerly
side at:
1. Holmes Street (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the westerly
curbline of Holmes Street and extending 90
feet west thereof. [Ord. No. 2520-18 § 12]
All
d. Along Millburn Avenue, eastbound on the
southerly side at:
1. Farley Place (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the easterly
curbline of Farley Place and extending 90
feet east thereof.
All
2. Baltusrol Way (far side)
Beginning at the most westerly driveway of
Saks extending 105 feet west thereof.
All
§ 7-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25
AO:225
Street Hours
3. Short Hills Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Short
Hills Avenue and extending 120 feet west
thereof.
All
4. Short Hills Circle (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the easterly
curbline of Short Hills Circle and extending
90 feet east thereof.
All
5. Douglas Street (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the easterly
curbline of Douglas Street and extending 90
feet east thereof.
All
6. Lackawanna Place (near side)
Beginning at the extension of the westerly
curbline of Lackawanna Place and extending
144 feet west thereof.
All
7. Parkview Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Parkview Drive and extending 120 feet west
thereof.
All
8. Undercliff Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Undercliff Road and extending 90 feet east
thereof.
All
9. Myrtle Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Myrtle
Avenue and extending 90 feet east thereof.
All
10. Vaux Hall Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Vaux
Hall Road and extending 90 feet east
thereof.
All
11. Norwood Terrace (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the easterly
curbline of Norwood Terrace and extending
90 feet east thereof.
All
§ 7-25 MILLBURN CODE § 7-25
AO:226
Street Hours
12. Wyoming Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the extension of Wyoming
Avenue and extending 90 feet west thereof.
All
e. Along Millburn Avenue, westbound on the
northerly side at:
1. Norwood Terrace (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Norwood Terrace and extending 90 feet west
thereof.
All
2. Vaux Hall Road (near side)
Beginning at the extension of the easterly
curbline of Vaux Hall Road and extending
120 feet east thereof.
All
3. Myrtle Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Myrtle
Avenue and extending 90 feet west thereof.
All
4. Wyoming Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Wyoming Avenue and extending 90 feet west
thereof.
All
5. Undercliff Road (far side)
Beginning at the extension of the westerly
curbline of Undercliff Road and extending 90
feet west thereof.
All
6. Duncan Street (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Duncan Street and extending 90 feet west
thereof.
All
7. Short Hills Circle (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Short
Hills Circle and extending 90 feet west
thereof.
All
8. Short Hills Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Short
Hills Avenue and extending 120 feet east
thereof.
All
§ 7-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25
AO:227
Street Hours
9. Baltusrol Way (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of
Baltusrol Way and extending 90 feet west
thereof.
All
10. Farley Place (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Farley
Place and extending 90 feet west thereof.
All
§ 7-26. TAXI STANDS. [1967 Code § 24-11-11; Ord. No. 5-4-68 § 1]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
Millburn Avenue Along the southerly side, from
a point 57 feet westerly from
the Maplewood—Millburn
Township boundary line for a
distance of 28 feet westerly
therefrom
All
Short Hills Station
Plaza
Along the southerly side, from
a point 258 feet easterly from
the projected easterly line of
Hobart Avenue for a distance
of 70 feet easterly therefrom
All
§ 7-27. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [1967 Code § 24-11-14; Ord. No.
8-19-68 § 3; Ord. No. 1-89-70 § 1; Ord. No. 4-16-73 § 1; Ord. No.
22-78 § 5; Ord. No. 28-78 § 2; Ord. No. 25-89 § 2; New; Ord. No.
2408-13]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
§ 7-25 MILLBURN CODE § 7-27
AO:228
Intersection Movement
Essex Street/ Lackawanna
Place [Ord. No. 2408-13]
The northerly westbound lane of Essex Street
reserved for right turn only onto Lackawanna
Place
Lackawanna Place Between Essex Street and Millburn Avenue;
two lanes southbound starting at a point 88
feet from the intersection of Millburn
Avenue. Both lanes are designated for left
turns into Millburn Avenue. Two lanes
northbound starting at a point 136 feet from
the intersection of Essex Street; the right
lane designated for traffic continuing straight
ahead at the intersection of Lackawanna
Place and Essex Street, the left lane
designated for traffic turning left into Essex
Street.
Parkview Drive The most easterly approach reserved for
right turns only at its intersection with
Millburn Avenue.
§ 7-28. NO PASSING ZONES. [1967 Code § 24-11-13; Ord. No.
6-21-71; New]
The following locations are hereby designated as No Passing Zones:
Brookside Drive — Old Short Hills Road to Glen Avenue
Great Hills Road — Old Short Hills Road to White Oak Ridge Road
Main Street — Essex Street to the Township boundary with Springfield
Township
Old Short Hills Road — Essex Street to the Township boundary with
Livingston Township
§ 7-29. SPEED LIMITS. [1967 Code § 24-13-2; Ord. No. 2-16-71 § 1;
Ord. No. 9-75 § 2; Ord. No. 2484-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2523-19]
Speed limits along designated streets shall be as designated below:
Name of Street Direction Speed Limit and Location
Essex Street [Ord. No.
2484-17 § 1]
West Twenty-five miles per hour
from Millburn Avenue to
Douglas Street (entire length)
Highland Avenue [Ord.
No. 2523-19]
Both Twenty-five miles per hour for
its entire length
§ 7-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-29
AO:229
Name of Street Direction Speed Limit and Location
Both Zone 1. Thirty-five miles per
hour from Route 124 to Short
Hills Avenue
Both Zone 2. Twenty-five miles per
hour from Short Hills Avenue
to Douglas Street
Both Zone 3. Twenty-five miles per
hour from Douglas Street to
Essex Street
Both Zone 4. Twenty-five miles per
hour from Essex Street to
Wyoming Avenue
Millburn Avenue [Ord.
No. 2484-17 § 2]
Both Zone 5. Thirty-five miles per
hour from Wyoming Avenue to
Maplewood Township Border
River Road
(JFK Parkway)
Both 40 m.p.h. beginning at Station
10 + 00 to Station
21 + 00, as shown on the State
Department of Transportation
jurisdictional limit map.
§ 7-30. through § 7-34. (RESERVED)
§ 7-29 MILLBURN CODE § 7-30
AO:230
Part II
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON PROPERTY UNDER MUNICIPAL OR
BOARD OF EDUCATION CONTROL
§ 7-35. OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS; PERMIT PARKING.41
§ 7-35.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 24-10-1; Ord. No. 11-16-70 § 3;
Ord. No. 18-77 § 6]
As used in this section:
HEAD-IN PARKING — Shall mean all vehicles parking in a parking meter
space shall face the parking meter controlling such space.
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES PARKING LOT — Shall mean an off-street
parking lot designated for parking of vehicles of Township employees and
officials.
NONRESIDENT — Shall mean a person having his/her residence some
place other than in the Township.
NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE — Shall mean a person who is employed in the
Township and who resides elsewhere.
PARKING METER — Shall mean any mechanical device or meter placed
or erected for the regulation of traffic by authority of this section. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Township, and when operated, shall at all times
indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such
period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Shall mean any space within a parking meter
zone in an off-street parking lot, adjacent to a parking meter, and which
is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or
otherwise durably marked on the surface of the parking meter zone.
PARKING PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the Township which
shall entitle the owner or operator of the vehicle in connection with which
the permit is issued to park the same in any municipal off-street parking lot,
subject to the provisions of this section.
PERMIT-PARKING-ONLY AREA — Shall mean an off-street parking lot or
portion thereof which is restricted to the parking of vehicles for which a
parking permit has been issued and is in effect and on which the insignia is
displayed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
RESIDENT — Shall mean a person having residence in the Township.
41.For state law as to powers of the Township as to off-street parking, see N.J.S.A.
39:4-197(g).
§ 7-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.2
AO:231
§ 7-35.2. Necessity of Off-Street Lots. [1967 Code § 24-10-2; Ord.
No. 12-18-72 § 1]
It is hereby determined that the areas hereinafter designated as municipal
off-street parking lots are necessary for the orderly control of traffic in the
Township.
The Township has two railroad stations on the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad
that serve commuters from a broad area to Newark and New York. These
stations are also contiguous to active shopping centers. Each of these
uses requires parking facilities to accommodate customers with different
demands for time for parking to suit their needs. Generally speaking,
shopper parking is of short-time duration, so such spaces accommodate
several customers in a business day. Commuter parking, however, usually
accommodates only one customer per space per day.
The objective to be accomplished by this section is the separation of these
two facilities of different requirements so one does not infringe on the use
of the other, and to do this with a minimum cost of service to the Township.
It has been the policy of the Township to issue permits at a reasonable cost
for commuters from and to our community. From a service cost standpoint,
permits are the most economical to administer. Therefore, the provisions
of this section will favor the use of permit parking for commuters and will
require that the usual fee be deposited in a meter if a permit designated
vehicle occupies a metered space in either a commuter or shopping area.
§ 7-35.3. Method of Limiting and Regulating Parking. [1967 Code
§ 24-10-3]
It is hereby determined and stated that the parking of vehicles in the
municipal off-street parking lots provided and maintained by the Township
shall be limited and regulated by the imposition of fees for the privilege of
parking thereon, to be determined by the length of time for which a vehicle
may be parked, except as otherwise herein provided. Such parking fees
shall be payable in advance, except as otherwise provided in this article.
Such fees are to be collected through the parking meters or other devices
installed or to be installed in such parking lots or by the purchase of parking
permits as provided in this section.
§ 7-35.4. Parking Area; Manner of Parking. [1967 Code § 24-10-4;
Ord. No. 2402-13; Ord. No. 2505-18]
The area available for the parking of vehicles in every municipal off-street
parking lot maintained by the Township shall be suitably subdivided by
pavement markings, or otherwise, into single-vehicle spaces, wholly within
one of which spaces, called a parking space, if available, each vehicle using
such lot shall be parked, either headed into or backed into unless otherwise
indicated by signs posted in such parking lot.
§ 7-35.2 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.5
AO:232
§ 7-35.5. Operation of Parking Meters. [1967 Code § 24-10-5; Ord.
No. 5-5-69 § 2; Ord. No. 18-77 §§ 6, 7]
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Police
Department or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal or except as otherwise herein provided, when
any vehicle shall be parked in any metered parking space controlled by a
parking meter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking
meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter
such proper coin of the United States of America, as is required for such
parking meter and as is designated by the directions of the meter and
by this article, and after the deposit of the proper coin, shall also set in
operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with the
directions thereon. The failure to deposit such coin and to set the timing
mechanism in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of
this section. Upon the deposit of such coin and the setting of the timing
mechanism in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by
such vehicle for the period of time prescribed for such metered parking
space for the payment made by such person. Should any person place a
vehicle in a metered parking space controlled by a meter which indicates
that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the
space, such person shall not be required to deposit a coin as long as his/
her occupancy of such space does not exceed the indicated unused parking
time. If any vehicle shall remain in any parking space beyond the unused
time limit left in such meter or the time paid for and such meter shall
indicate such illegal parking then the person who parked the vehicle in that
location or the registered owner thereof shall be deemed to have violated
the provisions of this article.
No motor vehicle shall occupy the same delineated parking space for more
than one period of time for which parking is permitted in such space, and
any motor vehicle that shall be parked for more than one period for which
parking is permitted in such space shall be in violation of this section even
though the required parking fee for the additional period or periods has
been deposited in the meter controlling the parking space in which the
motor vehicle is parked.
When any vehicle remains parked in any parking space beyond the parking
time limit prescribed for such space, each such period of time that the
vehicle remains in such parking space after the expiration of the initial
period of time shall constitute a separate violation irrespective of whether
or not a coin or coins have been deposited in the meter for the additional
period or periods of time.
§ 7-35.6. Time Limitations; Parking Prohibited During Certain
Hours. [Amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 13; Prior history
includes 1967 Code § 24-10-6; Ord. No. 30-77 § 4; Ord. No. 25-78
§ 1; Ord. No. 23-83 § 2; Ord. No. 20-86 § 1; Ord. No. 2-88 §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 2150A-99 § 1; Ord. No. 2195-01 § 1]
§ 7-35.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.6
AO:233
§ 7-35.7. Designation of Types of Lots. [1967 Code § 24-10-7; Ord.
No. 8-21-67 § 1; Ord. No. 12-15-69 § 1; Ord. No. 11-16-70 § 1; Ord.
No. 12-18-72 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 1-22-73 §§ 1, 4; Ord. No. 18-77 § 9;
Ord. No. 30-77 §§ 1, 5; Ord. No. 25-78 § 2; Ord. No. 23-80 § 1; Ord.
No. 18-82 § 1; Ord. No. 8-83 § 2; Ord. No. 23-83 § 3; Ord. No. 4-84
§§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 2-88 §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 15-88 § 2; Ord. No. 6-89 § 5;
Ord. No. 21-89 § 1; Ord. No. 18-91 § 1; Ord. No. 3-93 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 15-93 § 1; Ord. No. 6-94 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 21-95 § 1; Ord. No.
2195-01 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2243-04 § 2; Ord. No. 2279-06 § 1; Ord. No.
2345-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2433-14; Ord. No. 2520-18 § 14; amended
4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2530-19]
No parking in off-street parking lots in the Township shall be permitted
except by: (1) valid permit issued by the Township; (2) depositing the
correct payment in the meter controlling the parking space; (3) a vehicle
having a special handicapped person's license plate parked in a space
specifically designated as parking for such vehicles; or (4) as otherwise
provided for in this subsection.
a. Time limitations for permit parking spaces shall be either from 6:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. or for 24 hours, and for metered parking spaces from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No vehicle shall be parked on any off-street
parking lot, including the off-street parking lot at the Millburn High
School off Millburn Avenue, between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.; except that twenty-four-hour parking shall be allowed by permit
only solely at designated spaces in Lots Number 2, 6 and 14 for vehicles
displaying proper Township permit(s).
b. Lot Number 6 shall be signed for no more than 21 twenty-four-hour
permits, which shall be issued to Township residents only.
c. Lots Number 2, 6 and 14 shall be signed to provide for twenty-four-hour
permits, which shall be issued to Township residents only, on an asneeded
basis.
a. Lot Number 1 (118 spaces), located at Essex Street and Main Street,
shall have:
1. 95 three-hour meter spaces;
2. 20 business (only) permit parking spaces; and
3. Three handicapped parking spaces.
b. Lot Number 2 (400 spaces), located at Essex Street and Lackawanna
Place, shall have:
1. 281 permit parking spaces;
2. 44 three-hour meter spaces;
3. 19 twenty-four-hour permit spaces;
§ 7-35.6 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.7
AO:234
4. 48 business (only) permit parking spaces; and
5. Eight handicapped parking spaces.
c. Short Hills Train Station parking area - eastbound, with parking spaces
located at 20 Chatham Road, 99 Baltusrol Way and spaces located to
the east and west of the eastbound train station, shall, except for the
designated meter parking spaces, be a permit parking only area
restricted to vehicles which display a valid commuter permit or for
those whose full-time business or employment is in the Township and
have a valid business permit to park where designated. The
requirements of this section shall not be in effect on Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays. No overnight parking will be permitted.
This combination of lots will have the following space allocation:
1. 273 commuter permit parking spaces;
2. 11 business (only) permit parking spaces;
3. Two parking spaces restricted for the use of the employees of the
railroad station;
4. Eight handicapped parking spaces.
d. Lot Number 4 (59 spaces), located on Taylor Street, shall have:
1. 19 three-hour meter parking spaces;
2. 28 permit parking spaces;
3. Two handicapped parking spaces; and
4. 10 combination three-hour meter parking and permit parking
spaces.
e. Lot Number 5 (74 spaces), located on the northerly side of Millburn
Avenue and adjoining the Town Hall on the east, shall have:
1. 65 three-hour meter parking spaces;
2. Six parking spaces at no fee for municipal business; and
3. Three handicapped parking spaces.
f. Lot Number 6 (29 spaces), located on the northerly side of Millburn
Avenue and adjoining the Town Hall on the west, shall have:
1. 27 combination spaces for business or twenty-four-hour parking
permits; and
2. Two handicapped parking spaces.
g. Lot Number 7 (307 spaces), abutting the concrete platform adjoining
the westbound tracks of New Jersey Transit, at the Millburn Station,
shall have:
§ 7-35.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.7
AO:235
1. 277 permit parking spaces;
2. Nine three-hour meter parking spaces;
3. Eight spaces reserved for the Millburn-Short Hills Volunteer First
Aid Squad;
4. Four handicapped parking spaces;
5. Eight reserved spaces; and
6. One space reserved for the ticket agent.
All night parking shall be allowed by request and approval of the Millburn
Police Department only in Lot Number 7 on Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
h. Lot Number 9 (112 spaces), located at the intersection of Glen Avenue
and Lackawanna Place, shall have:
1. 17 twelve-hour meter parking spaces to be located and designated
pursuant to Subsection 7-35.8 to be used by vehicles bearing valid
Township resident parking decals on weekdays.
2. 41 permit parking spaces.
3. 16 parking spaces are hereby designated as "library patronage
parking lot" spaces and shall be restricted solely for the use of
library patrons, with parking time limited to three hours.
4. Four parking spaces designated for handicapped use.
The requirements of this section shall not be in effect for Lot Number 9 on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Parking shall be allowed only in Lot
Number 9 for vehicles displaying a valid permit.
i. Lot Number 10 (9 spaces), located on the northerly side of Chatham
Road some 357 feet, more or less, from the intersection of the easterly
side line of Forest Drive, shall be a permit-parking-only area restricted
to vehicles which display a valid "resident's permit" or a valid
"nonresident's, whose full-time business or employment is in the
Township, permit." The requirements of this section shall not be in
effect for Lot Number 10 on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
j. Lot Number 12 (15 spaces), located at 326 Millburn Avenue, shall have
14 one-hour meter parking spaces and one handicapped parking space.
k. Lot Number 13 (40 spaces), adjoining the Millburn Public Library, is
hereby designated as the "library patronage parking lot" and shall have
39 spaces restricted solely for the use of library patrons, with parking
time limited to three hours, and one handicapped parking space.
l. Lot Number 14 (98 spaces), located at Short Hills Avenue and Jarvis
Lane, shall have:
§ 7-35.7 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.7
AO:236
§ 7-35.8. Designation of Meters for Off-Street Parking Lots. [1967
Code § 24-10-8; Ord. No. 1-22-73 §§ 2, 5; Ord. No. 18-77 § 10]
The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Township Committee, shall
locate and designate the metered parking spaces in the off-street parking
lots, and the meters controlling such parking spaces shall bear a legend
indicating the type of parking permitted and the fees prescribed therefor.
§ 7-35.9. (Reserved)42
§ 7-35.10. Provisions Not Applicable to Lot Number 6. [1967 Code
§ 24-10-10]
The municipal parking lot designated as Lot Number 6 shall not be metered,
and none of the time limitations and parking meter fee requirements of
this section shall apply to such lot. Parking shall be permitted on such
lot by municipal officials and employees and the motor vehicles of the
Township only. There shall be issued to all municipal officials and employees
an insignia to be placed on the lower left corner of the rear window of
such officials' and employees' vehicles, which shall entitle such vehicles
to be parked in such lot. Any person parking a vehicle in such lot not so
authorized shall be in violation of this section.
1. 19 two-hour meter parking spaces;
2. 75 permit parking spaces, including 14 twenty-four-hour permit
parking spaces, 26 business parking spaces, and 35 permit parking
spaces that may be used for both business and twenty-four-hour
parking; and
3. Four handicapped parking spaces.
m. Lot Number 16 (27 spaces), located on the westerly side of Main Street
directly across Main Street from Block 701, Lot 2, shall have 27 permit
parking spaces.
n. Lot Number 17 (24 spaces), located on Essex Street westerly of the
Public Works Building, shall have 24 parking spaces restricted for use
by Township employees' vehicles which display a Township employee
parking permit.
o. Lot Number 19 (72 spaces), located on Spring Street, between Millburn
Avenue and Essex Street, shall have 60 business permit spaces and 12
municipal employee spaces.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 7-35.9, Parking Fees in Lot Number 3 and Off-Street,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1967 Code § 24-10-9 and Ordinance
Nos. 11-16-70, 12-18-72, 18-77, 18-82, 4-84 and 2304-07, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2341-09.
§ 7-35.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.11
AO:237
§ 7-35.11. Duty of Police in Case of Overtime Parking; Towing and
Storage. [1967 Code § 24-10-11; Ord. No. 1-22-73 §§ 3, 6; Ord. No.
2520-18 § 15]
Any vehicle parked on any municipal parking lot for a period in excess
of one hour succeeding the expiration of the period permitted for the
fee deposited in the parking meter controlling the space in which such
vehicle is parked, or, if such vehicle is parked during the period when the
parking meter fee requirements are not applicable, and parking in such lot
is prohibited, if such vehicle is parked for a period in excess of one hour, or
if a vehicle is parked without a permit in a lot or space restricted to permit
parking, such vehicle may be towed, under the direction of the officer in
charge of the Police Department, to a location designated by the Chief
of Police and there impounded, subject to redemption by the owner upon
payment of the cost of towing and a storage charge consistent with § 4-39,
Vehicle Towing and Storage Services, during which such vehicle remains
in such location, in addition to any fine imposed for the violation of this
section.
§ 7-35.12. Authority of Police to Designate Area on Parking Lots for
Parking of Certain Vehicles. [1967 Code § 24-10-12; Ord. No.
2160-99 § 2]
The Chief of Police of this Township is authorized to designate, with the
approval of the Township Committee, areas on any municipal parking lot
for the parking of vehicles used for municipal purposes or municipally
sponsored or approved purposes, or for taxis and vehicles carrying United
States mail, which vehicles shall not be required to comply with the
requirements of this section. The areas designated in pursuance with this
subsection shall be appropriately marked to indicate such designations.
The Chief of Police of the Township is authorized to designate, with the
approval of the Township committee, the following:
§ 7-35.13. Permits-Issuance; Schedule of Fees. [Amended in
entirety by Ord. No. 2520-18 § 16; Prior history includes 1967 Code
§ 24-10-13; Ord. No. 12-19-66 § 1; Ord. No. 12-18-72 § 6; Ord. No.
a. An area on Lot Number 5 which shall be unmetered and where parking
shall be limited to persons having lawful business in the Township Hall
during the time when they transact such business.
b. Areas on Lot Number 7 which shall be unmetered and which shall be
reserved exclusively for use by taxis and United States mail trucks.
c. Seven parking spaces at Gero Park for the exclusive use by vehicles of
employees of the Millburn Fire Department which vehicles display
proof that the vehicle is owned by a Fire Department employee.
Any other vehicle parked in the spaces so designated shall be in violation of this
section.
§ 7-35.11 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.13
AO:238
29-78 § 1; Ord. No. 43-83; Ord. No. 22-87 § 1; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1;
Ord. No. 18-90 § 1; Ord. No. 18-96 § 1; Ord. No. 2179A-00 § 1; Ord.
No. 2243-04 § 3; Ord. No. 2304-07 § 5; Ord. No. 2345-09 § 2; Ord.
No. 2414-13; Ord. No. 2433-14; Ord. No. 2469-16 § 1; Ord. No.
2492-17 § 1; amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2549-19]
Any Township employee designated by the Business Administrator shall be
authorized to issue the permits prescribed by this section and to accept the
fees herein prescribed. The following types of permits and schedule of fees
are hereby established:
a. Resident's commuter permit.
1. Annual permit fee:
(a) First car in a household: $620.
(b) Each additional car in household: $680 each.
2. Semiannual permit fee:
(a) First car in a household: $455.
(b) Each additional car in household: $505 each.
b. Business whose full-time business or employment is in this Township.
1. Annual permit fee: $230 to $450.
2. Semiannual: $215 to $415.
3. Annual transferable permit feet: $300 to $500.
4. Annual remote restricted business permit (use restricted to Lot 16
and Lot 19): $150.
5. Part-time business permits where designated: $3 to $5 per day.
c. Resident's twenty-four-hour permit.
1. Annual permit fee:
(a) First car in a household: $620.
(b) Additional car in household: $680.
2. Semiannual permit fee:
(a) First car in a household: $455.
(b) Additional car in household: $505.
3. Twenty-four-hour permits will be issued only to tenants that reside
in the B-4 Commercial District as zoned or those residents that
reside in the B-3 Commercial District as zoned along Millburn
Avenue between Short Hills Avenue and Morris Turnpike.
§ 7-35.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.13
AO:239
§ 7-35.14. Collection and Disposition of Fees for Parking Permits.
[1967 Code § 24-10-14; Ord. No. 12-18-72 §§ 7, 8; Ord. No. 27-78
§ 1]
All parking permit fees are payable in full in advance and shall be collected
by the employee or official designated by the Business Administrator who
shall account therefor and shall pay the same over to the Township Chief
Financial Officer/Treasurer, as required by law. Every such permit shall
be valid only for the period and vehicle for which issued. No refund may
be had of all or any part of the fee paid for any permit unless, in the
discretion of the Business Administrator, extenuating circumstances and
good cause are clearly demonstrated. A vehicle for which a permit and
insignia have been issued when parked at a parking meter must pay the
4. Permits will be limited to two per apartment unit.
5. A copy of a current rental lease must be provided with the
application in order for a twenty-four-hour permit to be issued.
6. All other rules and requirements established by the permit
application shall be adhered to by the permit holder.
d. Overnight parking permits for designated lots.
1. Annual permit fee: $225.
2. Use of the permit will be permitted in designated shopper parking
spaces in Lot 2 and Lot 14 Monday-Saturday 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
and Sunday all day.
3. Overnight parking permits will be issued only to tenants that reside
in the B-4 Commercial District as zoned or to those residents that
reside in the B-3 Commercial District as zoned along Millburn
Avenue between Short Hills Avenue and Morris Turnpike.
4. A copy of a current rental lease must be provided with the
application in order for an overnight parking permit to be issued.
5. All other rules and requirements established by the permit
application shall be adhered to by the permit holder.
e. Transfer fee.
1. Transfer of a permit to another vehicle: $5.
2. Transfer penalty (failure to return original sticker upon transfer):
$20.
f. Resident's summer intern permit (May 1 - September 1).
1. Summer intern permit (use restricted to Lots 14, 16 and 19): $75.
g. For categories where ranges are established herewith, the fee shall be
set by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 7-35.13 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.14
AO:240
parking meter fee. No portion of any off-street parking lot shall be deemed
reserved for the parking of any vehicle for which a permit has been issued
unless it is designated as a "permit-parking-only area." However, nothing
herein contained shall be construed to assure the holder of a permit of the
availability of a parking space for the parking of any vehicle for which a
permit has been issued.
§ 7-35.15. Application for Parking Permit. [1967 Code § 24-10-15]
Applications for permits under this section will be furnished by the
Township. Applications may be submitted to a Township employee, or officer
designated by the Business Administrator, by mail on the printed form
supplied by the Township. Every application shall be signed by the owner
of the vehicle for which the permit is desired. Every application shall
designate the type of permit desired, and the fee for such permit shall be
paid with the filing of the application. The permit and the insignia may be
mailed by the Township designee to the applicant.
§ 7-35.16. Term of Permit. [1967 Code § 24-10-16; Ord. No. 2469-16
§ 2]
Annual parking permits shall be for a calendar year only. Semiannual
permits shall be for the period of six calendar months, starting on the
first of the month for the six-month period for which the permit shall
be issued. Prorated parking permits shall be permitted for a three-month
period beginning October 1 and ending December 31 for each calendar
year.
§ 7-35.17. Placement of Insignia. [1967 Code § 24-10-17]
The insignia issued with a permit pursuant to this section shall be placed
on the lower left corner of the rear window of the vehicle in connection
with which the permit is issued; provided that if such vehicle has no rear
window, or the rear window can be removed, the insignia shall be placed
on the vehicle at the place designated in the instructions issued with the
permit. The insignia issued shall designate the type of permit and period of
time for which it shall be in effect.
To be eligible for the parking privileges afforded by any permit under this
section, a vehicle shall display the insignia issued while parked in any
municipal parking lot.
The owner of any vehicle upon which there is an insignia indicating that a
parking permit has been issued for such vehicle, shall, upon the expiration
of the period for which such permit was issued, remove such insignia from
such vehicle.
§ 7-35.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.18
AO:241
§ 7-35.18. Transfer of Permit. [1967 Code § 24-10-18; amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2549-19]
An unexpired permit issued pursuant to this section may be transferred
from the vehicle for which it was issued to another vehicle owned by the
licensee, provided that the licensee shall submit an application for such
transfer and a fee of $5 to cover the cost of effecting the same. The owner of
the vehicle shall either surrender the insignia placed upon the rear window
of such vehicle in a defaced condition to the Township designee or submit
such vehicle to the Township designee so that the insignia may be removed.
The permit shall also be submitted, together with the vehicle to which the
permit is to be transferred, in order that the necessary changes may be
made in such permit and a new insignia placed upon the vehicle to which
the permit is transferred.
§ 7-35.19. Regulations as to Operation of Vehicles on Lots. [1967
Code § 24-10-20; Ord. No. 18-77 § 13; Ord. No. 2463-16]
The following provisions relate to the operation of a vehicle while in and on
municipal off-street parking lots and appurtenances thereto:
§ 7-35.20. Essex Street Police Station Driveways. [1967 Code
§ 24-14-1; Ord. No. 6-5-72 § 6; Ord. No. 2520-18 § 17]
The easterly driveway to the Township Law Enforcement Building situated
on Essex Street shall be for entering only, and the westerly driveway shall
be for an exit only. Parking along the easterly driveway for a distance of 145
feet from its intersection with Essex Street is prohibited.
a. All through traffic is prohibited in the Township's municipal parking
lots, and no vehicle shall be operated in, on or over such lots except for
the purpose of ingress to and egress from such lots in connection with
the use thereof in parking such vehicle.
b. No vehicle entering Main Street from the exit thereon from Lot Number
1 shall turn left into Main Street.
c. The driveway from Millburn Avenue to Lot Number 4 shall be used for
one-way traffic only in a southerly direction from Millburn Avenue to
Lot Number 4.
d. The driveway into Lot Number 13 from Glen Avenue shall be the only
entrance to Lot 13 (entrance only) and shall be for one-way traffic only
in a southerly direction from Glen Avenue to the connecting driveway to
Lot Number 9.
e. The connecting driveway from Lot Number 13 to adjoining Lot Number
9 shall be the only exit from Lot Number 13 (exit only) and shall be for
one-way traffic only in an easterly direction.
f. No vehicle shall enter Lot 2, Millburn Parking Deck, from the
Lackawanna Place Drive.
§ 7-35.18 MILLBURN CODE § 7-35.21
AO:242
§ 7-35.21. Stopping or Standing Prohibited on Municipal Parking
Lots. [1967 Code § 24-11-3.1; Ord. No. 2341-09 § 8]
Stopping or standing is prohibited at all times on certain municipal
property. No person shall stop or stand at any time on any municipallyowned
property described below:
Library Patronage Parking Lot [Lot Number 13]: on either side of the
driveway to Lot Number 13.
Old Short Hills Park and Gero Park driveways and roads. In Old Short
Hills Park and Gero Park driveways and roads, stopping and standing is
prohibited.
Public school driveways and roads. In all public school driveways and roads,
stopping or standing is prohibited.
Driveways and roads, as used in this ordinance, include all areas and egress
routes, which are not marked by appropriate signage or roadway paint as
parking, loading, drop off or pick-up zones.
§ 7-35.22. Trucks Exceeding Four Tons Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 24-10-21]
No truck exceeding four tons' registered gross weight shall be parked in
any municipal off-street parking lot.
§ 7-36. through § 7-39. (RESERVED)
§ 7-35.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-36
AO:243

Part III
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY TO WHICH THE
PUBLIC IS INVITED UNDER N.J.S.A. 39:1 ET SEQ.
§ 7-40. through § 7-44. (RESERVED) [New]
§ 7-40 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-40
AO:245

Part IV
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY TO WHICH THE
PUBLIC IS INVITED UNDER N.J.S.A. 40:1 ET SEQ.
§ 7-45. PARKING PROHIBITED IN FIRE LANES. [Ord. No. 34-95 § 1;
Ord. No. 2248-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2281-06 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2303-07 § 1;
Ord. No. 2354-10; Ord. No. 2398-12; Ord. No. 2413-13; Ord. No.
2490-17 §§ 1, 2]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, no vehicle shall be parked in a
designated Fire Lane in the following private parking yards and parking
places to which the public is invited:
a. 1 East Willow Street, Millburn, New Jersey shown as Block 906, Lot 28
on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within twenty (20') feet of the curbline on the southerly
side of the building for the entire length.
2. No parking within fifteen (15') feet of the building line on the
northerly side of the building for the entire length.
b. 227 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey shown as Block 705, Lot 2
on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway with a width of thirty-four (34') feet at
the easterly side of the building, running in a northerly direction for
two hundred (200') feet.
2. No parking in the driveway with a width of twenty-seven (27') feet
running under the building in a westerly direction to a point where
the width of the driveway narrows to eighteen (18') feet.
3. No parking in the driveway with a width of eighteen (18') feet
running in a westerly direction to a point where such driveway
makes a right angle bend in a southerly direction.
4. No parking in the driveway with a width of twenty-four (24') feet at
the westerly side of the building, running in a southerly direction,
to the curbline at Millburn Avenue.
5. No parking in the driveway with a width of twenty-five (25') feet
running in a northerly direction from a point west of the covered
driveway for a distance of fifty-five (55') feet.
c. 720—740 Morris Turnpike, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block
1904, Lot 20 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within thirty-five (35') feet of the building line of the
northwesterly building along the front of such building.
2. No parking within thirty-five (35') feet of the curbline of the
southeasterly building along the front of such building.
§ 7-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-45
AO:247
3. No parking within twenty (20') feet of the building line along the
easterly side of the southeasterly building for the entire length.
4. No parking within thirty-five (35') feet of the building line along the
rear of both buildings for their entire length.
5. No parking in the driveway with a width of twenty-six (26') feet
running between both buildings for their entire length.
d. 800 Morris Turnpike, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 1712, Lot
24 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within thirty (30') feet of the curbline along the front of
the building for its entire length.
2. No parking within thirty (30') feet of the building line along the
westerly side of the building for its entire length.
e. 1200 Morris Turnpike, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 5303,
Lot 1 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within twenty-four (24') feet of the curbline around the
entire perimeter of the building known as The Mall at Short Hills
with the exceptions for the Loading Zone areas and Service areas.
2. No parking in the truck tunnel at The Mall at Short Hills with the
exception of the Loading Zones.
3. No parking in any roadway or in front of any egress door, elevator,
or stairwell in any parking deck in the Short Hills Mall.
4. No parking in any roadway in any parking lot at the Short Hills Mall
with the exception of loading zones and service areas.
f. 22 Brookside Drive, Millburn, New Jersey shown as Block 1304, Lots 13
and 14 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the building line on the
north and east sides for the entire length.
2. No parking in the driveway and aisle beginning at the northeast
corner of the building and running in a northeasterly direction,
twenty-two (22') feet wide, for a distance of one hundred seventy
(170') feet to a point where the width narrows to eighteen (18')
feet.
3. No parking in the driveway, eighteen (18') feet wide, running in a
northerly direction sixty (60') feet to a point where the width
widens to thirty (30') feet.
4. No parking in the driveway, thirty (30') feet wide, running in a
northwesterly direction eighty (80') feet to the curbline of
Brookside Drive.
§ 7-45 MILLBURN CODE § 7-45
AO:248
g. 51 JFK Parkway, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 5302, Lot 1 on
the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking along the horseshoe drive on the upper level northwest
side.
2. No parking along curb side P-2 deck under building from east end
of parking deck to west end of parking deck.
3. No parking along curb side P-1 deck under building from east end
of parking deck to west end of parking deck.
4. No parking within thirty (30') feet of curbline along northeast curb
in loading dock area in front of yard hydrant.
5. No parking within thirty (30') feet of fire lane to rear of building to
left loading dock on southeast side of building.
h. 41 JFK Parkway, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 5302, Lot 1 on
the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in front of building, lobby level, southeast side of
driveway, from east end of driveway to west end of driveway.
2. No parking in front of portico.
3. No parking in front of building, lobby level, northwest side of
driveway, one hundred five (105') feet from corner of portico to 51
JFK Parkway driveway.
4. No parking, either side of driveway leading to and from parking
levels P1 and P2.
i. 66 Highland Avenue, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 2206, Lot
1 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking on south side of East Lane, a private road, beginning at
a point in line with the handicapped elevator on the northwest side
of the Christ Church Education Building and running easterly to
the sidewalk on the west side of Forest Drive.
j. 462 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey shown as Block 1101, Lot
41 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the circular driveway entering the front of the high
school, except for the spaces where parking is permitted.
2. No parking in the driveway entering the baseball field parking lot
from Rector Street to the Field House.
3. No parking in the driveway coming from Millburn Avenue entering
the Board of Education towards Rector Street.
4. No parking in the driveway coming from the Board of Education
towards the circle.
§ 7-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-45
AO:249
5. No parking in the westerly driveway coming from Millburn Avenue
going southerly towards the Shop Building, except in the spaces
where parking is permitted and in the loading area.
6. No parking at least eighteen (18') feet from the Shop Building or
any egress door on the southwestern side or the southern exit.
7. No parking at least eighteen (18') feet in front of the black steel
gate located between the Shop Building and the Main Building
located in the southwestern side of the property.
8. No parking at least eighteen (18') feet from any egress door leading
to the westerly side of the building except for the approved loading
area.
k. 22 East Willow Street, Millburn, shown as Block 1004, Lot 6 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway within eighteen (18') feet of the
building from the entrance from East Willow Street going in a
southwesterly direction for one hundred seventy-two (172') feet to
the rear of the building.
2. No parking in the driveway going in the northeasterly direction
from the rear to East Willow Street for fifty (50') feet near the Fire
Department Sprinkler Connection.
l. 56 East Willow Street, Millburn, shown as Block 1004, Lot 2 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway near the Fire Department Connection
for fifty (50') feet from the entrance in a southwesterly direction,
except in the spaces where parking is permitted.
m. 67-71 East Willow Street, Millburn, shown as Block 507, Lot 88 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the entire building, except
in the spaces where parking is permitted and in loading areas.
n. 187 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, shown as Block 305, Lot 1 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway one hundred (100') feet from the
entrance going in the northeasterly direction.
2. No parking for ninety-six (96') feet on the easterly side of the
building starting at the loading dock.
3. No parking for the entire westerly side of the building from the
loading dock to Millburn Avenue.
o. 325 Taylor Road, Short Hills, shown as Block 2002, Lot 28 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
§ 7-45 MILLBURN CODE § 7-45
AO:250
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the curbline for the entire
parking lot.
2. No parking in the driveway within eighteen (18') feet of the
building going in the southwesterly direction towards the rear of
the building.
p. 315 White Oak Ridge Road, Short Hills, shown as Block 5402, Lot 2 on
the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the front apron in the southerly direction of the
building for an area of seventy (70') feet by seventy (70') feet.
2. No parking within fifty (50') feet of the rear of the building in the
northerly direction.
3. No parking in the driveway from the rear going in the southeasterly
direction to White Oak Ridge Road.
q. 103 John F. Kennedy Parkway, Short Hills, shown as Block 5302, Lot 3
on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the curbline going in the
northeasterly direction from the entrance to the circle, except in
the spaces where parking is permitted.
2. No parking within thirty (30') feet of any yard hydrant.
r. 101 John F. Kennedy Parkway, Short Hills, shown as Block 5302, Lot 3
on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the curbline from the circle
to the loading dock, except in the spaces where parking is
permitted.
2. No parking within thirty (30') feet of any yard hydrant.
s. 1025 South Orange Avenue, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block
4407, Lot 19.E on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the circular driveway.
2. No parking within eighteen (18') feet along the building.
t. 400 Hartshorn Drive, Short Hills, shown as Block 2901, Lot 1 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the curbline for the entire
W-shaped driveway except for the dropping off and/or picking up of
children by school buses.
u. 26 Troy Drive, Short Hills, shown as Block 4506, Lot 3 on the Millburn
Township Tax Map.
§ 7-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-45
AO:251
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the curbline for the entire
U-shaped driveway except for the dropping off and/or picking up of
children by school buses.
v. 52 Great Hills Drive, Short Hills, shown as Block 4101, Lot 33 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of any building except in the
area approved for parking.
2. No parking in the circular driveway except for the dropping off and/
or picking up of children.
3. No parking along the length of the curbline from the circular
driveway to the entrance at Great Hills Drive except in the areas
approved for parking.
4. No parking in the exit driveway for thirty-seven (37') feet from
Great Hills Drive to the parking lot.
w. 459 Essex Street, Millburn, shown as Block 1207, Lot 1 on the Millburn
Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the fifty (50') feet by fifty-five (55') feet front apron.
2. No parking on both sides of the curbline for one hundred twentythree
(123') feet on the northwesterly side of the building from
Essex Street to the rear of the building.
x. 326 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, shown as Block 804, Lot 14 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the building going in the
southerly direction from Millburn Avenue for ninety (90') feet.
y. 321 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, shown as Block 702, Lot 13 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within thirty (30') feet of the curbline next to the
hydrant.
z. The corner property at Bleeker Street and East Willow Street shown as
Block 1004, Lot 1 on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet on the Bleeker Street
driveway curbline going westerly to the front of the building.
aa. 25 Old Short Hills Road, Millburn, shown as Block 1207, Lot 20 on the
Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking within eighteen (18') feet of the building line in the
lower annex parking lot along the building's entire length, except in
the spaces where parking is permitted.
§ 7-45 MILLBURN CODE § 7-45
AO:252
2. No parking for the entire length of the driveway coming from Old
Short Hills Road to the annex passageway.
3. No parking in front of any egress doors located in front of the
building facing Old Short Hills Road.
4. No parking in the circular driveway located on Haddonfield Road,
except for the dropping off and/or picking up of children by buses.
5. No parking on the south side of Haddonfield Road for the entire
length between the rear driveway entrance and Old Short Hills
Road, except for the dropping off and/or picking up of children by
buses.
6. No parking along the curbline in the rear parking lot on the
westerly side of the building, except where parking is permitted.
bb. 51 Myrtle Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 207, Lot 7 on
the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking in the rear of the building, except where parking is
permitted.
2. No parking on the southwesterly side of Pine Street, beginning at a
point in line with the Fire Alarm Box mounted on the exterior wall
and running south ten (10') feet past the Fire Department Sprinkler
Connection.
cc. 52 Short Hills Avenue, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as Block 1712,
Lot 23 on the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking for the entire length of the westerly side of the building
from Millburn Avenue to the circular church driveway.
2. No parking in the westerly driveway leading to the building's
egress doors.
dd. 110 Essex Street, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 702, Lot 16 on
the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking on the northwesterly side of the building, from the rear
corner of the building by the Fire Department Connection for sixty
(60') feet along the rear wall.
ee. 337 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 702, Lot 7
on the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway for one hundred fifty-five (155') feet
from Essex Street to the rear of the property.
2. No parking for forty-five (45') feet along the rear wall of 333
Millburn Avenue.
§ 7-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-45
AO:253
ff. 56 Mechanic Street, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 1003, Lot 24
on the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway running southwest from Mechanic
Street curving southeast to the driveway leading to the rear of the
building.
gg. 26 Main Street, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as block 701, Lot 6 on the
Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway from Main Street, running ninety (90')
feet east into the parking lot.
hh. 465 Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 1712, Lot 24 on the
Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway, or in the circle, or in front of the fire
hydrant, except in the spaces where parking is permitted.
ii. 840 Morris Turnpike, Short Hills, New Jersey shown as Block 202, Lot
23 on the Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking from the front section of the driveway for one hundred
ninety (190') feet leading to the back of the building and ending at
the first permitted parking spot in the rear lot against the western
wall.
2. No parking along the rear of the building except in the spaces
where parking is permitted.
jj. 9 Lake Shore Drive, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as Block 3003, Lot
1, on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking on the right side of Lake Shore Drive running northeast
from Highland Avenue to the circular driveway.
2. No parking on either side of the circular driveway leading to Lake
Shore Drive except for the marked handicap parking spaces to the
right side of the front door.
3. No parking on the right side of the rear driveway from Lake Road
to the Fire Department Connection.
kk. Municipal Parking Lot #5, 375 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey,
shown as Block 1212, Lot 11, on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking along the southerly curbline running two hundred
twenty (220) feet from the Courtyard to the curbline of the first
permitted parking space.
ll. Pingry School, Country Day Drive, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as
Block 5005, Lots 16 and 16.E, on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the circular driveway off of Long Hill Drive.
§ 7-45 MILLBURN CODE § 7-45
AO:254
§ 7-45.1. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. No. 34-95 § 1]
The owners of the properties referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
2. No parking for the entire length of the roadway, including the
circular driveway, entering Pingry School from Briarwood Drive.
mm.249 Main Street, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 1001, Lot 18 on
the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking on the westerly side of the building, from the front
corner of the building for approximately seventy-five (75') feet to
the rear of the building.
nn. 200 Hartshorn Drive, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as Block 3803, Lot
34 on the Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking within twenty (20') feet of the curbline around the
entire building perimeter except the handicap parking area on the
northwesterly side of the building.
oo. 35 Main Street, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 1212, Lot 12 on
the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking in the driveway on the westerly side of the building,
from the Main Street entrance running seventy-two (72') feet to the
southerly wall of the building.
pp. 15 Chatham Road, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as Block 1602, Lot 2
on the Millburn Township Tax Map.
1. No parking for 40 feet on the north side of the building between the
easterly and westerly parking areas.
2. No parking for 20 feet along the easterly and westerly sides of the
building, except where parking is currently permitted.
qq. 274 and 276 Old Short Hills Road, Short Hills, New Jersey, shown as
Block 2702, Lots 15 and 19 on the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking for the entire length of the roadway extending from the
driveway entrance to Old Short Hills Park to the property line
between Old Short Hills Park and Greenwood Gardens and then
extending along the roadway on the property of Greenwood
Gardens to and including the circular driveway in front of 274 and
276 Old Short Hills Road.
rr. 350 Millburn Avenue, Millburn, New Jersey, shown as Block 801, Lot 2,
on the Township of Millburn Tax Map.
1. No parking for thirty-seven (37') feet in the front of the building
between the previously approved parking spaces.
§ 7-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-45.1
AO:255
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property.
The owner shall maintain such installed signs and pavement markings in
good condition at no cost or expense to the municipality.
§ 7-46. through § 7-49. (RESERVED)
§ 7-45.1 MILLBURN CODE § 7-46
AO:256
Part V
HANDICAPPED PARKING (FOR REFERENCE ONLY)
§ 7-50. HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS.
§ 7-50.1. Purpose. [1967 Code § 24-16-1; Ord. No. 5-83 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish handicapped parking spaces in
Millburn Township on public and private property which opens to the public
or to which the public is invited. This section is enacted in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:28-2-46, which confers upon the Township the right to establish
handicapped parking spaces in order to preserve and safeguard the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
§ 7-50.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-90 § 1C]
As used in this section:
APPROPRIATE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean, in the case of a restricted
parking zone, a permit issued by a municipality under the authority granted
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7 and, in the case of a restricted parking space, a
placard or wheelchair symbol license plate issued by the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles under N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
ELIGIBLE HANDICAPPED PERSON — Shall mean a handicapped person
who is the holder of an identification card issued by the New Jersey Division
of Motor Vehicles under Section 2 of P.L. 1949, c. 280 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-205), or
by a municipality under the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7.
PARK UNLAWFULLY — Shall mean to park a motor vehicle in a restricted
parking space or a restricted parking zone if a motor vehicle does not
display appropriate identification.
RESTRICTED PARKING SPACE — Shall mean a parking space which the
State or a local government has established for the exclusive use of a
handicapped person, but shall not include a restricted parking zone
established under N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6.
RESTRICTED PARKING ZONE — Shall mean a parking zone in front of the
residence of a handicapped person which a municipality has established for
the use of that handicapped person under the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.6.
§ 7-50.3. Handicapped Parking On-Street. [Ord. No. 10-92 § 1; New;
Ord. No. 25-95 § 1; Ord. No. 35-95 § 1; Ord. No. 2485-17 § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards or plates or placards by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 7-50 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-50.3
AO:257
Street
Number of
Spaces Location
Cypress Street 1 Along side of Wyoming School
Cypress Street 1 North side, beginning at a point
290 feet west of the northwest
curbline of Myrtle Avenue and
Cypress Street and extending
to a point 22 feet west thereof
Town Hall Plaza [Ord.
No. 2485-17 § 1]
1 The first parking space on the
east side of Town Hall Plaza
facing south
Whittingham Terrace 3 In front of Taylor Park
§ 7-50.4. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and on
Board of Education Property. [Ord. No. 2160-99 § 3]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
Municipal Parking Yards and Board of Education Property are
designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
Gero Park 3 Upper lot
§ 7-50.5. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public. [1967 Code § 24-16-2; Ord. No. 5-83 § 1; Ord. No. 13-90 § 1
C]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other
person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Each handicapped parking space shall be marked by a vertical sign
indicating that it is a handicapped parking space and shall contain the
penalty for violation in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, adopted March 20, 1973, and
filed with the New Jersey State Department March 21, 1973:
§ 7-50.3 MILLBURN CODE § 7-50.5
AO:258
Property Number of Spaces Location
Bell Labs 4 spaces 101 JFK. Parkway
Hilton Hotel/Office
Complex
42 spaces 51 JFK Parkway
King's Market 4 spaces 800 Rt. 124
Mack Building 12 spaces 150 JFK Parkway
Millburn Shop-Rite 4 spaces 220 Main Street
Monterey Cleaners 1 space 569 Millburn Avenue
National Community
Bank
1 space 281 Millburn Avenue
Satsky and Company 2 spaces 243 Millburn Avenue
Short Hills Mall 46 spaces 1260 Route 124
Temple B'Nai Jeshurun 3 spaces 1025 South Orange
Avenue
§ 7-50.6. Handicapped Parking on all Other Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-50.7. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
§ 7-50.8. Removal of Vehicles. [Ord. No. 13-90 § 1 C]
a. An eligible handicapped person may request a law enforcement officer
to arrange for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle which is
parked unlawfully in a parking space or zone which is restricted for use
§ 7-50.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-50.8
AO:259
§ 7-50.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 13-90 § 1 C; Ord. No.
2234-04 § 2]
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine
of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and up to ninety (90) days
community service on such terms and in such form as the Municipal Court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
by a handicapped person. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs for the removal and for any
storage which may result from the removal, as regulated by this Code in
Chapter 4, Section 4-39, as supplemented by any resolution regulating
fees for such towing.
b. The assessment of removal and storage costs against a person under
this section shall be in addition to any other penalty assessed against
the person.
§ 7-50.8 MILLBURN CODE § 7-50.9
AO:260
Part VI
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC DURING STREET MAINTENANCE AND
CONSTRUCTION
§ 7-51. TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS.
§ 7-51.1. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways. [1967 Code § 24-17-1; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above or below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic, and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
forces performing these operations.
Therefore, the Township of Millburn hereby adopts the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1978 edition, hereafter known as
M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and
regulates construction, maintenance operations or utility work which may
obstruct the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility who
fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work
is in violation of this section.
§ 7-51.2. Preconstruction Meetings and Approval of Plans. [1967
Code § 24-17-2; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under N.J.A.C. 16:25-9.2, wishing to conduct
work on, under or above the roadway to contact the traffic bureau of the
Township Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting
to develop plans for the safe movement of traffic during the construction
period. The Millburn Township Chief of Police shall review, modify, approve
or disapprove such plans. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are
not approved by the Millburn Township Chief of Police is in violation of this
section.
§ 7-51.3. Emergency Contact Phone Numbers. [1967 Code
§ 24-17-3; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1]
The person, contractor or utility shall, prior to the start of any work,
provide the traffic bureau with at least two (2) emergency contact phone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction
or maintenance site. If, for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be
§ 7-51 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-51.3
AO:261
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to a call
from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 7-51.4. Time Limits. [1967 Code § 24-17-4; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the traffic bureau of the Millburn Police
Department, particularly in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health, safety and welfare, in which case work may be performed
when necessary.
§ 7-51.5. Road Closings and Detours. [1967 Code § 24-17-5; Ord.
No. 21-89 § 1]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Millburn Township Chief of Police or his designee.
§ 7-51.6. Traffic Directors. [1967 Code § 24-17-6; Ord. No. 21-89
§ 1]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the traffic bureau that they are necessary to provide
for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-51.7. Stop Work. [1967 Code § 24-17-7; Ord. No. 21-89 § 1]
The traffic bureau of the Millburn Police Department shall have the
authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles,
stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open
excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/
or safety hazard for any violation of this article.
§ 7-52. PARKING AND TRAFFIC ON MILLBURN EDUCATION
PROPERTIES. [Ord. No. 2486-17 § 1]
§ 7-52.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2486-17 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish traffic and parking regulations at
Millburn Education Properties.
§ 7-52.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2486-17 § 1]
As used in this section:
§ 7-51.3 MILLBURN CODE § 7-52.2
AO:262
MILLBURN HIGH SCHOOL MAIN PARKING LOT (MBOE 1) — Shall mean
the main parking lot located east of the Millburn High School and west of
the Millburn Education Center.
MILLBURN HIGH SCHOOL WEST REAR PARKING LOT (MBOE 2) — Shall
mean the parking lot located at the bottom of the west driveway of the
Millburn High School Campus.
MILLBURN HIGH SCHOOL EASTERN PARKING LOT (MBOE 3) — Shall
mean the parking lot located on the eastern side of the Millburn High
School Campus, north of the maintenance building and southwest of the
Education Center.
MILLBURN HIGH SCHOOL—ATHLETIC FIELD PARKING LOT (MBOE 4) —
Shall mean the parking lot located south of the maintenance yard and west
of Rector Street, adjacent to the athletic fields.
MILLBURN EDUCATION CENTER MAIN PARKING LOT (MBOE 5) — Shall
mean the parking lot located north of the Education Center and east of
MBOE 10.
MILLBURN EDUCATION CENTER STAFF PARKING LOT (MBOE 6) — Shall
mean the parking lot located south of the Education Center and adjacent to
the private properties located on Blaine Street.
MAIN HIGH SCHOOL ROAD (MBOE 7) — Shall mean the main roadway
traveling through the Millburn High School Campus which begins on
Millburn Avenue (west of the front of Millburn High School) and winds
through the campus — east and then south terminating at the opening to
Rector Street
WESTERN DRIVEWAY (MBOE 8) — Shall mean the western-most driveway
off of Millburn Avenue that serves as egress and ingress to MBOE 2.
AUDITORIUM DRIVEWAY (MBOE 9) — Shall mean the driveway that serves
the backstage ingress and egress to the High School Auditorium and second
floor of the Millburn High School, located between MBOE 7 and MBOE 8.
EAST DRIVEWAY (MBOE 10) — Shall mean the eastern-most driveway to
the Millburn High School Campus, located north of the Education Center.
MAIN EXIT (MBOE 11) — Shall mean the exit from the Millburn High
School Campus, located off of MBOE 7 and west of MBOE 11.
ATHLETIC FIELD DRIVEWAY (MBOE 12) — Shall mean the driveway
located to the west of MBOE 4 and proceeds behind the Field House.
WEST DRIVEWAY LOADING DOCK (MBOE 13) — Shall mean the loading
dock is located off MBOE 8 on the western side of the Millburn High School.
VISITORS PARKING LOT (MBOE 14) — Shall mean the small parking lot
located east of the High School on MBOE 7.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean the Millburn Township
Superintendent of Public Schools or the Millburn High School Principal.
§ 7-52.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-52.2
AO:263
GRASS — Shall mean any and all lawns and unpaved surfaces owned by the
Millburn Board of Education.
PERMITS — Shall mean parking permits or programs issued by the
authorized representative and on file with the Township of Millburn
Municipal Clerk, the Millburn Police Department Traffic Bureau and the
Millburn Municipal Court.
SIDEWALKS — Shall mean the sidewalks and other areas intended for
pedestrian traffic and not motor vehicles.
TRAFFIC BUREAU — Shall mean the Millburn Police Department Traffic
Bureau.
WASHINGTON SCHOOL NORTH PARKING LOT — Shall mean the parking
lot located on the north side of Washington School (70 Spring Street).
WASHINGTON SCHOOL SOUTH DRIVEWAY — Shall mean the driveway
located on the south side of Washington School (70 Spring Street).
§ 7-52.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1]
All municipal, County, State, Federal and Millburn Board of Education
vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section 7-52. Nothing
in this Section 7-52 shall prohibit the right of a sworn member of the
Millburn Police Department, in concert with the authorized representative,
from temporarily allowing the parking of vehicles in normally prohibited
locations for special events, as long as the parking of those vehicles does
not prevent emergency access into otherwise occupied buildings.
§ 7-52.4. Parking. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1]
It shall be unlawful to park in the following locations on the Millburn High
School Campus and the Millburn Board of Education Property:
a. On the following roadways: MBOE 7, MBOE 8, MBOE 10, MBOE 11 and
MBOE 12.
b. On any grass or unpaved area, except for major events. The authorized
representative will contact the Millburn Police Department prior to
major events.
c. On MBOE 9, except while actively loading and unloading and under no
circumstances ever while the auditorium is occupied for an event.
d. All vehicles shall be parked within lined spots in all lots.
e. Only authorized vehicles as outlined in the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Code Title 39, may utilize handicap parking spots.
f. Only Millburn Board of Education authorized vehicles may park in
MBOE 13.
g. On any sidewalk.
§ 7-52.2 MILLBURN CODE § 7-52.4
AO:264
§ 7-52.5. No Left Turns. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2486-17
§ 1]
No left turns shall be permitted between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. from the Washington School North Parking Lot
and the Washington School South Driveway onto Spring Street, unless there
is a police officer present.
A "No Left Turn" sign, Type R3-2 (24" by 24"), shall be installed with
a permanent legend below it articulating the times and days of the turn
prohibitions. The sign shall be mounted on the southwest corner of the
Washington School North Parking Lot and Washington School South
h. Any place on the entire campus between the hours of 0230-0530 (2:30
a.m. and 5:30 a.m.) unless overnight permission is given by the
authorized representative and this information is conveyed to the
Millburn Police Department.
i. To take up more than one (1) parking spot or not parking a vehicle
between lines of spaces at any location on the Millburn High School
Campus or Education Center Property.
j. Parking Permit Program.
1. The Traffic Bureau, in consultation with the authorized
representative, is hereby authorized to establish a written parking
policy which will regulate the use of lined parking spaces on the
Millburn High School Campus and the Millburn Education Center's
property by designating where parking is permitted and by whom.
Any vehicle not displaying a valid sticker or other evidence of an
issued permit will be in violation of this Section 7-52.
2. A copy of this permit policy shall be on file with the following
agencies:
(a) The Millburn Police Department Traffic Bureau
(b) The Millburn Municipal Court
(c) The Clerk of the Township of Millburn
(d) The Millburn Board of Education
3. Announcement of the permit policy shall be made by publishing the
procedures in the local newspaper, announcement by the Millburn
Board of Education, and the Millburn Township Committee. Every
attempt shall be made to have a copy of the procedures sent to
every staff and student's household. In addition, proper signage
shall be installed regulating the permit policy.
4. Announcements, signage, and expense of the parking permit
program shall be the responsibility of the Millburn Board of
Education.
§ 7-52.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-52.5
AO:265
Driveway, facing westbound traffic exiting both locations. The sign shall be
mounted in conjunction with a Stop Sign (Type R1-1).
§ 7-52.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1]
The speed limit on the entire campus of the Millburn High School Campus
and the Millburn Education Center shall be ten (10) miles per hour.
§ 7-52.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2251-05 § 1]
This entire section shall be enforced by the Millburn Police Department.
Failure to obey any of the outlined provisions can result in a uniformed
traffic summons being issued and will carry the same weight and force
as violations of parking provisions governing municipal parking lots or as
outlined in the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code Title 39.
§ 7-53. through § 7-56. (RESERVED)
§ 7-52.5 MILLBURN CODE § 7-53
AO:266
Chapter 8
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
[Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township Committee
to make rules and regulations concerning public parks, see N.J.S.A.
40:61-1. As to public parks generally, see N.J.S.A. 40:61-1 to
40:61-41.]
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS. [1967 Code § 16-1-1]
As used in this Chapter:
COMMISSION — Shall mean the Board of Recreation Commissioners of the
Township.
PARK — Shall mean any park, reservation, arboretum, playground, athletic
field, recreation center or any other area in the Township owned or used by
the Township, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any wheeled contrivance, whether motor-powered,
animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer. Exception
is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the Township
parks.
§ 8-2. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 8-2.1. Certain Acts Prohibited. [1967 Code § 16-1-2; New; Ord. No.
2514-18]
No person shall, in any park:
a. Carry or use any golf club or hit golf balls.
b. Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal.
c. Bring or have in their possession, or set off or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other
fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or
throw them in any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto.
It is prohibited for persons to bring or have in their possession or set
off or otherwise cause to ignite sparklers and other non-exploding, nonaerial
fireworks or novelties. Sparkling devices and novelties include,
but are not limited to: sparklers, snakes, glow works and smoke
devices.
Exception is made as to any regularly conducted display of fireworks
under and by virtue of the authority of the Commission or other
municipal authorities.
d. Have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic
beverages at any time in any park.
§ 7-53 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2.1
AO:267
§ 8-2.2. Disfiguration, Removal of Buildings, Signs, Benches
Prohibited. [1967 Code § 16-1-3]
No person shall, in any park, willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
destroy, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, bench, table,
fireplace, paving or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or any structure, equipment,
facility or park property or appurtenances, either real or personal.
§ 8-2.3. Damage to Trees, Shrubbery or Lawns Prohibited. [1967
Code § 16-1-4]
No person shall, in any park:
e. Be present in any park after closing time. All parks shall be closed from
10:00 p.m. to sunrise except for Township sponsored activities and
except for access to and from private property through Old Short Hills
Park.
f. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing.
Exception is here made as to any concessionaire acting under and by
virtue of authority of the Commission or other municipal authority.
g. Drive, ride or lead a horse, except upon an area designated for such
use, if any.
h. Shoot any arrow or use any bow and arrow, except when engaged in an
archery program under the supervision of the Commission.
i. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such area and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Commission.
j. Have brought in, or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse
or other trash. No refuse, trash or waste material shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, and all waste materials shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park
by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
a. Damage, cut, break, trample, injure or destroy any hedge, shrub, tree
or plant.
b. Enter upon any flower bed or pick any flowers.
c. Dig in, damage, injure or otherwise disturb any lawn or grass area.
d. Climb any tree.
§ 8-2.1 MILLBURN CODE § 8-2.3
AO:268
§ 8-2.4. Riding Bicycles or Motorized Vehicles in Parks. [1967 Code
§ 16-1-5; Ord. No. 1-74 §§ 1, 2]
No person shall, in any park, ride or coast on a motor vehicle or similar
vehicle.
No person shall, in any park, ride or coast on a bicycle except upon the
designated paved pathways of Taylor Park and Gero Park.
§ 8-2.5. Operation and Parking of Vehicles. [1967 Code § 16-1-6;
Ord. No. 10-74 § 1]
No person shall, in any park:
§ 8-3. TAYLOR PARK LAKE.
§ 8-3.1. Swimming in Taylor Park Lake. [1967 Code § 16-1-7]
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in Taylor Park Lake.
§ 8-4. through § 8-6. (RESERVED)
§ 8-7. STRUCTURES IN PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.43
Exception is made as to duly authorized municipal employees in the
performance of duty.
a. Operate any vehicle in any portion of a park, except upon the
designated parking areas and the driveways and approaches thereto.
b. Park any vehicle, except upon a designated parking area, and except in
accordance with the posted directions thereat and the instructions of
any park attendant who may be present.
c. Except that, in Taylor Park only, the operation of vehicles shall be
prohibited except for:
1. Authorized vehicles of the Shade Tree and Recreation
Departments.
2. Vehicles using the designated driveways and approaches to the
recreation house to park momentarily and unload and pick up
handicapped persons.
3. Commercial vehicles using the designated driveways and
approaches to Bauer Community Center to park, while unloading
supplies and conducting business.
43.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning licensing in general, see Chapter 4, General
Licensing.
§ 8-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-7.1
AO:269
§ 8-7.1. Structures Prohibited in Parks or Other Public Places;
Exception. [Ord. No. 14-93 § 1]
No person shall, in any park or other public place in the Township, place,
erect or leave any unattended structure (as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7),
except for structures located in parks by the Township relating to
recreational activities, or upon the issuance by the Millburn Business
Administrator or his/her delegate of a permit to place a structure which
communicates lawful speech in the Short Hills Green on the following terms
and conditions:
a. The structure shall be structurally sound, not in excess of five (5') feet
in height, five (5') feet in width and five (5') feet in depth and shall not
impede access to and from the train station and public thoroughfares.
b. The structure shall be placed only for a period of time not in excess of
five (5) days. Only one (1) structure at a time shall be allowed, as
determined by a random drawing in the event of a conflict. Applications
for any month shall be submitted during regular business hours to the
Business Administrator by the tenth (10th) day of the prior month.
In the event of any conflict as to subject or time, which cannot
otherwise be resolved, the permit shall be issued as determined by a
random drawing. The same or a similar structure shall not be placed
there again, and the same sponsor shall not place a structure there
again, within the same calendar year, but in no event more than once
within a ten (10) month period.
c. The name of the sponsor shall be placed on a sign of approximately two
(2) square feet on or near the structure and visible to the public.
d. The sponsor shall agree to restore the Short Hills Green to the
condition it was in prior to the placement of the structure.
e. The application for the permit shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the responsible
person(s) to contact with respect to the structure.
2. The dates on which the structure will be displayed.
3. The title, a written description and sketch of the structure,
including all wording on the structure and on the sponsor sign.
4. The agreement of the sponsor to indemnify and hold the Township
harmless from any and all costs, damages, expenses, losses or
liabilities, including reasonable attorney's fees.
f. The sponsor shall deposit together with the permit application the sum
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) cash or cash equivalent as assurance
that the structure shall be removed at the end of five (5) days, which
sum shall be returned to the sponsor if the structure is removed, or
forfeited to the Township if the structure is not removed or if the Short
§ 8-7.1 MILLBURN CODE § 8-7.1
AO:270
§ 8-8. through § 8-10. (RESERVED)
§ 8-11. RECREATION FEES. [1967 Code § 16-1-9; Ord. No. 20-77 § 1;
Ord. No. 14-79 § 1; Ord. No. 8-82 § 1; Ord. No. 6-83 § 1; Ord. No.
39-83 § 1; Ord. No. 3-85 § 1; Ord. No. 2-87 § 1; Ord. No. 23-87 § 1;
Ord. No. 1-89 § 1; Ord. No. 4-89 § 1; Ord. No. 21-90 § 1; Ord. No.
6-91 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1-93 § 1; Ord. No. 2-93 § 1; Ord. No. 1-94 § 1;
Ord. No. 11-95 § 1; Ord. No. 01-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2135-98 § 1; Ord.
No. 2181-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2221-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2283-07 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 2349-10; Ord. No. 2400-13; Ord. No. 2451-15; Ord. No. 2519-18]
The fees to be charged by the Recreation Department for annual permits,
guests, activities, etc. shall be as follows:
Use Fee or Fee Range
Swimming Pool:
Family $305.00 — $320.00
Individual $164.00 — $172.00
Senior Citizen (Over 62) $82.00 — $86.00
Associate $180.00 — $190.00
Child Care $137.00 — $144.00
Guest Fees:
Weekdays, per person $8.00 — $10.00
Saturdays, Sundays &
Holidays, each
$10.00 — $12.00
Replacement Cards $10.00
Refund Processing Fee $10.00 — $50.00
Tennis:
Adult $66.00 — $69.00
18-21 $46.00 — $48.00
8-17 $23.00 — $25.00
Golf-Membership, Par 3:
Individual, Adult $84.00 — $100.00
Junior, 13-20 $52.00— $55.00
Junior, 8-12 $22.00 — $30.00
Nonresident:
Hills Green is not returned to the condition it was in prior to the display
of the structure.
g. For the permit a fee shall be charged in the amount of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
§ 8-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11
AO:271
Use Fee or Fee Range
Individual, Limited $95.00 — $115.00
Individual, Unlimited $180.00 — $200.00
Individual 13-17 $95.00 — $115.00
Individual, Employed in
Township of Millburn
$140.00 — $170.00
Green Fees, Par 3: Resident Nonresident
Weekdays $3.00 — $4.00 $6.00 — $7.00
Saturdays, Sundays &
Holidays
$5.00 — $6.00 $9.00 — $10.00
Guest Fees:
Weekdays $7.00 — $12.00
Saturday, Sunday & Holidays $10.00 — $14.00
Additional Consecutive
Rounds
$3.00 — $4.00
Pull-Cart Rental $3.00 — $4.00
Youth Activities:
General Youth Activities $2.00 — $260.00
All-Star Teams — Various
Sports
$75.00 — $150.00
Baseball — Kindergarten & TBall
$80.00 — $100.00
Basketball — Biddy $90.00 — $105.00
Basketball — High School —
Intramural
$30.00 — $50.00
Basketball — Open Gym —
Weekdays
$18.00 — $23.00
Basketball — Open Gym —
Weekends
$34.00 — $75.00
Basketball — Youth $80.00 — $100.00
Basketball — Travel $150.00 — $250.00
Cheerleading $80.00 — $100.00
Chess $75.00 — $150.00
Cross Country— Youth $15.00 — $125.00
Cross Country — Travel $30.00 — $50.00
Clinics — Various Sports,
Clinics/Camps, etc.
$25.00 — $265.00
§ 8-11 MILLBURN CODE § 8-11
AO:272
Use Fee or Fee Range
Equipment Deposit $50.00 — $100.00
Football - Flag 2nd-8th $80.00 — $90.00
Football — Junior $125.00 — $250.00
Field Hockey — Youth $80.00 — $250.00
Roller/Street Hockey $80.00 — $90.00
Soccer — Youth/In-Town $80.00 — $90.00
Soccer — Travel/In-Town $80.00 — $125.00
Softball — High School
Intramural
$30.00 — $50.00
Softball — Youth/ In-Town $80.00 — $90.00
Softball — Suburban Travel $110.00 — $250.00
Softball — Travel/In-Town $80.00 — $125.00
Summer Camp, Mini-day — 3
wks
$245.00 — $325.00
plus $25 — $50 trip
fee
Summer Camp, Playground-
Full day 3 wks
$380.00 — $420.00
plus $80 — $90 trip
fee
Summer Camp, Playground-
Half day 3 wks
$190.00 — $200.00
plus $30 — $50 trip
fee
Summer Camp, TGIS — 3 wks $205.00 — $225.00
plus $110 — $120
trip fee
Swimming Team $80.00 — $100.00
Track — Junior $80.00 — $90.00
Volleyball — Clinic $75.00 — $90.00
Volleyball — In-Town $80.00 — $90.00
Volleyball — Open Gym $20.00 — $35.00
Volleyball — Travel $110.00 — $250.00
Wrestling — Youth $80.00 — $90.00
Wrestling — Travel $100.00 — $250.00
Adult Activities:
Individual & Team Activities $30.00 — $115.00
Four Mile Run $16.00 — $24.00
Seniors — Crafts, Exercise
and Other Programs
$10.00 — $150.00
§ 8-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11
AO:273
Use Fee or Fee Range
Skiing — Multi Day $335.00 — $485.00
Skiing — Weekend $450.00 — $525.00
Other (Special Activities):
Golf Lessons - Group $23.00 — $32.00
per 1/2 hr
Golf Lessons - Individual $33.00 — $57.00
per 1/2 hr
Swim Lessons — Group $25.00 — $35.00
Swim Lessons — Individual $18.00 — $22.00
per 1/2 hr
Swim Accessory Sales $1.00 — $25.00
Tennis Lessons — Group $10.00 — $30.00
per hr
Tennis Lessons — Individual $30.00 — $60.00
per hr
Sneakers/ Special Needs
Programs
$80.00 — $100.00
Building Rental Fees (per hour)
Bauer Community Center
Assembly Room — Weekdays $20.00 — $40.00
Assembly Room — Weekends $35.00 — $70.00
Kitchen — Weekdays (per
event)
$15.00 — $20.00
Kitchen — Weekends (per
event)
$20.00 — $25.00
Other Rooms — Weekdays $17.00 — $25.00
Other Rooms — Weekends $20.00 — $45.00
Gero Recreations Center
Meeting Room
Weekdays $17.00 — $25.00
Saturdays and Sundays $20.00 — $45.00
Field Rental, per hour $10.00 — $70.00
Facility Rental Deposit -
Cleaning Charge/Assessment
$50.00 — $150.00
Facility Rental — Picnic Area,
Equipment, Other
$10.00 — $100.00
Facility Rental — Restrooms $15.00 — $20.00
§ 8-11 MILLBURN CODE § 8-11
AO:274
Chapter 9
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 9-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 9-1.1. Establishment. [1967 Code § 7-2-1; Ord. No. 12-28-76 § 1]
§ 9-1.2. Powers and Duties Generally. [1967 Code § 7-2-2; Ord. No.
12-28-76 § 1]
The Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall administer the provisions
of the State Uniform Construction Code in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126.
§ 9-1.3. Application for Permit Procedure. [1967 Code § 7-2-3; Ord.
No. 12-28-76 § 1]
Application for permit shall be in accordance with procedure as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-130.
a. There is hereby established in the Township, a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as Millburn
Construction Code Enforcing Agency, consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire
Protection Subcode Official, and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in Paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
d. All other provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 are incorporated herein by
reference to the same effect as if herein set forth at length.
§ 8-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.4
AO:275
§ 9-1.4. Decisions on Applications for Permits; Expiration or
Cancellation of Permits. [1967 Code § 7-2-4; Ord. No. 12-28-76 § 1]
Decisions for applications for permit shall follow the procedure as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-131.
§ 9-1.5. Construction Permit Fees. [1967 Code § 7-2-5; 12-28-76 § 1;
Ord. No. 19-79 § 1; Ord. No. 15-90 § 1; Ord. No. 8-92 § 1; Ord. No.
04-97 § 1; Ord. No. 10-97 § 1; Ord. No. 2202-02 § 1; Ord. No.
2250-05 §§ 1—6]
A construction permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance,
and the fee shall be the sum of the subcode and surcharge fees hereafter
listed and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
a. Option. Fees may be waived for public institutions, churches, and
volunteer fire companies. Fees may also be waived or reduced for
community organizations, charitable institutions receiving tax exempt
status under the Internal Revenue Code, and for buildings being rebuilt
immediately after destruction by fire or acts of nature; provided,
however, that such waiver as set forth herein above for community
organizations, charitable institutions receiving tax exempt status under
the Internal Revenue Code, and for buildings being rebuilt immediately
after destruction by fire or acts of nature shall be so waived or reduced
only by Mayor and Committee of the Township of Millburn.
1. Building Subcode fee. Building volume or cost: The fees for new
construction or alteration are as follows:
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the
amount of $0.03 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and
structures of all use groups and types of construction as
classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of the Building
Subcode; except that the fee shall be $0.015 per cubic foot of
volume for use groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2,
and the fee shall be $0.0007 per cubic foot for structures on
farms, including commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.2(d) with the maximum fee for such structures on farms
not to exceed $1,060.
(b) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with pre-engineered systems of
commercial farm buildings, premanufactured construction,
and the external utility connection for premanufactured
construction shall be the estimated cost of the work. The fee
shall be in the amount of $23 per $1,000. From f$50,001 to and
including $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of
$18 per $1,000 of estimated cost above $50,000. Above
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $15 per
§ 9-1.4 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:276
$1,000 of estimated cost above $100,000. For the purpose of
determining estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to the
agency such cost data as may be available produced by the
architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating
firm, or by the contractor. A bonafide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The agency shall make the final
decision regarding estimated cost.
(c) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as fees
for new construction for the added portion.
(d) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Items (a) and (b) above.
(e) Provided, further, that the minimum fee shall be $65.
2. Miscellaneous flat fees.
(a) Private swimming pools. In-ground: $250; aboveground: $65.
(b) Fencing/retaining walls: $10 per $1,000 estimated costs,
provided the minimum fee shall be $65.
(c) Residential tool or storage sheds. Up to 100 square feet: $65.
Over 100 square feet: $0.0150 per cubic feet of building or
structure, provided that the minimum fee shall be$65.
(d) Commercial/residential type antenna mast and satellite dish.
Roof- or ground-mounted shall be $10 per $1,000 estimated
cost, provided the minimum fee shall be $65.
(e) Signs. Fee shall be based at $2 per square foot of the surface
area. The minimum sign fee shall be $65. In the case of doublefaced
signs, the area of only one side of the sign shall be used
for purposes of the fee computation.
(f) Siding/roofing: $10 per $1,000 estimated costs, provided the
minimum fee shall be $65.
(g) Demolition.
(1) Interior: fee shall be $150.
(2) For a residential R-2, R-3 or R-4 building or structure, the
fee shall be $250 per demolition, and $300 for other use
groups.
(h) Commercial installation or removal of flammable or
combustible liquid storage tanks and dispensing units or
pumps.
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:277
Installation, per tank, of a tank for heating purposes up to:
1,000 gallons $150
1,001 to 2,000 gallons $200
2,001 to 3,000 gallons $250
Over 3,000 gallons $300
Installation, per tank, of a tank for dispensing or storage of
flammable or combustible liquid up to:
1,000 gallons $200
1,001 to 2,000 gallons $250
2,001 to 3,000 gallons $300
Over 3,000 gallons $375
Dispensing units or pumps - per
unit
$15
Abandonment of tank in place or
removal - per tank
$230
(i) Moving of a structure or building. From one lot to another or to
a new location on the same lot shall be $10 per $1,000 of the
sum of the estimated cost of moving. The fee for a new
foundation and for placement in a completed condition in the
new location shall be the same fee as in Subsection 1(a) above;
provided that the minimum fee shall be $65.
(j) Renewal of an existing permit. For one additional year the fee
shall be $100, provided substantial construction has taken
place within the first six-month period of the construction
permit applied for. For each additional year thereafter, the fee
shall be 1/3 of the cost of the original permit, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $100; and, provided further, that the
construction for which the permit is applied, is progressing
diligently.
(k) Asbestos removal. An administrative fee of $70 shall be paid
for each construction permit issued for an asbestos abatement
project and an administrative fee of $14 for each certificate of
occupancy.
(l) Driveways, patios and walks. A fee of $65 shall be paid for each
driveway, patio, or walk installation.
(m) Lead hazard abatement. The fee for a permit for lead hazard
abatement work shall be $120. The fee for a lead abatement
clearance certificate shall be $28.
(n) Final inspection. Upon completion of construction applied for
and all required final Subcode inspections performed, the
§ 9-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:278
applicant and/or agent of owner/applicant shall notify the
Construction Office that the job is complete in order to close
out any ongoing job/project. In the event the Construction
Office is not notified that construction is completed within 30
calendar days of such completion, an additional fee of $50 shall
be assessed to the owner/applicant or other who has applied
for and received the subject construction permit, unless good
cause is shown to the Construction Office for the delay.
(o) Tennis, paddleball, basketball and other exterior sports courts.
The fee for a permit for a tennis, paddleball, basketball or
other exterior sports court shall be assessed at the alteration
fee per Paragraph 9-1.5a1(b). The fee for a residential tennis,
paddleball, basketball or other exterior sports court shall be
$250. Any electrical, plumbing or fire permit fees shall be
assessed separately.
(p) Swingsets/playsets, basketball equipment, water features, and
all other accessory uses. The fee for swingsets/playsets,
basketball equipment, water features, and all other accessory
uses not otherwise described in this subsection shall be $65
per installation.
(q) Tents. A fee of $92 shall be paid for each tent in excess of 900
square feet in area or more than 30 feet in any dimension. Any
electrical permit fees shall be assessed separately.
3. Elevator fees schedule.
(a) The fee for a permit to install an elevator device shall be a flat
fee. The fee may vary for different types of inspections, tests,
and elevator devices. N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(g)1.
(b) The categories of municipal elevator fees shall be identical to
the categories of elevator fees listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(a)
and (b).
(c) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures of
Use Groups R-3 and R-4 shall be: N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)6: $49.
(d) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in use
groups other than R-3 and R-4 shall be: N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 (c)7:
$254.
(e) Acceptance tests: The fee for elevators in structures not in Use
Group R-3 or R-4 shall be as follows: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(a)1i
through vi. (See N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)8.)
(1) Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors $238
Over 10 floors $396
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:279
Hydraulic elevators $212
Roped hydraulic elevators $238
Escalator and moving walks $212
Dumbwaiter $53
Stairway chair, incline and
vertical wheelchair lift and
manlifts
$53
(2) Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be as follows: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(a)2i
through iii.
Oil buffers $43
Cwt. governor and safeties $106
Auxiliary power generator $79
(f) The fee for elevator devices in structures in Use Group R-3 or
R-4 shall be: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(a)3: $159.
(g) The fee for witnessing acceptance tests of and performing
inspections of alterations shall be: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(a)4: $53.
(h) The fee for routine, six month tests and inspections for elevator
devices in structures not in Use Groups R-3 or R-4 shall be as
follows: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(b)1i through iv.
Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors $147
Over 10 floors $190
Hydraulic elevators $106
Roped hydraulic elevators $147
Escalator and moving walks $147
(i) The fee for one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of tests
of elevator devices, which shall include a six-month routine
inspection, shall be: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(b)2i through vi.
(1) Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors $212
Over 10 floors $253
Hydraulic elevators $159
Roped hydraulic elevators $212
Escalator and moving walks $338
§ 9-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:280
Dumbwaiters $84
Manlifts, stairway chair lifts,
incline and vertical wheelchair
lifts
$128
(2) Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(b)3i through iii.
Oil buffers, per buffer $43
Cwt. governor and safeties $84
Auxiliary power generator $53
(j) The fee for the three-year or five-year inspection of elevator
devices shall be as follows: N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(b)4i and ii.
Traction and winding drum elevators:
1 to 10 floors (5-year inspection) $359
Over 10 floors (5-year
inspection)
$401
Hydraulic and roped hydraulic
elevators:
3-year inspection $265
5-year inspection $159
4. Plan review. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before the
plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited
toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the construction
permit.
5. New Jersey state permit fees per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19. In order to
provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the
fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0019 per cubic foot of
volume of new construction. The fee for all other construction,
except pre-engineered systems of commercial farm buildings, shall
be $0.96 per $1,000) of value of construction. No fee shall be
collected for pre-engineered systems of commercial farm buildings.
Surcharge fees shall be remitted to the Department of Community
Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending September
30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than one
month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due.
6. Plumbing fixtures and equipment. Plumbing fees shall be as
follows:
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:281
(a) For each plumbing fixture listed below, $10:
Water closet/bidet/urinal
Bathtub
Stall shower
Lavatory/sink
Washing machine/standpipe
Dishwasher
Kitchen pot filler
Hose bibb
Garbage disposal
Indirect connection
Drinking fountain
Floor drain
Backflow preventer (non-testable)
Stacks
(b) Each heat pump and/or device: $50.
(c) Storm/sanitary sewer line (each) inside building only: $76.
(d) Storm/sanitary sewer line (each) outside building only: $76.
(e) Testable backflow preventer: $100.
(f) Each special device as listed below shall be $65:
Hot water heater
Lawn sprinkler with back flow preventer
Gas piping
Gas service entrance
Utility service connections
Grease traps
Fuel oil piping
Oil separators
Steam boilers (gas or oil)
§ 9-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:282
Active solar systems
Interceptors
Water cooled air conditioning units
Refrigeration units
Sewer ejectors
Sewer pumps (stormwater)
(g) Minimum fee for plumbing permit shall be $65.
7. Electrical fixtures and equipment. Electrical fees shall be as
follows:
(a) Electrical fixtures and devices.
From 1 to 50 receptacles, fixtures or switches: $40.
Each additional 25 receptacles, fixtures or switches: $10.
For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or
switches shall include:
Lighting fixtures Smoke detectors
Receptacles Thermostats
Light poles (residential) Switches
Emergency and exit lights Heat detectors
Motors - Fract. hp Communication/intercom
Alarm devices/F.A.C. panel
Any similar device or motor of 1 horsepower or 1 kilowatt or
less
(b) Motors.
1 hp to 10 hp $25
10.1 hp to 50 hp $60
50.1 hp to 100 hp $90
100.1 hp and larger $450
(c) Electrical devices.
1 kW to 10 kW $25
10.1 kW to 50 kW $60
50.1 kW to 100 kW $90
100 kW and larger $450
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:283
For the purposes of computing this fee, typical electrical
device sizes are listed below, and proper kW rating must be
noted on application so proper fee can be assessed.
Typical electrical devices:
Dishwasher 1.2 kW
Hot water heater 4.5 kW
Electric dryer 5 kW
Apartment size range 8 kW
For electric B.B. heat greater
than 4 feet or 1 kW, apply
schedule.
All other devices, apply kW
schedule.
(d) Transformers or generators.
1 kW to 10 kW $25
10.1 kW to 50 kW $60
50.1 kW to 112.5 kW $90
112.5 kW and larger $450
(e) Service equipment including:
Service panel
Service entrance
Subpanel
Commercial F.A.C. panel
0 to 200 AMP $60
200.1 to 1000 AMP $100
1000.1 and larger $450
(f) Construction pole services.
Service $85
1 receptacle $40
Total pole service $125
(g) Air conditioners. Includes disconnect switch, condenser unit,
air-handling unit and final inspection.
Flat fee $65
§ 9-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:284
(h) Pools, spas, hot tubs, etc. Includes bonding, underground
conduit, underwater lighting and final inspection.
Flat fee $95
Exterior lighting, subpanels,
exterior outlets, etc., priced
separately.
(i) Commercial lights and poles.
1 to 10 $45
11 to 20 $85
21 to 30 $120
Over 30 $140
(j) Minimum fee for electrical permit shall be $65.
8. Fire Subcode fees. Fire protection and other hazardous equipment:
sprinklers, standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas and oil-fired appliances not connected to
the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and
crematoriums.
In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number of each
shall be counted separately and two fees, one for heads and one for
detectors, shall be charged.
(a) The fee for 10 or fewer smoke or carbon monoxide detectors
shall be: $65.
(b) The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be: $65.
(c) The fee for 11 to 20 smoke or carbon monoxide detectors shall
be: $85.
(d) For 21 to and including 100 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be: $120.
(e) For 101 to and including 200 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be: $228.
(f) For 201 to and including 400 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be: $590.
(g) For 401 to and including 1,000 heads or detectors, the fee shall
be: $800.
(h) For over 1,000 heads or detectors, the fee shall be: $1,000.
(i) The fee for each standpipe shall be: $229.
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:285
(j) The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall be:
$92.
(k) The fee for each gas or oil-fired appliance that is not connected
to the plumbing system shall be: $46.
(l) The fee for each commercial kitchen exhaust system shall be:
$92.
(m) The fee for each incinerator shall be: $365.
(n) The fee for each crematorium shall be: $365.
(o) The fee for each fire service line shall be: $85.
(p) The fee for emergency/exit lights shall be: $65.
(q) Minimum fee for fire permit shall be: $65.
9. Mechanical fees.
(a) The fee for a direct replacement or conversion for an appliance
listed below in a Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure by a
mechanical inspector shall be $85 and $10 for each additional
device. No separate fee shall be charged for gas, fuel, oil or
water piping connections associated with the mechanical
equipment inspected. However, an additional fee of $60 shall
be charged for new gas service, new water service, new oil
lines and items of this nature.
The following items shall be eligible for direct replacement
fees:
Water heater Gas piping
Steam boiler Fuel oil piping
Hot air furnace Air handler/condensing
unit
Hot water boiler Back flow preventer
(b) Installation or removal of flammable or combustible liquid
storage tanks and dispensing units or pumps:
Dispensing units or pumps - per
unit
$15
Inside tanks up to 275 gallons
installed for heating
Purposes - per tank $60
Other inside tanks - per tank $76
Underground tanks - per tank $176
Aboveground tanks
§ 9-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.5
AO:286
§ 9-1.6. Connection Fees. [Ord. No. 2379-11 § 1]
Up to 660 gallon capacity - per
tank
$150
661 to 2,000 gallon capacity -
per tank
$250
Each additional 1,000 gallons $10
Abandonment of tanks in place
or removal - per tank
$76
10. Occupancy permit fees.
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of
10% of the new construction permit fee that would be charged
by the Department pursuant to these regulations. The
minimum fee shall be $130, except for one or two-family (Use
Group R-3 or R-4 of the Building Subcode) structures of less
than 5,000 square feet in area and less than 32 feet in height,
and structures on farms, including farm buildings subject to
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), for which the minimum fee shall be $60.
(b) There shall be no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(c) Certificate of occupancy. Change in use groups shall be
combined minimum fee for all subcodes, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $240.
(d) Continued certificate of occupancy. The fee shall be the
combined minimum fee for all subcodes, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $240.
(e) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $550 for Class I structures and $111
for Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of
an application for variation shall be $212 for Class I structures
and $60 for Class II and Class III structures.
(f) For cross connections and backflow preventers that are subject
to annual testing, the fee shall be $111 for each device.
(g) All subcode fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
(h) All fees paid to the Department under the regulations shall be
nonrefundable.
a. Definitions.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure heretofore or
hereafter constructed and designed or used for dwelling purposes,
either temporary or permanent, or other use or occupancy by persons.
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.6
AO:287
CONNECTION FEE PAYMENT DATE — Shall mean the date upon which
the connection fee authorized in this section shall be due and payable,
which shall be no less than 60 days prior to the sewer connection
date, and upon the failure of which no physical connection or use of
the municipal sewerage system shall be permitted and no certificate of
occupancy issued for the related building or structure.
SERVICE UNIT — Shall mean the amount of sewage flow attributable
to each single-family residential unit, and also known as an equivalent
dwelling unit.
SEWER CONNECTION DATE — Shall mean the date upon which
physical connection is made to the municipal sewerage system.
b. Sewer connection required. The owner of any building located upon any
public street or easement in the Township in which a sewer is now
constructed and in operation or shall be hereafter constructed and in
operation shall, on the sewer connection date with respect to the
building, connect such building therewith, and at such connection point
as shall be designated by the Township Engineer.
c. Connection fee to be assessed. A connection fee for each connection of
any property to the sewerage system shall be imposed upon the owner
or occupant of the property so connected. The connection charges shall
be uniform within each class of users and the amount thereof shall not
exceed the actual cost of the physical connection plus an amount
representing a fair payment towards the cost of the system and
computed in the following manner:
1. The amount representing all debt service, including but not limited
to sinking funds, reserve funds, the principal and interest on bonds,
and the amount of any loans and interest thereon, paid by the
Township to defray the capital cost of developing the system as of
the end of the immediately preceding budget year shall be added to
all capital expenditures made by the Township not funded by a
bond ordinance or debt for the development of the system as of the
end of the immediately preceding budget year;
2. Any gifts, contributions or subsidies to the Township received from,
and not reimbursed or reimbursable to, any federal, state, county
or municipal government or agency or any private person, and that
portion of amounts paid to the Township by a public entity under a
service agreement or service contract which is not repaid to the
public entity by the Township, shall then be subtracted;
3. The remainder shall be divided by the total number of service units
served by the local unit or units at the end of the immediately
preceding budget year, and the results shall then be apportioned to
each new customer according to the number of service units
attributed to that connector, to produce the connector's
contribution to the cost of the system. In attributing service units to
each connector, the estimated average daily flow of sewage for the
§ 9-1.6 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.6
AO:288
connector shall be divided by the average daily flow of sewage
for the average single-family residence in the area served by the
Township to produce the number of service units to be attributed.
4. The connection fee shall be recomputed during the first quarter of
each budget year, after a public hearing is held. The revised
connection fee may be imposed upon those who subsequently
connect to the system in that budget year.
d. Connection fees. The connection fee shall be paid on or before the
connection fee payment date for connection directly to: (1) an existing
sewer line within the Township presently operated and maintained by
the Township; (2) any sewer line constructed by the Township as a
capital project, or otherwise; or (3) any sewer line constructed by a
developer as an on-site, on-tract, off-site or off-tract improvement in
conjunction with the development of a subdivision or site plan
(including those units constructed by a developer in conjunction with a
subdivision or site plan where the developer is installing the sewer line
at its cost) as follows: [Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2545-19]
1. Each apartment unit, condominium unit, cooperative apartment
unit, townhouse unit or single-family dwelling already in existence
or to be newly constructed and not presently connected to the
sewer system shall pay a connection fee as follows: single-family
dwelling, apartment unit, condominium unit, cooperative
apartment unit, townhouse unit or any other multiple dwelling unit,
per unit: $1,800 (basic connection fee).
2. Schools, municipal facilities, churches and charitable institutions:
connection fees: same as commercial and industrial connections.
3. Commercial and industrial connection (including condominium
offices and cooperative offices): The connection fee shall be
computed for each connection based on the charge for a singlefamily
dwelling multiplied by the equivalent number of singlefamily
units (service units) contributing the same flow rate to the
system in accordance with the following standards:
(a) The design flow rate for one single-family dwelling is 250
gallons per day.
(b) The design flow rate for various types of establishments, as set
forth in the applicable regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection ("NJDEP"), as
amended, currently cited in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3, shall be used
to determine the equivalency factor for the types of
establishments listed therein.
(c) In any case where the design flow cannot be reasonably
established, using N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3 as a guide, the Township
shall determine the design flow by such means as are, in its
§ 9-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.6
AO:289
opinion, fair and equitable, based upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer.
Example Calculation ("GPD" means gallons per day):
GRD
250
x basic connection charge = connection fee (rounded
to next highest $100)
4. Hotels, nursing homes (and other types of similar lodging):
(a) Connection fees: same as commercial and industrial, except
that only one connection shall be required.
e. Additional connection fee for addition, alteration or change in use.
[Added 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2545-19]
1. For a property connected to the sewerage system for less than 20
years, the Township shall charge an additional connection fee for
an addition, alteration, or change in use that materially increases
the level of use and imposes a greater demand on the sewerage
system but does not involve a new physical connection of the
property to the sewerage system.
2. The connection fee authorized by Subsection e1 of this section shall
be equal to the amount by which the increased use and demand on
the sewerage system exceeds the use and demand that existed
prior to such addition, alteration, or change in use.
3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the Township
from charging a new or additional connection or tapping fee for any
new or additional connection of a property to the sewerage system,
or for any increase in the size of an existing connection, or for any
new construction of additional service units connected to the
sewerage system that materially increases the level of use or
demand on the sewerage system.
4. As used in this section, "materially increases" means any increase
in the number of service units; or any other change which increases
the level of use or demand on the sewerage system by 15% or more
over the highest actual annual use and demand that existed during
the prior ten-year period immediately preceding the addition,
alteration, or change in use; provided, however, that, if the
property has been connected to the sewerage system for less than
10 years, the average level of use and demand shall be calculated
based on the actual period of connection.
f. Credits. [Added 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2545-19]
1. The Township shall provide a credit applicable toward a connection
fee to be charged for a reconnection of a disconnected property
that was previously connected to the sewerage system, provided
that:
§ 9-1.6 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.6
AO:290
(a) The property has been connected to the sewerage system for at
least 20 years; and
(b) Service charges have been paid for the property in at least one
of the last five years.
2. The credit required under Subsection f1 of this section shall be
calculated as follows:
(a) If the reconnection does not require any new physical
connection, or does not increase the nature or size of the
service or the number of services units, or does not expand the
use of the sewerage system, the credit shall be equal in amount
to the new connection fee.
(b) If the reconnection requires a new physical connection,
increases the nature or size of the service or the number of
service units, or expands the use of the sewerage system, the
credit shall be equal in amount to any connection fee
previously paid for the property, and the Township shall charge
the difference between the credit and the connection fee for
the new use or class.
(c) If no connection fee was ever paid for the property, but all
service charges due and owing on the property have been paid
for at least 20 years, the credit shall be equal in amount to the
new connection fee; provided, however, that any charges due
and owing pursuant to Subsection f1(b) of this subsection shall
be paid.
(d) If no connection fee was ever paid for a disconnected property
that is to be reconnected and which was previously connected
to the sewerage system for at least 20 years and all service
charges due and owing on the property have not been paid for
at least 20 years, the Township shall charge, in addition to any
charges due and owing pursuant to Subsection f1(b), a
connection fee equal to the lesser of:
(1) 20% of the service charges that would have been paid
based upon the usage for the last full year that the
property was connected to the sewerage system for the
period from the date of the disconnection from the
sewerage system to the date of the new connection; or
(2) The new connection fee.
3. A credit shall not be allowed under this section for a property that
has been disconnected from the sewerage system for more than
five years.
4. As used in this section, "disconnected property" means a property
that has been physically disconnected from the sewerage system or
§ 9-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.6
AO:291
§ 9-1.7. Tapping/Construction Fee. [Ord. No. 2379-11 § 2]
Prior to the making of the physical connection of a sewer line to the
municipal sewer system, there shall be paid a tapping/construction fee of
$110 to cover the administrative cost of municipal approval of the proposed
connection and the inspection of the construction of the connection by
municipal personnel to assure compliance with the Township requirements
for such work.
a property not physically disconnected but to which service has
been discontinued without payments being made. A "disconnected
property" shall not include a property that has been temporarily
disconnected from the sewerage system or to which service has
been discontinued without payments being made for less than 12
consecutive months and which is being reconnected as it existed
prior to the temporary disconnection or discontinuance of service.
g. Affordable housing projects. [Added 12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2545-19]
1. With respect to the construction of affordable housing projects,
including any affordable housing units in inclusionary projects, a
50% reduction in the connection fee shall be applied to new
connections to the Township sewerage system. This reduction shall
only apply to affordable housing units and shall not apply to market
rate housing.
2. For units previously connected to the Township's system that were
demolished or refurbished to allow for new affordable housing
units and for which a connection fee was previously paid, a credit
against the connection fee to be assessed for connection with the
sewerage system shall be applicable to any affordable housing
units, including affordable housing units in inclusionary projects.
The credit shall be the connection fee previously assessed and paid
for connection with the sewerage system for units previously
connected to the Township's system.
3. The connection fee assessable against an affordable housing owner,
for units previously connected to the Township's system that were
demolished or refurbished to allow for new affordable housing
units, including affordable housing units in inclusionary projects,
shall be the lesser of the reduced rate provided for in Subsection g1
of this section, or the current nonreduced rate applicable to other
types of housing developments minus the credit provided under
Subsection g2 of this section for units for which a connection fee or
tapping fee was previously paid, provided that said affordable
housing owner can establish the connection fee or tapping fee was
previously assessed and paid for connection with the system. If the
same cannot be established, the reduced rate provided for in
Subsection g1 of this section shall be assessed.
§ 9-1.6 MILLBURN CODE § 9-1.8
AO:292
§ 9-1.8. through § 9-1.13. (Reserved)
§ 9-1.14. Classes or Types of Occupancy Posing Special or Unusual
Hazards to Public Safety. [1967 Code § 7-1-6; Ord. No. 12-28-76 § 1]
The enforcing agency will administer the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-131.
§ 9-1.15. Inspection of Construction by Enforcing Agency; Right of
Entry; Stop Construction Orders. [1967 Code § 7-1-7; Ord. No.
12-28-76 § 1; Ord. No. 2507-18 § 1]
The enforcing agency will administer the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-132. Prior
to inspection of building framing, a certification, with supporting
documentation, signed by a licensed land surveyor registered in the State
of New Jersey shall be filed with the Construction Office who shall review
same to assure compliance with applicable height restrictions.
§ 9-1.16. Certificates of Occupancy. [1967 Code § 7-1-8; Ord. No.
12-28-76 § 1; Ord. No. 2507-18 § 2]
The enforcing agency will administer the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133. Prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an as-built survey prepared by
a licensed land surveyor registered in the State of New Jersey shall be filed
with the Construction Office who shall review same to assure compliance
with applicable zoning requirements, including front, rear and side yard
setbacks, total lot coverage, building coverage, accessory use coverage and
maximum building height.
§ 9-1.17. Premanufactured Systems. [1967 Code § 7-1-9; Ord. No.
12-28-76 § 1]
The enforcing agency will administer the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-135.
§ 9-1.18. Appeal Procedure. [1967 Code § 7-2-7; Ord. No. 12-28-76
§ 1]
a. Appeals. Appeals shall be taken to the Essex County Construction
Board of Appeals in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
b. Stay of proceedings. Neither an appeal to the Essex County
Construction Board of Appeals nor a departmental appeal nor an appeal
to a court of competent jurisdiction shall automatically stay an order to
stop construction issued pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code or prevent the seeking of an order in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of a stop-construction
order.
§ 9-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.19
AO:293
§ 9-1.19. Penalties Provided. [1967 Code § 7-2-8; Ord. No. 12-28-76
§ 2]
Penalties will be as provided in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-138.
§ 9-2. (RESERVED)
§ 9-3. UNFIT BUILDINGS.44
§ 9-3.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 7-4-1; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Shall mean any dwelling or structure or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation, use or otherwise. The term shall include any
outhouses or appurtenances thereto usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Township Committee.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder of title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all persons who have interests of
record in a building and any who are in actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any Department or branch of the government of the
Township, County or State relating to health, fire, building regulations or to
other regulations concerning buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer authorized by this section to
exercise the powers prescribed in this section.
§ 9-3.2. Business Administrator to Perform Duties of "Public
Officer." [1967 Code § 7-4-2; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
The Business Administrator is hereby designated as the public officer to
exercise the powers prescribed by this section.
§ 9-3.3. Unfit Buildings Prohibited. [1967 Code § 7-4-3; Ord. No.
5-20-63 § 1]
No person shall have, keep or maintain a building that is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use or which is dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants thereof or the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents in the Township.
§ 9-3.4. Complaints That Buildings Are Unfit; Notices of
Complaints; Hearings. [1967 Code § 7-4-4; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Township charging that any building is
44.Editor's Note: For state law authorizing the Township to repair, close or demolish
dwellings unfit for human habitation, see N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 to 40:48-2.12.
§ 9-1.19 MILLBURN CODE § 9-3.4
AO:294
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears
to the Public Officer, on his/her own motion, that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if his/her
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner and parties in interest of such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Public Officer or his/her designated agent
at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after
the service of such complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint.
The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 9-3.5. Issuance and Service of Notice After Determination That
Building is Unfit. [1967 Code § 7-4-5; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
If, after the notice and hearing required by subsection 9-3.4 the Public
Officer determines that the building under consideration is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he/she shall state in writing his/her findings
of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and the parties in interest an order as
follows:
§ 9-3.6. Failure to Comply with Order to Repair, Alter,
etc.—Ordering Repairs, Closing, etc.; Posting Notices That
Dwellings Are Unfit. [1967 Code § 7-4-6; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
If the owner of any dwelling fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Public Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved
or to be vacated and closed. The Public Officer also may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time, as specified in the order of removal.
§ 9-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.7
AO:295
§ 9-3.7. Failure to Comply with Order to Remove or Demolish. [1967
Code § 7-4-7; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish any
building under this section, the Public Officer may cause such building to
be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 9-3.8. Maintaining Buildings Which Have Been Posted; Removal
of Posted Notices. [1967 Code § 7-4-8; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
No person shall own, have, keep, maintain or live in any building on which
there has been posted a placard as provided in subsection 9-3.6 or remove
or cause removal of any such posted placard.
§ 9-3.9. Costs of Demolition to Constitute Lien Against Property;
Procedure. [1967 Code § 7-4-9; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness fees,
sheriff fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding before the Public Officer, and the cost of repairs, alterations
or improvements, vacating and closing or removal or demolition under this
section shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such
cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the Public
Officer, he/she shall sell the materials of such building and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public
Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by the Court
and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by the final order or judgment
of such Court; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the Township to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 9-3.10. Defects Which Render Buildings Unfit. [1967 Code
§ 7-4-10; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Township. Such conditions may include, without limiting the
generality of the following:
a. Defects therein increasing the hazard of fire, accident or other
calamities.
§ 9-3.7 MILLBURN CODE § 9-3.10
AO:296
§ 9-3.11. Service of Complaints and Orders. [1967 Code § 7-4-11;
Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
Any complaint or order issued by the Public Officer pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be served upon persons either personally or
by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such are unknown and cannot
be ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, and then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published
in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by such order. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the
County Recording Officer.
§ 9-3.12. Additional Powers of Public Officer. [1967 Code § 7-4-12;
Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including, in addition to the other powers granted
in this section, the following:
§ 9-3.13. Performance of Repairs or Alterations; Recovering Costs
of Repairs or Alterations. [1967 Code § 7-4-13; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
Any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition as provided in
this section may be performed by the Township through its proper officers
or employees, or the Township may contract with any person to render
such services on behalf of the Township under its control and direction
and pursuant to specifications showing in detail the service to be rendered,
b. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
c. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided that such entrance shall be made in such manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
e. To delegate any of his duties and powers under this section to such
officers, agents and employees as he/she may delegate.
§ 9-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.13
AO:297
pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the governing body for the
same and upon ample security for proper performance being given to the
Township. The procedure to be followed in entering into any such contract
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-5. The Township may recover
the cost thereof from the owner by action at law. This section shall be in
addition to any other remedy provided for by this section and shall not
make void any lien upon real estate provided by this section nor prevent the
imposition of any penalty imposed for the violation of this Code or any other
ordinance of the Township.
§ 9-3.14. Applicability of Section; Powers Under Section Deemed
Supplemental. [1967 Code § 7-4-14; Ord. No. 5-20-63 § 1]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts of any Department of the Township to enforce any provisions
of its Charter, ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent violations thereof.
The powers conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred by any other law.
§ 9-4. (RESERVED)
§ 9-5. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS USED BY THE
PUBLIC.
§ 9-5.1. Minimum Standards. [1967 Code § 7-7-1; Ord. No. 10-81
§ 1]
No owner, lessee or occupant of any building or portion thereof in the
Township which is open for use or occupancy by the public shall maintain
or cause to be maintained such building in such a way that:
§ 9-6. through § 9-8. (RESERVED)
a. The temperature of any interior portion thereof is allowed to fall below
55° Fahrenheit at any time in which such building or portion thereof is
open for use or occupancy by the public.
b. Any lavatory or toilet facilities intended for use by the public are in an
unsanitary or inoperable condition.
c. Any interior or exterior sidewalk, passageway, waiting area or parking
lot or any other area in, through or over which the public passes or has
access is inadequately illuminated at any time in which any such area or
portion thereof is open for use by the public. For purposes of this
section, such interior areas shall be deemed to be inadequately
illuminated if the footcandle power measures less than five footcandles
at a distance of three feet from the floor surface and such exterior areas
are inadequately illuminated if the footcandle power measures less than
two footcandles at a distance of three feet from the floor surface.
§ 9-3.13 MILLBURN CODE § 9-9
AO:298
§ 9-9. CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE CONVERSIONS.
ARTICLE I
DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR PROTECTED TENANCY
STATUS
§ 9-9.1. Designation of Administrative Officer. [1967 Code
§ 8AA-1-1; Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
Pursuant to the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.22 et seq. (the "Act") and the regulations promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (the "DCA") pursuant thereto,
N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.1 et seq. (the "Regulations") the Millburn Township Clerk
shall be, and hereby is designated as, the municipal Administrative Officer,
who shall assume the duties under this Chapter.
§ 9-9.2. Procedure. [1967 Code § 8AA-1-2; Or. No. 11-87 § 1]
The following procedures shall apply to any building being converted to the
condominium or cooperative form of ownership:
a. The owner or sponsor of the building being converted shall supply the
Township Clerk with a current tenant list and stamped envelopes
addressed to each tenant, each such envelope containing copies of all
required notices to be given to such tenants, and all documents
required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.9.
b. Within 10 days of the receipt of the items set forth above, the Township
Clerk shall mail to each tenant the notice and all other forms required
by the Act and Regulations and, within two business days of such
mailing, shall provide to the owner or sponsor an affidavit that the
Township Clerk has mailed the aforesaid items to each tenant.
c. A tenant seeking protected tenancy status shall file an application form
with the Township Clerk within the sixty-day time period set forth in the
Act and Regulations.
d. The Township Clerk shall accept all applications timely submitted by
the tenants seeking the benefits of the protected tenancy status of the
Act.
e. Upon written request of the Township Clerk, mailed first class, a tenant
seeking protected tenancy status shall supplement the form with such
documentation as the Township Clerk shall deem necessary in order to
make a determination of eligibility. An application form shall be deemed
to be completed when all supplementary documentation required by
the Township Clerk has been submitted. Such supplementary
documentation may include:
1. Copies of income tax returns, including the immediate past year's
New Jersey State Income Tax Form.
§ 9-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-9.2
AO:299
§ 9-9.3. Eligibility Criteria. [1967 Code § 8AA-1-3]
The Township Clerk shall determine each applicant to be eligible,
conditionally eligible or ineligible.
§ 9-9.4. Notice of Eligibility Determination. [1967 Code § 8AA-1-4;
Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
Any tenant determined by the Township Clerk to be eligible or conditionally
eligible for protected status pursuant to the Act and Regulations shall be
2. Copy of birth certificate or other such valid proof of age.
3. Copy of Entitlement to Social Security or SSI Disability Benefits,
where applicable.
An application shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be accepted if
supplementary documentation is not provided to the Township Clerk within
10 days of request therefor.
f. The Township Clerk shall make the determination of eligibility within 30
days after receipt of the completed application.
a. A tenant shall be determined to be eligible only if he or she has
established, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Township Clerk, that
he or she qualifies as a senior citizen tenant or disabled tenant under
the Act and Regulations and meets the income, principal residence and
all other requirements established by the Act and Regulations as of the
date of application.
b. A tenant shall be determined to be conditionally eligible only if he/she
has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the Township Clerk
that he/she meets all requirements established by the Act as of the date
of application, except the two-year principal residency requirement or
the sixty-two-year age requirement, or both.
1. A conditionally eligible tenant shall automatically become eligible if
the conversion recording, as defined in subsection 9-9.30, occurs
after the tenant's second anniversary of establishing a principal
residence in the building or sixty-second birthday, whichever is
later.
2. If the conversion recording precedes either such second
anniversary of residence or such sixty-second birthday, the tenant
shall automatically become ineligible.
3. In the event that a tenant is determined to be conditionally eligible,
the determination notice sent to the tenant and to the owner shall
indicate the date after which the tenant shall be eligible if the
conversion recording has not been made.
c. Any tenant not determined to be either eligible or conditionally eligible
shall be determined to be ineligible.
§ 9-9.2 MILLBURN CODE § 9-9.4
AO:300
so notified by the Township Clerk by mail deposited within two business
days after the eligibility determination has been made. Any tenant who
does not qualify for protected status shall be likewise so notified of the
determination, and the reasons for ineligibility shall be set forth in such
notice. A copy of the notice of determination as to eligibility, conditional
eligibility and ineligibility as to each tenant who has applied also shall be
mailed at the same time to the owner or sponsor of the plan of conversion.
§ 9-9.5. through § 9-9.10. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
APPEALS
§ 9-9.11. Designation of Hearing Officer. [1967 Code § 8AA-2-1; Ord.
No. 11-87 § 1]
The Township Business Administrator shall be, and hereby is designated as,
the administrative Hearing Officer who shall assume the duties with respect
to appeals filed under this Chapter.
§ 9-9.12. Appeal of Eligibility Determination; Administrative
Hearing. [1967 Code § 8AA-2-2; Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
The eligibility determination of the Township Clerk may be appealed by any
aggrieved person and such appeal shall be determined by the Township
Business Administrator, or his/her designee, who shall be a Township
official, through an administrative hearing.
a. Application for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing to
the Business Administrator and mailed within 10 days of receipt by the
aggrieved person of the notice of determination. The application shall
be accompanied by the administrative hearing fee set forth in
subsection 9-9.21.
b. The administrative hearing shall be held within 10 days of application
therefor, at a time, date and place specified by the Business
Administrator, subject to postponement in the Business Administrator's
discretion in extenuating circumstances.
c. Notice of the hearing shall be given to all known parties in interest who
may testify, present evidence and examine adverse witnesses and
evidence.
d. The hearing shall be before the Business Administrator and a sound
recording shall be made.
e. Within 10 days after the close of the hearing, the Business
Administrator shall issue a final written decision and statement of
reason therefor. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:24-2.7(g), any appeal from such
final decision shall be to the courts.
§ 9-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-9.13
AO:301
§ 9-9.13. through § 9-9.19. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
FEES
§ 9-9.20. Application Fee. [1967 Code § 8AA-3-1; Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
The owner or sponsor shall submit a fee of $50per each application
submitted to the Township Clerk by tenants of the building being converted
in the form of a check or money order made payable to the Township of
Millburn. Within 10 days after the expiration of the sixty-day application
period the Township Clerk shall send a bill to the owner or sponsor based on
the number of applications submitted. Payment shall be due to the Township
Clerk within 10 days of mailing.
§ 9-9.21. Administrative Hearing Fee. [1967 Code § 8AA-3-2; Ord.
No. 11-87 § 1]
Upon application for an administrative hearing, the applicant shall submit a
fee of $75 for each application.
§ 9-9.22. through § 9-9.29. (Reserved)
ARTICLE IV
FILING OF CONVERSION RECORDING
§ 9-9.30. Conversion Recording; Copy to Township Clerk. [1967
Code § 8AA-4-1; Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
A copy of the conversion recording, defined as the master deed (in the case
of a condominium conversion) or the deed to the cooperative corporation (in
the case of a cooperative conversion), shall be forwarded to the Township
Clerk simultaneously with the filing of the same with the Essex County
Register's Office.
§ 9-9.31. Notification of Qualified Protected Tenant. [New]
The owner of a condominium which is the subject of a lease shall advise the
Township Assessor, in writing, by November 15 of each year as to whether
or not the condominium is rented by a qualified Protected Tenant. If the
Assessor is not so notified, the unit shall be assessed on the basis that it is
not occupied by a qualified Protected Tenant.
§ 9-9.32. through § 9-9.34. (Reserved)
ARTICLE V
STATUTORY AUTHORITY/CONSTRUCTION
§ 9-9.13 MILLBURN CODE § 9-9.35
AO:302
§ 9-9.35. Statutory Authority/Construction. [1967 Code § 8AA-5-1;
Ord. No. 11-87 § 1]
This section shall be subject to, and shall be construed to be consistent
with, the provisions of the Act and the Regulations, which are specifically
incorporated by reference into this section.
§ 9-10. (RESERVED)
§ 9-11. HOUSING CODE FOR RENTAL DWELLINGS.45
§ 9-11.1. Title. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 1]
This section shall be known as "The Housing Code of the Township of
Millburn" and may be referred to as "The Housing Code."
§ 9-11.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 2]
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the Township structures
which are, or may become, unfit for human habitation or occupancy, or
use, due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such structures or part thereof, unsafe or unsanitary,
or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to
the welfare of the residents of the Township. It is further found and declared
that, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, the
condition of certain properties has the further effect of creating blighting
conditions and initiating slums; and that by reason of timely regulations
and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be
prevented and neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the
desirability and amenities of dwellings and neighborhoods enhanced and
the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 9-11.3. Purposes. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 3]
The purpose of this Housing Code is to protect the public health, safety,
morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
conditions of occupancy and maintenance of rented dwellings, rented
dwelling units, lodging houses and lodging units; to establish minimum
standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and
conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation;
to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants of the aforesaid
facilities; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of such
facilities; to fix penalties for the violation of this Code. This Housing Code is
hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it
is intended that this Housing Code be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.
45.Editor's Note: See also Property Maintenance for Rental Dwellings, Section 10-4.
§ 9-9.35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.4
AO:303
§ 9-11.4. Applicability. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 4]
§ 9-11.5. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants. [Ord. No. 21-75
§ 5]
a. Every rented dwelling space and the premises in which it is situated in
the Township, used or designed for human habitation, shall comply with
the provisions of this section, whether or not such building or buildings
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the
enactment of this Housing Code and irrespective of any permits or
licenses which shall have been used for the use or occupancy of the
building or premises or for the construction or repair of the building or
for the installation or repair of equipment of facilities prior to the
effective date of this Housing Code. This Housing Code establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy of all
rented buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the
building, equipment or facilities contained therein except as provided in
subsection 9-11.4b.
b. In any case where the provisions of this Housing Code impose a higher
standard than that set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set
forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this Housing Code
impose a lower standard than any other ordinance of the Township or
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained
in any other such ordinance or law shall prevail.
c. After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits thereof
shall, where this Housing Code is applicable, be issued upon
compliance with this Housing Code as well as compliance with the
ordinance under which such licenses and permits are granted.
d. No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this
Housing Code shall constitute a defense against any violation of any
other ordinance of the Township applicable to any structure or
premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner or occupant
from complying with any such other provision nor any official of the
Township from enforcing any such other provision.
a. No person shall rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not conform to the
provisions of subsection 9-11.7 established hereby as the standard to be
used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation.
b. Every owner and occupant shall comply with the respective duties and
responsibilities applicable to each which are set forth in subsection
9-11.7.
§ 9-11.4 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.5
AO:304
§ 9-11.6. Administrative Provisions. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 6]
c. Owners and operators shall not be held responsible for violation of
subsection 9-11.7 when that part of the building is in the exclusive
possession of an occupant or where the responsibility has been placed
on the occupant by a lease agreement, or where the violator is alleged
to be other than the owner or operator.
a. Enforcement. The Health Officer is hereby designated as the Officer to
exercise the powers prescribed by this Housing Code and he/she shall
serve in such capacity without an additional salary. He/she may appoint
or designate such other public officials or employees of the Township to
perform such duties as may be necessary for the enforcement of the
Housing Code, including the making of inspections.
b. Inspections. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine the condition of
rented dwellings, rented dwelling units, lodging houses and lodging
units and premises located within the Township in order that he/she
may perform his/her duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of rented dwellings and of the general public. For the
purpose of making such inspections the Health Officer is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times, all
rented dwellings, rented dwelling units, lodging houses, lodging units
and premises. The owner or occupant of the same, or the person in
charge thereof, shall give the Health Officer free access to such
facilities and premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a rented
dwelling, rented dwelling unit, lodging house or lodging unit shall give
the owner thereof, or his/her agent or employee, access to any part of
such facility, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this section or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
c. Violations of Housing Code. Whenever the Health Officer determines
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this section, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, he/she shall give notice of such alleged
violation to the person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall (i) be put in writing; (ii) include a statement
of the reasons why it is being issued; (iii) allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires; and (iv) be served upon the owner or
his/her agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided that
such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him/her
personally or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his/her last
known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the rented dwelling affected by the notice; or if he/she is
§ 9-11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.6
AO:305
served with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of this State. Such notice may contain an outline of
remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the
provisions of this section and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this section, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Business Administrator, provided
such person shall file in the office of the Business Administrator, a
written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the
notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the Business
Administrator shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner a written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced
not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed;
provided that upon application of the petitioner the Business
Administrator may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable
time beyond such ten-day period, if in his/her judgment the petitioner
has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
After such hearing the Business Administrator shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the notice, depending upon his/her findings as to whether
the provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Business
Administrator sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order. Any notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the
office of the Business Administrator within 10 days after such notice
is served. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and
decision of the Business Administrator shall be summarized, reduced
to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of
the Business Administrator. Such record shall also include a copy of
every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Business Administrator may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of the State. Whenever the Health Officer finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health, or safety, he/she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as he/she deems necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, such order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Business
Administrator shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After
such hearing, depending upon his/her findings as to whether the
provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations adopted
§ 9-11.6 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.6
AO:306
§ 9-11.7. Standards. [Ord. No. 21-75 § 7]
The provisions of this section shall constitute the standards to guide the
Health Officer or his/her agents in determining the fitness of a building for
human habitation, use or occupancy.
pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Business Administrator
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
d. Rules and Regulations for Enforcement. The Health Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this Housing Code including the following in addition to
others herein granted, to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as he/she may deem necessary, and the Township
Committee approves by resolution, for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this Housing Code; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Housing
Code, nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Health Officer shall file a certified copy of all such rules
and regulations in his/her office and in the office of the Township Clerk.
a. Definitions. The words, terms or phrases listed below for the purpose of
this Housing Code shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Department branch
or agency of this Township which is authorized by the adopting
ordinance to administer the provisions of this Housing Code.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used for human habitation, use or occupancy and includes any
accessory buildings and appurtenances belonging thereat or usually
enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or structure or part thereof
containing one or more rented dwelling units or lodging units.
RENTED DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms
or any part thereof located within a building and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used, or designed to be used, for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the animal and vegetable and other organic
waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — Shall mean a room or enclosed floor space
within a rented dwelling unit used or designed to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding basement recreation
rooms, bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATIONS — Shall mean the presence, within or around a
building, of any insects, rodents or other pests.
§ 9-11.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.7
AO:307
LODGING HOUSE — Shall mean any building, or that part of any
building containing one or more lodging units, each of which is rented
by one or more persons not related to the owner.
LODGING UNIT — Shall mean a rented room or group of rooms,
containing no cooking facilities, used for living purposes by a separate
family or group of persons living together or by a person living alone,
within a building.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person or persons in actual possession
of, and living in the building or rented dwelling unit, including the
owner.
OFFICER — Shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized by
this section to exercise powers prescribed by this Housing Code.
OWNER — Shall mean any person properly authorized to exercise the
powers of, or for, an owner of property for purposes of its purchase,
sale, occupancy or maintenance.
PERSON — Shall be given the same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A.
1:1-2.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Shall mean and include all installed
receptacles or devices which are supplied with water or which receive
or discharge liquid waste or sewage into the drainage system with
which they are directly or indirectly connected.
RUBBISH — Shall mean and include all combustible and
noncombustible waste material, except garbage.
UTILITIES — Shall mean and include electric, gas, heating, water and
sewerage services, and equipment therefor.
b. Water Supply.
1. Every rented dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided
with a safe supply of potable water meeting the standards as set
forth in "Potable Water Standards" as published by the New Jersey
State Department of Health.
2. The source of such water supply shall be approved by the New
Jersey State Department of Health and/or the Township Board of
Health.
3. The minimum rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet
or fixture shall be not less than one gallon per minute.
c. Facilities.
1. Every rented dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink of
nonabsorbent impervious material, at least one flush-type water
closet, a lavatory, and a bathtub or shower, available only for the
use of the occupants of that dwelling unit.
§ 9-11.7 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.7
AO:308
2. Every lodging house shall be provided with a minimum of one flushtype
water closet, lavatory, and a bathtub or shower for every eight
persons or part thereof.
3. Every water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower for each rented
dwelling unit or lodging house shall be accessible from within the
building without passing through any part of any other rented
dwelling unit or lodging unit and in a lodging house shall be located
no farther than one floor above or below the lodging units served.
Such water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be
contained in a room or rooms which are separated from all other
rooms by walls or doors that afford privacy.
4. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer
systems approved by the Board of Health, and shall be maintained
in good working condition.
5. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, and bathtub or shower required by
this Housing Code shall be connected to both hot and cold water
lines.
6. Every rented dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are
installed and maintained in good and safe working condition,
connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
paragraph c5 (above) of this Housing Code and capable of
delivering water at a minimum temperature of not less than 120°
Fahrenheit.
d. Garbage and Rubbish Storage and Disposal.
1. Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in watertight
receptacles of metal or other approved material. Such receptacles
shall be provided with tight-fitting covers. Adequate garbage
receptacles shall be provided for each rented dwelling unit, in
accordance with paragraph k9 of this subsection.
2. Rubbish shall be stored in receptacles of metal or other approved
material. Adequate rubbish receptacles shall be provided for each
rental unit in accordance with paragraph k9 of this subsection.
e. Lighting.
1. Every rented habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window
or skylight area measured between stops, for every rented
habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of
any rented habitable room and are located less than three feet from
the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the
room, such a window shall not be included in calculating the
required minimum total window area.
§ 9-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.7
AO:309
2. Every rented dwelling shall be provided with an electric service.
3. Every rented habitable room shall contain at least two separate
wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience
outlet and one ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. Every such
outlet and fixture shall be maintained in good and safe condition,
and shall be connected to the source of electric power. No
temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords which run
directly from portable electrical fixtures to convenience outlets,
and which do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend
through doorways, transoms, or other openings through structural
elements.
4. Every portion of each staircase (other than an exterior cellar
staircase) hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace room, utility
room, and all similar uninhabitable space located in a rented
dwelling shall have either natural or artificial light available at all
times, with an illumination of at least two lumens per square foot (2
footcandles) in the darkest portions.
5. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase
common to two or more families in a rented dwelling shall be
illuminated naturally or artificially at all times with an illumination
of at least two lumens per square foot (2 footcandles) in the darkest
portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways. In rented
dwellings comprising two dwelling units, such illumination shall
not be required at all times if separate switches, convenient and
readily accessible to each dwelling unit, are provided for the
control of such artificial light by the occupants thereof.
6. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have either
natural or artificial light available at all times with an illumination
of at least two lumens per square foot (2 footcandles). Such light
shall be measured 36 inches from the floor of the center of the
room. Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so
located as to avoid danger of electrical hazards.
f. Ventilation.
1. Means of ventilation shall be provided for every rented habitable
room. Such ventilation may be provided either by an easily
operable window or skylight having an openable area of at least
45% of the minimum window area or minimum skylight area as
required in paragraph e1 of this subsection, or by other means
acceptable to the Administrative Authority, which will provide at
least two air changes per hour.
2. Means of ventilation shall be provided for every rented basement
recreation room, bathroom and water closet compartment. Such
ventilation may be provided either by an easily operable window or
skylight having an openable area of at least 45% of the minimum
window area or minimum skylight area as required in paragraph f1
§ 9-11.7 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.7
AO:310
of this subsection, which will provide at least six air changes per
hour, or by other means acceptable to the Administrative Authority.
g. Heating Equipment.
1. Every rented dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in good and safe working condition,
and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments located and in
use therein to a temperature of at least 68° Fahrenheit when the
outside temperature is 0° Fahrenheit. The temperature shall be
read at a height of three feet above floor level at the center of the
room.
2. Every space heater and water heater, except electrical, shall be
properly vented to a chimney or duct leading to the outdoors.
Portable space heaters, except electrical, shall be prohibited.
h. Egress.
1. Every rented dwelling, or rented dwelling unit, or lodging unit shall
have safe and unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress
shall not be through any other dwelling unit or part thereof and
shall lead to a safe and open space at ground level accessible to a
street.
2. A rented room used for sleeping purposes under the provisions of
paragraph j5 of this subsection shall be provided with a safe and
unobstructed means of egress leading directly to an outside area
accessible to a street.
i. Maintenance.
1. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, door, window, roof, or other
part of a rented building shall be kept in good repair and capable of
the use intended by its design, and any exterior part or parts
thereof subject to corrosion or deterioration shall be kept well
painted or otherwise provided with a protective treatment
sufficient to prevent deterioration.
2. Every inside and outside stairway, every porch, and every
appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair. In a rented dwelling containing lodging units or more than
one dwelling unit, every stairway having three or more steps shall
be properly bannistered and safely balustraded.
3. In a rented building containing lodging units or more than one
dwelling unit, every porch, balcony, roof and/or similar place higher
than 30 inches above the ground, used for egress or for use by
occupants, shall be provided with adequate railings or parapets.
§ 9-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.7
AO:311
Such protective railings or parapets shall be properly balustraded
and be not less than three feet in height.
4. Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway shall be free
from holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water within
a dwelling or be a cause of dampness.
5. Every foundation, floor, and wall of a rented dwelling shall be
maintained so as to prevent the collection of water.
6. Every rented dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and
insects. Rodent or vermin extermination and rodent-proofing and
vermin-proofing may be required by the Board of Health. Rodent
and vermin extermination shall be carried out in accordance with
paragraph k11 of this subsection. Every openable window, exterior
door, skylight, and other opening to the outdoors, which is used for
ventilation, shall be supplied with properly fitting screens in good
repair from May 1 until October 1 of each year. Such screen shall
have a mesh of not less than No. 16.
7. Every rented building, rented dwelling, rented dwelling unit and all
other areas of the premises shall be clean and free from garbage or
rubbish and hazards to safety. Lawns, hedges and shrubbery shall
be kept trimmed and shall not be permitted to become overgrown
and unsightly. Fences shall be kept in good repair.
8. The Officer may order the owner to clean, repair, paint, whitewash,
or paper such walls, floors or ceilings, when a wall, floor or ceiling
within a rented dwelling has deteriorated so as to provide a
harborage for rodents or vermin, or the plaster, wallboard, or other
covering has become loose or badly cracked or missing. Nothing in
this subsection shall be so construed as to place upon the
nonresident owner responsibilities for cleanliness contained in
paragraph k6 of this subsection.
9. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor shall be
so constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to
water so as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
10. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary equipment used
for construction shall be permitted to remain in place beyond the
period of three months without permission of the Administrative
Authority.
j. Use and Occupancy of Space.
1. Every rented dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional
square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the
floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room
area.
§ 9-11.7 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.7
AO:312
2. In every rented dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in every lodging unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
60)square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
3. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of
any room where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
4. No room in a rented dwelling may be used for sleeping if the floor
level of the room is lower than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade
of the ground adjacent to and within 15 feet of the exterior walls of
the room.
5. A rented room located below the level of the ground but with the
floor level less than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the
ground adjacent to and within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the
room may be used for sleeping provided that the walls and floor
thereof in contact with the earth have been damp-proofed in
accordance with a method approved by the Administrative
Authority; and provided that the windows thereof are at least 15
feet from the nearest building or wall.
k. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants.
1. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities,
equipment or utilities which are required under this Housing Code
to be removed from, shut off, or discontinued in any occupied
rented dwelling let or occupied by him/her except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is authorized by the Officer. In the event
that any service or utility, which the owner has agreed to supply, is
discontinued, the owner shall take immediate steps to cause the
prompt restoration of such service or utility.
2. The owner of a rented dwelling located in an area found by the
Officer to be infested by rats, insects, or other vermin shall carry
out such rat stoppage, vermin-proofing or other means of
preventing infestations of the rented dwellings as may be required
by the Board of Health.
§ 9-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11.7
AO:313
3. No owner shall let to an occupant any vacant dwelling unit or
lodging unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
4. Every owner of a rented dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units or lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a
clean and sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings
and premises thereof.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise
provided for under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly
maintenance of the premises. The storage of objects or materials
not covered in paragraphs k7 and k8 of this subsection, or not
otherwise prohibited by municipal ordinance shall be done in an
orderly manner so as not to constitute a health, safety, or fire
hazard.
6. Every occupant of a rented dwelling shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling which he/she occupies
and controls.
7. Every occupant of a rented dwelling unit shall as required by
paragraph d of this subsection, dispose of all his/her garbage and
any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents.
8. Every occupant of a rented dwelling unit shall dispose of all of his/
her rubbish in a clean, sanitary manner as required by paragraph d
of this subsection.
9. In rented dwellings containing no more than three dwelling units, it
shall be the responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to
furnish such receptacles outside the rented dwelling unit as are
needed for the storage of garbage and rubbish until removed from
the premises. In lodging houses and in rented dwellings containing
four or more dwelling units, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner to furnish such receptacles outside the lodging units or
dwelling units as are needed for the storage of garbage and rubbish
until removed from the premises.
10. Every occupant of a rented dwelling unit in a dwelling containing
no more than three dwelling units shall be responsible, unless
provided for otherwise under a lease agreement, for the periodic
removal of all garbage and rubbish from the premises in
accordance with such regulations of this Township for the
collection of garbage and rubbish.
11. Every occupant of a rented dwelling comprising a single dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests therein or on the premises and every
occupant of a rented dwelling unit in a rented dwelling containing
more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his/her dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
§ 9-11.7 MILLBURN CODE § 9-11.7
AO:314
Chapter 10
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 10-1. BRUSH, WEEDS, OBNOXIOUS GROWTH, GARBAGE AND
DEBRIS.
§ 10-1.1. Presence Upon Land. [1967 Code § 12-1-1]
It is hereby declared that the presence upon lands lying within the Township
of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash and debris is inimical to public health, safety and the
general welfare or likely to constitute a fire hazard.
§ 10-1.2. Littering of Private and Public Property. [1967 Code
§ 12-1-2; Ord. No. 20-90 § 1; Ord. No. 2430-14 §§ 1, 2]
paragraph, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner
to maintain a rental dwelling in a rat-proof or reasonably insectproof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the rented
dwelling units in any rental dwelling or in the common parts of
any dwelling containing two or more rented dwelling units,
extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
12. Every occupant of a rented dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing
fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation thereof.
13. In rented dwellings containing two or more dwelling units having a
common source of heat for domestic hot water, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to make provision for the proper
operation of such facilities at all times.
14. Every owner of a rented dwelling, who permits to be occupied any
dwelling unit or lodging unit therein under any agreement,
expressed or implied, to supply or furnish heat to the occupants
thereof, shall supply heat adequate to maintain therein a minimum
inside temperature of 68° Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. throughout the year.
15. In the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, an owner
shall be obliged to provide heat wherever heating facilities are
under the control of the owner or whenever two or more dwelling
units or lodging units are heated by a common facility.
16. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of
this Housing Code not specified as the responsibility of occupants.
§ 9-11.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.2
AO:315
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, cast, dump, throw away or
discard any household or commercial solid waste, refuse, weeds,
clippings, branches, wastepaper, cartons, tin cans, appliances and other
such equipment or furnishings in a state of non-use and/or disrepair, or
other waste or junk matter, materials or substances of any kind upon
any lot or parcel of land, upon any street, road, alley, way, park,
parkway, public property or in any place not specifically designated for
the purpose of solid waste storage or disposal; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
keeping or placing, at such times as may be permitted or directed by
any other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the Township or
Township Board of Health, of garbage, ashes or other refuse for
collection by private or public scavenging facilities, nor to prohibit the
keeping or placing of clean, natural soil or rock or fertilizing material
upon any lands with the permission or for the purposes of the owner of
such lands.
b. For the purposes of this section "unsolicited" shall mean the printed
matter referred to herein which has not been ordered, subscribed to or
requested by the recipient.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or deposit, or to cause the
delivery or deposit, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause the
delivery or deposit of any unsolicited printed material to or upon the
premises of any private residence located within the Township except
in accordance with the terms of the following paragraph:
1. Any unsolicited printed material shall be delivered to or deposited
upon the premises of a private residence only within a permanently
installed appurtenance to the premises which an owner or
occupant of the private residence has designated for such material
to be received and collected. If there is no such appurtenance at
the premises, any unsolicited printed material may be deposited
only upon either the ground or the floor, at a point beneath the
place where the private residence regularly receives its mail or
within a three-foot radius of that point.
2. Excepted from subparagraph 1 shall be any unsolicited printed
material which is delivered to or deposited upon the premises of
any private residence which plainly bears either the name, mailing
address and email address of a person responsible for the delivery
or deposit of said material, or a telephone number which may be
contacted to determine such name, regular mailing address and
email address, which may be used by an owner or occupant of the
private residence to effectively request by certified mail, return
receipt requested or by email with verified receipt capability, that
such material cease to be delivered to or deposited upon the
premises of that private residence.
Where the private residence referred to in this paragraph is an
individual unit of any condominium or other such common
§ 10-1.2 MILLBURN CODE § 10-1.2
AO:316
§ 10-1.3. Placing Waste Matter in Streams and Drainage Ditches.
[1967 Code § 12-1-3]
No person shall throw, put or place or cause to be thrown, put or placed,
into any ditch, gutter, pipe, catch basin or stream or any facility used for
drainage purposes in the Township, any garbage, ashes, rubbish or any
substance, matter or thing whatsoever, whereby the free, unobstructed use
of such ditch, gutter, pipe, catch basin or stream or drainage facility may
be in any wise impeded or interfered with, or whereby the same may be
rendered unsightly or unsanitary.
§ 10-2. NOTICE.
§ 10-2.1. Notice to Owner to Remove Within Five (5) Days. [1967
Code § 12-1-4]
Whenever it shall appear to the Township Committee that the presence
upon any lands within the Township of brush, weeds, dead or dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash or debris is hazardous
to public health, safety or the general welfare of the residents in the
Township or constitutes a fire hazard, they or any owner or tenant of any
such lands shall be required to remove therefrom such conditions and
substances within five (5) days after receipt by such owner or tenant of
written notice from the Township Clerk requiring such removal.
§ 10-2.2. Method of Serving Notice; Contents. [1967 Code § 12-1-5]
The notice provided by subsection 10-2.1 may be served upon any such
owner or tenant by any of the following methods:
property, the request by certified mail, return receipt requested or
by email with verified receipt capability, shall be made by an owner
or occupant of that individual unit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally deliver or
deposit any unsolicited printed material to or upon the premises of
a private residence after such time as said person has received a
request by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by email with
verified receipt capability, made by an owner or occupant of that
private residence that such material cease to be delivered to or
deposited upon the premises of that private residence.
4. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit or
restrict any person from delivering unsolicited printed material
directly to a person who is (i) actually present on the premises of a
private residence at the time of delivery, and (ii) who personally
accepts said material at such time.
5. Any owner or occupant of any private residence located within the
Township shall have the right to enforce any violation of this
paragraph by filing a complaint in municipal court.
§ 10-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.2
AO:317
§ 10-2.3. Failure to Obey Notice. [1967 Code § 12-1-6]
For State law authorizing Township to assess costs for removal of brush,
weeds, etc., see N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13.
Whenever the owner or tenant of any lands within the Township receiving
notice to remove from the lands any of the substances mentioned in
subsection 10-2.1 shall fail and neglect, within the time prescribed in the
notice to effect removal of the substances, such removal shall be
accomplished by or under the direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works, who, upon completion thereof, shall certify the cost thereof, to
the Township Committee. If the Township Committee, after examining the
certificate, shall find the same to be correct, it shall cause the cost so
certified to be charged against the lands, whereupon the amount of such
charge shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become
and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands,
to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
In addition to paying the cost of removing such matter as provided above,
any person failing to obey the provisions of the notice shall, upon conviction
therefor, be punished as provided by Section 1-5. Each day's failure to obey
such notice shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 10-3. UNUSED AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AND
MACHINERY.
§ 10-3.1. Declared Inimical to Public Welfare. [1967 Code § 12-1-7]
It is hereby declared that the keeping, storage or abandonment of any motor
vehicle not currently used for transportation, and not being registered with
the State for the current year, or of any unused machinery or equipment
upon lands within the Township is inimical to the public welfare in that
a. Personally;
b. By posting the notice for a five (5)-day period on the property where the
violation exists;
c. By registered mail, and if by registered mail, the five (5)-day period
within which such removal shall be accomplished shall be deemed to
have commenced to run from the date of the return receipt obtained by
the postal authority for the delivery of such registered notice. Every
notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal aforesaid, warn the
owner or tenant of the lands to which it refers that failure to accomplish
such removal will result in removal by or under the direction of the
Township Superintendent of Public Works and in the latter event the
cost of such removal shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be
added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon the same, to bear interest at the same rate and to be collected as
in the case of such taxes.
§ 10-2.2 MILLBURN CODE § 10-3.1
AO:318
the exposure to view of such motor vehicle, machinery or equipment is
unsightly and detrimental to the neighborhood.
§ 10-3.2. Keeping in Township Prohibited; Exception. [1967 Code
§ 12-1-8; Ord. No. 8-84 § 1]
No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land,
or street, or any other place in the Township, any unused machinery or
equipment, or any motor vehicle which does not display a valid inspection
sticker less than two (2) years old and which vehicle is also not validly
registered with a State for the current year; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to any such motor vehicle, machinery or equipment
which is placed, kept, stored, or abandoned inside a garage or other
building in the Township.
§ 10-3.3. Removal Upon Notice. [1967 Code § 12-1-9; Ord. No. 14-97
§ 3]
Whenever it shall appear to the Township Committee that the presence
upon any lands within the Township of a motor vehicle not currently used
for transportation, and not being registered with the State for the current
year, or any unused machinery or equipment is inimical to the general
welfare in that it is unsightly, the owner or tenant of any such land shall be
required to remove therefrom such motor vehicle, machinery or equipment
or to place the same in a garage or other building within five (5) days after
receipt by such owner or tenant of written notice from the Traffic Bureau
of the Police Department requiring such removal; and it is further provided
that the provisions of subsections 10-2.2 and 10-2.3 relating to the notice to
be given, the effect of noncompliance and the penalties for failure to comply
therewith shall apply to this subsection.
§ 10-3.4. Abandonment or Parking of Vehicles on Public Property.
[1967 Code § 12-1-10]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or abandon, or cause to be
parked or abandoned, a motor vehicle upon the property of the
Township, the Board of Education or other public property, without the
consent of the owner of such property.
b. Any motor vehicle left upon the property of the Township, Board of
Education or other public property in violation of this subsection may
be removed therefrom by the Police Department to a location
designated by the Chief of Police and impounded. Such motor vehicle
shall be released to the registered owner thereof upon payment of all
applicable towing, impounding and other charges. It shall be presumed,
for the purpose of this subsection, that any motor vehicle parked or
abandoned upon property in violation of this subsection was so placed
there or caused to be placed there by such registered owner. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in Section 1-5.
§ 10-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.4
AO:319
§ 10-3.5. Litter Receptacle Required. [Ord. No. 20-90 § 2]
The Township shall provide or cause to be provided, and to be maintained
and serviced, by the Township or other public agency or entity or by
private persons or entities, receptacles suitable for the deposit of litter and
recyclables at the following public places: pedestrian walkways; shopping
malls; active retail commercially-zoned areas, such that at a minimum
there shall be no single linear quarter (1/4) mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; public swimming pools;
drive-in restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment
areas; construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; and at special events to which the public is invited, including
sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors
of any such places or the sponsors of any such events shall be responsible
for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 10-4. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.46
§ 10-4.1. Title and Purposes. [Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
§ 10-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
As used in this section:
Nothing contained in this subsection shall apply to the authorized
parking of motor vehicles upon any municipal parking lot or any
parking lot or area provided by the Board of Education.
a. Title. This Section 10-4 shall be known as "The Property Maintenance
Code of the Township of Millburn" and may be referred to as "The
Property Maintenance Code".
b. Purposes. The purposes of this Property Maintenance Code are to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum
standards governing the maintenance, appearance, and condition of
properties in the Township; to preserve property values in the
Township; to prevent and eliminate blighting conditions and
depreciation of property values which may adversely affect adjacent or
surrounding properties; to fix certain responsibilities and duties on
owners and occupants; to provide for administration and enforcement;
and to fix penalties for violation of this Property Maintenance Code.
This Property Maintenance Code is hereby declared to be remedial and
essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this Code be
liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein.
46.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 22-75 and
11-91.
§ 10-3.4 MILLBURN CODE § 10-4.2
AO:320
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition of a building, or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or
other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive
wear.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean (a) any part of the premises
not occupied by any building thereon; (b) any open space on the outside
of any building; or (c) any part of any building which is exposed to the
elements.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person or persons, including the owner, in
actual possession of, and using an entire building or any occupancy unit in
a building.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of the title to premises in fee
simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are in
actual possession thereof.
PERSON — Shall be given the same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land and any buildings
located thereon.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean an assembly of materials forming a
construction.
WINDOW — Shall mean an opening in the wall or roof of a building for
the admission of light which openings may be closed to the elements by
casements or sashes containing glass or other transparent material.
§ 10-4.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
a. Buildings and Premises to Comply. Every building and structure and the
premises on which it is situated in the Township shall comply with the
provisions of this Property Maintenance Code, whether or not such
building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after
the enactment of this Property Maintenance Code, and irrespective of
any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment
or facilities prior to the effective date of this Property Maintenance
Code. This Property Maintenance Code establishes minimum standards
for buildings, structures and properties, but does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration
or use of the building, except as provided in paragraph b of this
subsection.
b. Higher Standard to Prevail in Cases of Conflict with Other Laws or
Ordinances. In any case where the provisions of this Property
§ 10-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.3
AO:321
§ 10-4.4. Appearance and Maintenance of Exterior of Premises and
Structures; Duties and Responsibilities of Owner and Occupant.
[Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
The exterior of premises and the condition of the exterior of structures
and accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor on adjoining
property owners or conditions reflective of deterioration. Owners and
occupants of properties in the Township shall maintain such premises and
structures in accordance with the following minimum standards.
§ 10-4.5. Administrative Provisions. [Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
Maintenance Code impose a higher standard than set forth in any other
ordinance of the Township, or under the laws of the State of New Jersey,
then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions
of this Property Maintenance Code impose a lower standard than any
other ordinance of the Township or of the laws of the State, then the
higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall
prevail.
c. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances. No
certification of compliance with this Property Maintenance Code shall
constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the
Township, applicable to any structure or premises.
a. Lawn. Turf grass lawn areas shall be kept trimmed to a height of no
higher than six (6) inches.
b. Landscaping, shrubs and hedges shall be kept from becoming
overgrown and unsightly.
c. Windows and doors of houses, garages and accessory structures shall
be kept free of broken or missing windowpanes, frames, members,
panels, trim, screens or shutters, and shall be maintained in proper
working condition.
d. Fences. Permitted fences meeting the Township ordinances shall be
maintained in good repair and free from deterioration. Gates for pool
fences and enclosures shall be maintained in proper functioning
condition.
e. Excessive Peeling Paint. The exterior of the dwelling or accessory
structure shall be maintained in good repair and free of excessive
peeling paint which constitutes condition of deterioration. Exterior
siding, shingles, veneer and related trim shall be maintained in
weather-tight condition, in good repair without loose or missing
elements.
a. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Township is hereby designated as
the officer charged with the enforcement of this Property Maintenance
Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the Enforcement Officer. All
§ 10-4.3 MILLBURN CODE § 10-4.5
AO:322
authorized members of the Police Department and Fire Department,
Building Department and Health Office of the Township are hereby
designated as Assistant Enforcement Officers for purposes of the
enforcement of this Property Maintenance Code.
b. Procedure.
1. The Enforcement Officer or other designated representatives
authorized by him/her are hereby authorized and directed to make,
or cause to be made, inspections to determine the condition of
buildings, structures and premises located within the Township in
order that he/she may perform his/her duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of the premises and of the
general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey at all reasonable times, all premises. The owner and
occupant of the same, or the person in charge thereof, shall give
the Enforcement Officer free access to such facilities and premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a rented dwelling or
nonresidential premises shall give the owner thereof, or his/her
agent or employee, access to the premises, at all reasonable times
for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this Property
Maintenance Code or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section
10-4.
2. Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this Section 10-4, or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, he/she shall give notice of such alleged violation
to the person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall (a) be put in writing; (b) include a
statement of the reasons why it is being issued; (c) allow a
reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and (d)
be served upon the owner or his/her agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is served upon him/her personally; or if a copy
thereof is sent by certified mail to his/her last known address; or if
a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
premises affected by the notice; or if he/she is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws
of this State. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action
which, if taken, will affect compliance with the provisions of this
Section 10-4 and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
3. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Section
§ 10-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.5
AO:323
10-4, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Business Administrator, provided such person shall file in the office
of the Business Administrator a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Business Administrator shall set a
time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner a
written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced
not later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition
was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner, the
Business Administrator may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond such ten (10) day period, if in his/her
judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason
for such postponement. After such hearing the Business
Administrator shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice,
depending upon his/her findings as to whether the provisions of
this Section 10-4 and other rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Business Administrator
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order.
Any notice served pursuant to this Section 10-4 shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in
the office of the Business Administrator within ten (10) days after
such notice is served. The proceedings at such hearing, including
the findings and decision of the Business Administrator, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Business Administrator. Such record shall
also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Business Administrator may seek relief therefrom in any court
of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the State.
Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health or
safety, he/she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that
such action be taken as he/she deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section
10-4, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Business Administrator shall be afforded
a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon
his/her findings as to whether the provisions of this Section 10-4
and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with, the Business Administrator shall continue such
order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
c. The Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
§ 10-4.5 MILLBURN CODE § 10-4.5
AO:324
§ 10-4.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2228-04 § 1]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section 10-4 shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this Section 10-4 and each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 10-5. SUMP PUMPS AND PIPE DRAINS DISCHARGE CONTROL.
[Ord. No. 2372-11 § 1]
In order to protect against the adverse consequences of uncontrolled sump
pump and pipe drain discharges, no person shall construct, install, improve,
maintain or permit to be operated on the person's owned or occupied
property any device which allows any point discharge of water by either
forced pumping such as a sump pump or gravity such as a pipe drain onto
a street, sidewalk, sidewalk or public right-of-way except as provided for
below.
§ 10-5.1. New Pump and Pipe Drain Installations. [Ord. No. 2372-11
§ 1]
Sump pumps and pipe drains installed on or after the effective date of this
section, adopted May 3, 2011, shall comply with the following conditions
and be installed in accordance with the latest approved plumbing code by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs and this section.
Plan review and inspection by Plumbing Subcode Inspector.
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Property
Maintenance Code, including the following, in addition to others herein
granted, to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as
he/she may deem necessary, and the Township Committee approves
by resolution, for the property enforcement of the provisions of this
Property Maintenance Code; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Property
Maintenance Code, nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the
provisions thereof. The Enforcement Officer shall file a certified copy of
all such rules and regulations in his/her office and in the office of the
Township Clerk.
a. The sump pump or drain discharge shall preferably be directed into an
existing Township storm sewer system. If the storm sewer system is not
available, then the discharge shall be directed onto a surface as grass,
rock or a splash pad so that the discharge will be dissipated and not
immediately drain to the Township right-of-way or adjacent properties.
If the pump discharge is not directed into an existing storm sewer
system, then the discharge must be a minimum of ten (10') feet from,
and not directed perpendicular to, any private property line. The
discharge location shall be as approved by the Township Engineer, or
his designee. The discharge may also be directed to a swale, ditch,
§ 10-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.1
AO:325
§ 10-5.2. Existing Sump Pump and Pipe Drain Installations. [Ord.
No. 2372-11 § 1]
Sump pumps and pipe drains installed prior to the effective date of this
section shall comply with the following conditions:
drywell, detention basin, drainage basin or other drainage facility or
location as approved by the Township Engineer, or his designee.
b. The discharge location shall not create a public nuisance which is any
thing, condition, or act which is or may become injurious or hazardous
to the public or adjacent property.
c. The discharge shall not create a build-up of icing, standing water or
algae growth on the street, sidewalk or the public right-of-way.
d. No person shall connect or cause or permit to be connected any sump
pump, pipe drain, floor drain, surface drain, subsoil drain or leader pipe
with the house to the sanitary sewer, or use the sanitary sewer
connection or any pipe or drain connected therewith for the purpose of
receiving and discharging drainage of any kind other than plumbing
fixtures.
e. Sump pump and pipe drain discharges may not be directed into a
Township street or right-of-way unless permission is granted by the
Township Engineer, or his designee.
a. An existing sump pump or drain discharge may continue at the location
where the discharge was made on the effective date of this section as
long as such discharge does not:
1. Create or further a public nuisance which is any condition or act
which may become injurious or hazardous to the public; and/or
2. Create or further a build-up of icing, standing water, algae growth
or cause erosion of pavement on the street, sidewalk or public
right-of-way.
b. An existing sump pump or pipe drain discharge that is causing a public
nuisance or is creating a build-up of icing, standing water, algae growth
or cause erosion on the street, sidewalk or the public right-of-way shall
be corrected by the owner to bring the sump pump or pipe drain
discharge into compliance with the requirements of subsection 10-5.1
in its entirety.
c. The Township Engineer, or his designee may require the following:
1. That the sump pump or pipe drain have a point of discharge that is
located a minimum of ten (10') feet or greater as directed by the
Township Engineer, or his designee.
2. That the discharge be directed within the limits of the owner's
property onto a surface such as grass, rock or a splash pad so that
§ 10-5.1 MILLBURN CODE § 10-5.2
AO:326
§ 10-5.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2372 § 1]
The requirements of the Code shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer at the direction of the Township Administrator (or his designee) or
the Township Engineer (or his designee). For the violation of this provision
of this section, or any other ordinance of the Township of Millburn unless
a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the provision
violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be one
or more of the following: a fine not exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00)
dollars; imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days; or to a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90)
days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 11
TREE PRESERVATION
§ 11-1. INTENT AND PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
the discharge will be dissipated and not immediately drain into the
Township right of way or adjacent properties.
a. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within the Township of
Millburn will cause increased drainage control costs, increased soil
erosion and sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation
of water resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased
buildup of atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat
island effect and increased dust and pollution. The singular or
cumulative affect of any of the foregoing could adversely impact the
character of Millburn Township, decrease property values, render the
land unfit and unsuitable for its most appropriate use, and negatively
affect the health, safety and general welfare of Millburn's residents.
Thus, the Township governing body desires to regulate and control
indiscriminate and excessive cutting of trees within the Township and
to require appropriate tree replacement.
b. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of the Township's water resources, development on steep
slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management and the
general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the Township
also correlates with increased air pollution. Therefore, the governing
body finds that the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern. Managing the
Township's tree resources is consistent with the State-approved
community forestry management plan, as in P.L. 1996, c. 135.47 The
appropriate management guidelines for tree preservation to be utilized
are:
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 10-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1
AO:327
§ 11-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER — "Caliper" is a type of diameter measurement used in the
nursery industry. The height measurement shall be taken from ground level
for field-grown stock and from the soil line for container-grown stock, which
should be at or near the top of the root flare. Caliper measurement of
the trunk shall be taken six (6") inches above the top of root flare up to
and including four-inch caliper size. If the caliper at six (6") inches above
the ground exceeds four (4") inches, the caliper should be measured at
twelve (12") inches above the top of root flare. Seldom are tree trunks
perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result from the use
of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual or electronic
slot or pincer type caliper tools should be the average of the smallest and
largest measurements.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
four (4') feet above the uphill/highest side.
DRIPLINE — Shall mean the circular area surrounding a tree, the radius of
which area shall be the distance from the trunk of the tree to the outermost
branch of the tree.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the Forester of the Township of
Millburn or his/her duly authorized representatives.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, ice, wind and gravity.
1. The American National Standard, ANSI A300;
2. Trees and Development: A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees
During Land Development, Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark; and
3. Penn State Guide to Tree Preservation During Construction.
c. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A forestry management
program is intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the
continued use of forest resources which are compatible with the
maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring
management of forest and trees through the application of sound
management practices. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down,
damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any trees covered by this chapter, except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
d. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Enforcement
officer, which shall mean the Forester of the Township of Millburn or
his/her duly authorized representative.
§ 11-1 MILLBURN CODE § 11-2
AO:328
HISTORIC TREE — Shall mean a tree that has been determined to be
at least one hundred (100) years old and of notable historic interest to
Millburn Township because of its age, type, size or historic association
and which has been so designated by ordinance and/or resolution of the
Township Committee, as appropriate.
MILLBURN TREE RESTORATION PLAN — Shall mean a plan of tree
removal, preservation, and planting prepared by a New Jersey Licensed
Tree Expert or Licensed Landscape Architect.
PERMIT — Shall mean a license issued by the Township Forester to remove
or destroy a tree.
ROOT SYSTEM — Shall mean tree roots within the dripline perimeter.
SHADE TREE ADVISORY BOARD — Shall mean the advisory committee
established by Chapter 2, Article V, § 2-33 of this Code.
SPECIMEN TREE — Shall mean any tree in fair or better condition which
is so designated by ordinance and/or resolution of the Township Committee,
as appropriate, based on considerations of whether the tree is a rare species
or specimen thereof; is abnormal in height, trunk diameter or dripline
circumference for a tree of its species; has foliage of an unusual quality
for a tree of its species; occupies a location which confers special shade
tree, fragrance, erosion control, aesthetic, scenic enhancement, historic,
preservation or cultural values to the community. For purposes of this
definition, "in fair or better condition" shall mean that a tree has a relatively
sound and solid trunk with no evidence of extensive decay or visual
evidence of being hollow and with no major insect or pathological problem.
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — Shall
mean that individual appointed by the Business Administrator with the
consent of the Township Committee having direct charge and management
of the maintenance and/or repair of all streets, sewers, drainage, shade
trees, parks and other like operations performed by the Township.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — Shall mean the qualified professional engineer
and certified municipal engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey and
appointed by the Township Committee to oversee planning, construction,
and maintenance of public improvements and other matters of similar
character.
TOWNSHIP FORESTER — Shall mean that person appointed by the
Township to supervise and insure the conservation, protection and care of
trees, shrubs and soil within the Township and having the scope of duties
and authority provided for in this Chapter and shall also include those
persons working under the Township Forester's supervision or authorized
to carry out the duties and obligations assigned to the Township Forester.
TOWNSHIP TREE — Shall mean a tree located on land owned by the
Township or other municipal body or which is located on a street, highway,
right-of-way or parkway.
TREE — Shall mean any woody perennial plant having a diameter greater
than ten (10") inches measured at a point four (4') feet above the ground.
§ 11-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2
AO:329
TREE REMOVAL APPLICANTS — Shall refer to any person or organization
seeking to remove or alter trees in the Township.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — Shall mean the permit issued by the Forester
or its designee to remove or destroy a tree or to place machinery, material
or temporary soil deposit or regrade soil within the dripline of any tree.
§ 11-3. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
The terms and provisions of this Chapter shall apply as follows:
§ 11-4. PERMIT PROCEDURE. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
a. Unless specifically excepted in Section 11-8 below, no person shall cut
or remove, or cause or permit to be cut or removed, any tree on any
land within the Township or place any machinery, material or temporary
soil deposit or regrade the soil within the dripline of any tree unless the
person shall have first obtained a permit therefor in accordance with
the regulations and provisions of this Chapter.
b. Specimen and historic trees.
1. Trees which have been designated as specimen or historic under
the provisions of this Chapter shall be maintained in a living
condition, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cut or remove
such tree or place any machinery, material or temporary soil
deposit or regrade the soil within the dripline of such tree without
an approved tree removal permit. No specimen or historic tree
shall be cut or removed, and none of the activities set forth in this
paragraph shall be undertaken, unless the applicant has obtained
the approval of the Enforcement Officer.
2. The condition of trees proposed to be saved shall be evaluated by
use of guides including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas, ISA Books, Nelda
Matheny and James R. Clark.
(b) Urban Tree Risk Management, USDA Forest Service,
Northeastern Area.
(c) ANSI Tree Risk Assessment.
a. Any person wishing to obtain a Tree Removal Permit shall make
application to the Enforcement Officer by filing a written application
and paying such fees as are set forth in Section 11-6
Any person desiring to cut or remove any tree or trees or to place
machinery, material or temporary soil deposit or regrade soil within
the dripline of any tree within the Township shall file an application
therefor with the Enforcement Officer on a form to be provided for
the purpose. The application shall identify the lot or tract of land
upon which the tree or trees are located; shall disclose the name and
§ 11-2 MILLBURN CODE § 11-4
AO:330
address of the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner; shall set
forth the reasons for requesting a permit to cut or remove same; and
shall acknowledge who owns the tree or trees and shall indemnify and
hold the Township harmless against any and all liability, damages and
costs resulting from or arising out of the applicant's cutting or removal
of any tree or trees. The applicant shall attach to the application a
survey or other document satisfactory to the Enforcement Officer which
accurately sets forth the location of the tree or trees and evidence of
the ownership thereof.
b. When a permit is required, the applicant shall submit a Millburn Tree
Restoration Plan with the application that identifies the location of the
tree on the property survey, species and diameter of tree(s) to be
removed, and proposed location and species of replacements according
to the table in Section 11-15 below.
c. The Enforcement Officer shall review the application, which shall upon
filing be deemed to constitute consent from the applicant to the
Enforcement Officer and/or such person or persons as he/she may in
writing designate for entry upon the land for the purpose of inspection.
In reviewing any such application the Enforcement Officer may in his/
her discretion consult the Shade Tree Advisory Board, the Township
Engineer, and such landscape architect or geologist as he/she may
deem necessary or advisable. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided
in paragraph d within twenty (20) business days excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays from the filing of an application hereunder,
the Enforcement Officer shall endorse his/her decision upon the
application, and in case of partial or complete disapproval, shall set
forth the basis for such decision. In addition, where appropriate, the
Enforcement Officer shall indicate on such application guidelines and
preventive measures to be taken to preserve from injury or destruction
trees not sought to be cut or removed. Among the conditions which the
Enforcement Officer may impose on a permit are the requirement of a
performance bond in the amount of the value of the trees to be
preserved as appraised by a New Jersey certified tree expert, which
bond shall be released upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and
the requirement of replanting trees or shrubs if trees which provide
buffer, reduce soil erosion, or serve other purposes consistent with the
provisions of Section 11-1, are to be removed. Any application
approved, in whole or in part, shall automatically become a permit in
accordance with the terms of the endorsement. Any permit not acted
upon within three (3) months from the date of such approval shall
automatically expire.
d. Upon the filing of any application for the cutting or removal of trees
located on any lot or tract for which an application for a Building Permit
or subdivision or site plan review is required to be submitted to the
Construction Code Official, the Township Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment, the applicant shall furnish the Enforcement Officer with
a copy of the Building Permit application or subdivision plat or site plan
§ 11-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4
AO:331
therefor, and the Enforcement Officer may withhold his/her
endorsement pending receipt of written notice of official action with
respect to such Building Permit, subdivision plat or site plan
application. Within twenty (20) business days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, of the receipt of such notice, the
Enforcement Officer shall act upon the application as provided in the
preceding paragraph c.
e. The Enforcement Officer shall require the applicant to give notice to
owners of real property within twenty (20') feet of a tree which is
proposed to be cut or removed. Such notice shall be given by personal
service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days
prior to any proposed cutting or removal of a tree. All required fees and
bonds for any application, shall be paid and/or a copy provided to the
Township prior to the issuance of the tree removal permit.
f. Tree removal permit applications shall be filed at the Enforcement
Officer's office and shall be completed in full. The application must be
deemed complete and all required fees, as set forth in Section 11-6, be
paid prior to review.
g. Inspections. After the application is complete and reviewed, the
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the trees and property which are the
subject of the permit application.
h. The following trees are hereby designated as Historic trees:
(T) is Township Tree
Tree Diameter CircumferenceLocation
Quercus alba —
White Oak
3.21' (d) 548 White Oak Ridge
Road
Quercus alba —
White Oak
4.25' (d) 25 Ridge Terrace
Quercus alba —
White Oak
3.50' (d) 31 Knollwood Road
Quercus alba —
White Oak
3.70' (d) Birch Lane Island (T)
Tag #3130
Quercus alba —
White Oak
3.95' (d) 5 Northern Drive
Quercus alba —
White Oak
5.34' (d) 18 Brooklawn Drive,
Front
Quercus alba —
White Oak
5.52' (d) 38 Kenilworth Drive
Quercus alba —
White Oak
5.87' (d) 61 Great Oak Drive (T)
Tag #4971
§ 11-4 MILLBURN CODE § 11-4
AO:332
§ 11-5. STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
Upon receipt of an application for cutting or removal of trees, the
Enforcement Officer, and/or his /her designee, shall inspect the site on
which are located the tree or trees sought to be cut or removed or otherwise
protected within the intendment of this Chapter and the drainage and
other physical conditions existing on the subject property and adjoining
properties. The Enforcement Officer shall consider the following factors in
deciding whether to issue such permit:
Tree Diameter CircumferenceLocation
Quercus —
Veluntina, Black
Oak
4.50' (d) 2 Barberry Lane (T)
Tag #2905
Fraxinus
Americana —
White Ash
13'4" (c) 1 Briarwood Drive
Quercus coccinea
— Scarlet Oak
12'4" (c) 44 Windermere
Terrace
Quercus coccinea
— Scarlet Oak
14'11" (c) 26 Coniston Road (on
Windermere)
Quercus alba —
White Oak
14'11" (c) 40 Knollwood Road
(Wells Lane) (T) Tag
#4338
Quercus coccinea
— Scarlet Oak
11'6" (c) 40 Knollwood Road
(Wells Lane)
Fraxinus
Americana —
White Ash
12'8" (c) 104 Farley Road (T)
Tag #5034
Ulmus Americana
— American Elm
12'8" (c) 308 Millburn Avenue
(Taylor Park) (T)
Quercus alba —
White Oak
15'8" (c) 55 White Oak Ridge
Road (Multi)
Quercus coccinea
— Scarlet Oak
12'10" (c) 1 Park Place
Quercus alba —
White Oak
13'1" (c) 1 Park Place
Platanus
occidentalis —
American
Sycamore
12'9" (c) Lackawanna and Glen
Avenue (T)
§ 11-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5
AO:333
§ 11-6. FEES. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
Fees shall not be charged to an applicant with respect to a tract of land
having a single or two-family dwelling occupied by the owner thereof
located thereon. Except as provided in the previous sentence, each
applicant for a permit under this Chapter shall make a nonrefundable
deposit with the Enforcement Officer of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
the first tree removal permit, and a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
additional tree removal permit. A separate Tree Removal Permit shall be
required for each tree.
§ 11-7. APPEAL. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Enforcement Officer shall have
the right to appeal such decision to the Township Committee. Such appeal
a. Whether the proposed cutting or removal would impair the growth and
development of the remaining trees on the applicant's property or
adjacent property.
b. Whether the proposed cutting or removal would adversely change
existing drainage patterns impacting neighboring properties.
c. Whether the proposed removal would allow soil erosion or increase
dust.
d. Whether the proposed removal would constitute a significant change in
the screening between existing or proposed buildings on contiguous
lots or would change the wooded aspect of the lot as viewed from the
adjacent public road.
e. Whether the proposed removal would constitute a horticulturally
advantageous thinning of an existing overgrown area.
f. The overall effect of removal of such tree or trees on the physical and
aesthetic value of the property and the neighborhood.
g. Whether the area where such tree or trees are located will be occupied
by a building or structure, a driveway or recreation area, a roadway, a
drainage right-of-way, or a sewer line, or whether such area is within
twenty (20') feet of any of the foregoing.
h. Whether existing conditions or proposed changes in the topography of
the area where such tree or trees are located have depressed land
configuration or fill of land which shall be deemed injurious to the trees
or other trees located nearby so as to require welling, construction of
an aerification system, or tree removal or replacement.
i. Whether the presence of the tree or trees is likely to cause hardship or
will endanger the public or any adjoining property owner by reason of
its being diseased or dead or for some other adequate reason within the
intent of this Chapter.
§ 11-5 MILLBURN CODE § 11-7
AO:334
shall be by written notice stating the reasons upon which the appeal is
based, filed with the Township Clerk within ten (10) days of the decision of
the Enforcement Officer.
The Township Committee shall hear the matter, upon notice to the
applicant, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The
Township Committee may in its discretion and upon complete review of the
application and after hearing the testimony of the Enforcement Officer, the
applicant and such other experts as may be appropriate, reverse, modify or
affirm the aforesaid decision. If the Township Committee shall not act within
thirty (30) days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the decision being
appealed shall be deemed to have been affirmed by the Committee.
§ 11-8. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
Excepted from the provisions of this Chapter shall be:
a. Any tree located on publicly owned land or public rights-of-way and
removed by the public agency or its representatives.
b. The first two (2) trees, provided that all of the following conditions are
met:
1. None of the trees exceed eighteen inches (18") in diameter or fiftyseven
inches (57") in circumference at four feet (4') above the
ground.
2. The trees removed do not constitute more than fifty (50%) percent
of the trees on the lot;
3. No more than two (2) trees are removed within any twelve (12)
month period; and
4. All trees are located on a residentially zoned lot occupied by the
owner.
c. Dead or diseased trees upon certification by the Enforcement Officer or
other qualified New Jersey Certified Tree Expert.
d. Partially or completely fallen trees by acts of nature, or which endanger
the public safety.
e. Any tree located within the public right-of-way as shown on a
subdivision map approved by the Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment after consultation with the Township Forester; any tree
located in an area to be occupied by a building, driveway, patio, pool or
sports court as shown on a plan approved by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment in connection with an application for subdivision
or site plan approval; or any tree located in an area to be occupied by a
building, driveway, patio, pool or sports court as shown on a plan
approved by the Township Engineer for a permit related to a single
family lot pursuant to the Grading, Drainage, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Ordinance.
§ 11-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-9
AO:335
§ 11-9. (RESERVED)
§ 11-10. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
The Enforcement Officer shall oversee all tree removals pursuant to an
issued tree removal permit. The Enforcement Officer shall conduct
adequate inspections of all sites for which a tree removal permit has been
issued.
§ 11-11. APPLICABILITY TO TREE REMOVAL CONSTRUCTION
COMPANIES; PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
All provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any person removing trees
on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal construction
companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be
removed any tree or undertake any work for which a permit is required
pursuant to this Chapter unless a valid permit therefor is in effect and is
displayed in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 11-12; such
removal or work shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject
the person or company violating this section to all penalties provided
herein.
§ 11-12. DISPLAY OF PERMIT; CARRYING OF PLAN OR
AUTHORIZATION; RIGHT OF ENTRY. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
§ 11-13. DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
The Enforcement Officer shall perform the duties set forth in this Chapter
and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter. In this regard, the Enforcement Officer is authorized and shall
perform any necessary inspections and is further authorized and shall issue
a. The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees
are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the
permit and for ten (10) days thereafter. In addition, the person or
persons cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall
carry with him/her authorization from the owner or applicant
authorizing such person to cut or remove trees. In the event that the
trees are being cut or removed in accordance with a forest management
plan or a soil conservation plan, a copy of the plan shall be in the
possession of the person cutting or removing such trees.
b. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Enforcement Officer
and all law enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the
provisions of this Chapter, and such entries shall be deemed lawful.
Failure to allow such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a
violation of this Chapter and shall constitute failure to display the
permit as required herein.
§ 11-9 MILLBURN CODE § 11-13
AO:336
violation notices and shall sign complaints and provide testimony in the
Municipal Court for violations of this Chapter.
§ 11-14. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
§ 11-15. MILLBURN TREE RESTORATION PLAN. [Ord. No. 2443-15]
a. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty as stated in Section
1-5 of this Code, including a fine of up to two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense, in the discretion of the Judge before whom
conviction may be had. Each tree cut or removed in violation of this
Chapter shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter and each day the same is violated shall
be defined and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
b. In addition to other remedies, the Enforcement Officer or other
authorized official may institute any appropriate legal action to prevent
a continuing violation of the terms of this Chapter.
a. Any tree used in a required planting must be at least two and one-half
(2 1/2") inches caliper in diameter (for deciduous trees) or at least six
(6') feet in height (for evergreen trees) and must be nursery stock,
balled and burlapped and guaranteed for two (2) years from the date of
planting. The Township Forester shall publish on the municipal website
a suitable species list for replacement trees.
b. The removed tree must be replaced according to the table below that is
dependent on the diameter measured at a point four (4') feet above the
ground of the existing tree that would be removed. If in the discretion of
the Township Forester, due to available space, species of trees and/or
required space between plantings a lesser number would be
appropriate, the Township Forester may grant a downward adjustment.
Diameter of
Existing Tree
(inches)
# Replacement
Trees
Diameter of
Existing Tree
(inches)
# Replacement
Trees
From 10 to 12 1 From 27 to 30 7
From 12 to 16 2 From 30 to 33 8
From 16 to 18 3 From 33 to 36 9
From 18 to 21 4 From 36 to 39 10
From 21 to 24 5 From 39 to 42 11
From 24 to 27 6 From 42 and
greater
12
§ 11-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-15
AO:337
§ 11-16. REMOVAL OF TOWNSHIP TREES; PERMIT. [Ord. No.
2190-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2443-15]
Application for Tree Removal Permit:
§ 11-17. CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF TOWNSHIP TREE
REMOVAL PERMIT; FEE. [Ord. No. 2190-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2443-15]
The Enforcement Officer shall issue the Township Tree removal permit,
subject to the following conditions:
In lieu of providing a Replacement Tree, the owner of real property
must contribute two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per replacement
tree to Millburn, with such funds to be used for tree replacement.
a. No Township tree or tree in the public right-of-way shall be removed or
altered except by the Department of Public Works or by a tree removal
contractor so authorized by contract with the Township or by a permit
issued by the Department of Public Works.
b. In situations where an adjacent property owner desires the removal of a
Township tree which is not dead, dying or unsafe, the following shall
apply:
1. The property owner shall file an application for a tree removal
permit, fully explaining the reasons for the tree removal;
2. The Township Forester shall review the application and determine
whether the tree may be considered for removal, and reject or
approve the application and issue permit, including the reasons for
the decision within twenty (20) business days.
3. An application approved by the Township Forester shall be
forwarded to the Superintendent of Public Works for further
consideration. The Superintendent shall review the application and
issue a permit or deny the application within five (5) business days.
4. The tree removal application process shall take no longer than
twenty (20) business days. If an application has not been granted or
denied within twenty (20) business days, such failure shall be
deemed a denial of the application for purposes of appeal to the
Shade Tree Appeal Board, unless such period of time has been
extended with the consent of the applicant.
5. The applicant must replace the tree to comply with the Township of
Millburn's goal of No Net Loss of trees by replanting according to
the table provided in Chapter 11, Section 11-15 or providing
funding for the replanting of trees on Township property.
a. The property owner will be responsible for the full cost of the tree,
stump and debris removal.
§ 11-15 MILLBURN CODE § 11-17
AO:338
§ 11-18. DENIAL OF PERMIT; RIGHT OF APPEAL. [Ord. No.
2190-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2443-15]
An applicant shall have the right to appeal any denial of a Township tree
removal permit to the Township Committee.
§ 11-19. MAINTENANCE OF TOWNSHIP TREES AND SHRUBS.
[Ord. No. 2190-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2443-15]
b. The Township shall be held harmless and indemnified from any damage
or costs incurred as a result of the tree removal. A properly executed
hold harmless and indemnification agreement shall be filed with the
tree removal permit application.
c. The tree removal shall be conducted by a fully-insured tree removal
contractor, with a certificate of insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.)
Commercial General Liability ("CGL") submitted with the application.
d. The tree removal contractor shall comply with all State, O.S.H.A. and
A.N.S.I. line clearance standards.
e. The tree removal contractor shall notify the Township Police
Department prior to the temporary closing of any street required for
the safe removal of a Township tree, and shall receive the written
approval of the Police Department.
f. As a condition of granting a permit to remove a Township tree, the tree
removal applicants shall provided financial compensation to the
Township for a replacement tree in advance of the written authorization
to remove the Township tree. The species, size and location shall be
approved by the Township Forester.
g. Each applicant for a permit to remove a Township tree shall pay a
permit fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
a. The appeal shall be submitted in writing within fourteen (14) days of
the decision of the Forester.
b. The Township Committee may seek the advice of the Environmental
Commission, the Township Forester, the Township Engineer, the
Superintendent of Public Works or such other experts as it deems
appropriate.
c. The Township Committee shall, within forty-five (45) days of the filing of
the appeal, adopt a resolution that either affirms the denial being
appealed or directs the Department of Public Works to issue the permit
for removal with whatever conditions the Township Committee deems
appropriate.
a. All Township trees and shrubs located on property owned by the
Township shall be maintained solely by the Department of Public Works.
§ 11-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-19
AO:339
§ 11-20. PROHIBITED ACTS; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord.
No. 2190-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2443-15]
b. All Township trees and shrubs not located on property owned by the
Township, but on properties owned by the Board of Education or by
some other public Township body, may be maintained by the
Department of Public Works as is required for the general public
welfare.
c. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be empowered to authorize
garden clubs, individuals or civic associations to adopt certain
Township trees and shrubs and flower beds for care and maintenance,
when he/she deems it in the public interest to do so.
a. It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts with respect to
Township trees without the prior written permission of the Township
Forester:
1. Cut, prune, break, injure, alter or remove any Township tree in any
way; or cut, unduly disturb, regrade or interfere in any way with
any root of a Township tree.
2. Spray any Township tree with a chemical.
3. Fasten any rope, wire, sign, or other device to a Township tree or to
any guard about such a tree, or install any nails, screws, spikes,
hooks, or fasteners of any type whether into or on or around any
Township tree or part thereof.
4. Install, remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any
Township tree.
5. Close or obstruct the area encompassing the dripline so as to
restrict the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of such
tree.
6. String any wires or lines from one Township tree to another or to
any other point.
b. The Township Forester shall grant written permission if the activity for
which such permission is requested is, in his/her opinion in the public
interest and not likely to materially injure any Township tree.
c. Any damage to any Township tree by machines, objects, autos, etc. shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter.
d. No person shall move, or cause to be moved, any building or large
object along any street without having first obtained a valid permit from
the Superintendent of Public Works who, if he deems necessary, may
require a bond or cash deposit to be furnished in an amount sufficient to
cover any damage to, or destruction of, Township trees on such street
or streets as a result of such moving operations.
§ 11-19 MILLBURN CODE § 11-20
AO:340
Chapter 11A
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Chapter 11A, Protection of Township Trees
containing portions of Ordinance No. 2190 was combined into
Chapter 11, Tree Preservation by Ordinance No. 2443-15.]
Chapter 12
WATER AND SEWER
e. The provisions of this Chapter are not to be construed as requiring the
Township to maintain, replace or move any sidewalk not located on
property owned by the Township. Property owners shall comply with
subsection 15-7.5 of this Code in relation to sidewalk repair or
replacement within the dripline of Township trees.
f. Any violation of this Chapter shall be punished as provided by Section
11-14 of this Code.
§ 11-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-20
AO:341

ARTICLE I
WATER
§ 12-1. PROCLAMATION OF WATER EMERGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Purposes and Intent. [1967 Code § 24A-1-1; Ord. No. 22-80
§ 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds that the adoption of this section is
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare and is in the public
interest because:
§ 12-1.2. Authority to Proclaim Emergency Water Restrictions.
[1967 Code § 24A-1-2; Ord. No. 22-80 § 2]
Whenever (1) the average amount of water in the wells, reservoirs or
other sources from which the Township either directly or indirectly receives
its water falls, during any one (1) month period, twenty (20%) percent
below the average amount of water stored in such water sources during
the corresponding months of the five (5) immediately preceding years, or
(2) whenever the Township Engineer upon an independent investigation
certifies that an emergency exists in the water supply, or (3) whenever
the Mayor or Business Administrator shall proclaim the existence of an
emergency in the water supply system of the Township and prescribes
regulations to:
§ 12-1.3. Effect of Proclamation. [1967 Code § 24A-1-3; Ord. No.
22-80 § 3]
The proclamation of the emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users, upon the filling of the same in the office of the Township Clerk and the
publication thereof, at least once, in the official newspaper or newspapers
circulating in the Township. The regulations set forth in the proclamation,
a. The long continued droughts occurring in this area of the State have
resulted in a dangerous lowering of the Township's potable water
reserves, and threatened the preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare; and
b. Past experience has demonstrated that appeals for voluntary
cooperation to conserve water are not and have not been as effective as
necessary to preserve shrinking water supplies.
a. Prohibit the use of water for any purpose not necessary to the health,
safety and welfare of the public;
b. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies;
c. Reduce consumption by users;
d. Prevent waste for the period or duration of such emergency.
§ 12-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.3
AO:343
and any subsequent regulations made and published, as aforesaid, upon
filing thereof in the office of the Township Clerk, shall be deemed to have
the force and effect of regulations adopted under the authority of this
section, the same as if specifically incorporated and set forth herein. Every
owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises in the
Township shall, upon the proclamation and promulgation of the regulations,
become bound thereby and by the provisions of this section, and shall
conform thereto and comply therewith in the use of water and the
maintenance of the water service connections and equipment for the
purposes thereof.
Upon the making of the proclamation of emergency, the Township Business
Administrator shall give written notice to the appropriate Departments of
the Township to refrain from all street and gutter flushing, hydrant flushing
and fire practices, except as the practices are deemed necessary in the
interest of public health or safety, and until the emergency is declared no
longer to exist.
§ 12-1.4. Duty to Prevent Waste of Water. [1967 Code § 24A-1-4;
Ord. No. 22-80 § 4]
Upon the making of the proclamation of emergency, every owner, lessee,
tenant and occupant of any building or premises in the Township shall:
§ 12-1.5. Penalty. [1967 Code § 24A-1-5; Ord. No. 22-80 § 5]
§ 12-2. AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS.
a. Maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes, fixtures
and connections, in good order and repair, in order to ensure that there
shall be no waste of water;
b. Not use water for watering of lawns;
c. Not use water for washing of vehicles;
d. Not use water for filling of swimming pools;
e. Not open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant in the Township,
except in emergency;
f. Use water only for purposes essential to the health and safety of the
inhabitants of the Township.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be liable for
the general penalty provided in Section 1-5 of this Code.
b. Each and every violation of any provision of this section shall constitute
a separate violation, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 12-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 12-2.1
AO:344
§ 12-2.1. Legislative Finding Relative to Waste of Water, Etc. [1967
Code § 15-1-1]
It is hereby determined and stated that the requirements of the facilities for
the protection of property from fire and the limitations upon the supply of
potable water in and for the present and future residents of this Township
render inimical to the general welfare the unrestrained consumption of
water in air conditioning and refrigeration systems employing water as a
cooling agent, which do not include equipment for the recirculation of water
used therein for such purposes.
It is hereby further determined and stated that air conditioning and
refrigeration systems employing water as a cooling agent in use in this
Township, which are not provided with equipment for the recirculation of
the water used therein for such purpose, create progressively increasing
demands upon the supply of water available to the residents of this
Township, and involve a substantial waste of the available water supply for
the Township by drawing continuously upon it during periods when the need
for the cooling and humidification of the interiors of buildings coincides
with droughts and infrequency and inadequacy of rainfall, and involves a
waste of the available supply of water in the Township by permitting it to
flow through and beyond such air conditioning or refrigeration systems,
into the sanitary sewer system of the Township served by sewer facilities
provided by the joint meeting, of which the Township is a member.
§ 12-2.2. Installation and Use Without Recirculatory Equipment
Prohibited. [1967 Code § 15-1-2]
No building air conditioning or refrigeration system shall be constructed
or used within the Township employing or designed to employ water as
a cooling agent, which is not provided with or fails to employ such
recirculatory equipment as will permit the continuous reuse of the water
employed in such system and prevent the wastage and continuous
discharge of water from the supply available in and for the Township into
any sanitary or drainage sewer line or other discharge facility, except for
purposes of draining such system when required for its repair, alteration,
reconstruction or discontinuance.
§ 12-3. through § 12-9. (RESERVED)
§ 12-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3
AO:345

ARTICLE II
SEWERS
§ 12-10. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
§ 12-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2292-07 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Millburn, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 12-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2292-07 § 1]
As used in this section are the same as or based on corresponding
definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Millburn, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Millburn or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and corrosion inhibitors.
§ 12-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-10.2
AO:347
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 12-10.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2292-07 § 1]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Millburn, any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 12-10.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2292-07 § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
Municipal Officials of the Township of Millburn.
§ 12-10.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2292-07 § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
§ 12-10.2 MILLBURN CODE § 12-10.5
AO:348
Chapter 13
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 13-1. FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
§ 13-1.1. Adoption. [1967 Code § 11-1-1; Ord. No. 26-78 § 1; Ord.
No. 12-85 § 1]
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code promulgated under the Uniform Fire
Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 to 213, is hereby adopted in and for the
Township and shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Fire Prevention
Code" of the Township of Millburn. Any section or provision of the Code
which is not specifically deleted, amended, or supplemented by subsection
13-1.3 is hereby adopted and, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, deemed to be
incorporated by reference in this subsection as if set forth at length herein.
Three (3) copies of the Code, marked so as to indicate what portion thereof
is adopted, have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and
will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 13-1.2. Definitions. [1967 Code § 11-1-2; Ord. No. 2212-03 § 1]
For the purposes of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by subsection 13-1.1,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this subsection:
CORPORATION COUNSEL — Shall mean the Township Attorney.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Shall mean the officer of the Township Fire Department
assigned by the Chief of the Fire Department to be in charge of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention within the Fire Department.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Millburn.
§ 13-1.3. Amendments (Fees, Etc.).48 [1967 Code § 11-1.3; Ord. No.
26-78 § 2; Ord. No. 2-82 § 1; Ord. No. 9-84 § 1; Ord. No. 12-85 § 2;
Ord. No. 16-91 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 14-92 § 1; Ord. No. 2212-03 § 2; Ord.
No. 2220-03 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2306-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2427-14; Ord.
No. 2514-18]
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code adopted by subsection 13-1.1 is hereby
amended and supplemented as follows:
a. Permit Fees. The permit fees established by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9 (a, b and
c) of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code with respect to the types of
permits defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c) shall be charged in the Township
of Millburn as follows:
48.Editor's Note: For other New Jersey Fire Code fees, see applicable New Jersey Fire Code
sections on file in the Township Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 12-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:349
Type 1 $54.00
Type 2 $214.00
Type 3 $427.00
Type 4 $641.00
b. Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Alarm Compliance
Fee. The application for a Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon
Monoxide Alarm Compliance (CSDCMAC), as required by N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.3, shall be based upon the amount of time remaining before the
change of occupant is expected, as follows:
1. Requests for a CSDCMAC received more than ten (10) business
days prior to property being sold (the closing date), leased (signing
of the lease), or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy
for residential purposes: $100.00;
2. Requests for a CSDCMAC received four (4) to ten (10) business
days prior to property being sold (the closing date), leased (signing
of the lease), or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy
for residential purposes: $125.00;
3. Requests for CSDCMAC received fewer than four (4) business days
prior to property being sold (the closing date), leased (signing of
the lease), or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy for
residential purposes: $175.00.
4. Reinspection fees of $50.00 will be charged for each additional
inspection after the original CSDCMAC.
c. Exemption for Permit Fee. There shall be an exemption from permit fee
for any public display of fireworks on July 4 and any other event
sponsored by the Township or school systems which the Millburn
Township Committee approves by resolution.
d. Section 605.10 is hereby amended to read as follows:
605.10.4 Portable heaters, electric space heaters. The use of portable
kerosene and portable oil fired heaters is prohibited in all use groups
in the Township. Portable, electric space heaters shall comply with
Sections 605.10.1 through 605.10.4.
e. Section 906 entitled "Portable Fire Extinguishers—Where required" is
hereby supplemented by a new section 906.1(7) to read as follows:
906.1(7) Other occupancies. The Fire Official shall survey each
assembly, business, factory and industrial high hazard, institutional,
mercantile, multi-family and storage occupancy and shall specify
appropriate manual or portable fire extinguishing appliances which
shall be provided in or near boiler rooms, basements, storage areas,
kitchens, mechanical rooms, corridors, lobbies, sales floors, office areas
and other places.
§ 13-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 13-1.3
AO:350
§ 13-2. ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE
PREVENTION. [1967 Code § 11-1-7; Ord. No. 12-85 § 3; Ord. No.
2212-03 § 3]
f. (Reserved)
g. A new Chapter 34 of the International Fire Code New Jersey Edition
2006, entitled "Flammable and Combustible Liquids" is hereby enacted
to read as follows:
3404.1.1 Storage tanks and dispensing units in residential districts.
Storage tanks for gasoline, diesel fuel, and other combustible or
flammable liquids and dispensing equipment related thereto are
prohibited in all residential districts of the Township. This prohibition
shall not apply to any tanks and accessory equipment for which a
permit has been issued by the Millburn Township Fire Official under the
Fire Protection Subcode adopted by the Township. This ordinance shall
not apply to tanks utilized in the storage of fuel oil used in connection
with oil-burning equipment for heating of residential buildings.
h. N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a)4 is supplemented by the addition thereto of a new
subsection vi to read as follows:
5.70-2.7(a)4vi Displaying liquid or gas fuel powered equipment in all
Use Groups.
a. The Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 1-5 shall be locally
enforced in Millburn Township by the Fire Official in the Township Fire
Department, which is hereby established, and which shall be operated
under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official.
b. The officer in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be an officer
of the Fire Department assigned by the Chief of the Fire Department to
act as Fire Official.
c. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall be necessary.
d. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall make monthly reports to the
Township Committee, which reports shall contain all proceedings under
this Chapter, and such other information as the Committee may
request.
e. The Millburn Township Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it
in all buildings, structures and premises within the established
boundaries of Millburn Township, other than owner-occupied one (1)
and two (2) family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2
AO:351
§ 13-3. FIRE HYDRANT SAFETY REGULATIONS.
§ 13-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2208-02 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to ensure that fire hydrants are kept clear and
unobstructed in the event they are needed for fire suppression, training,
or maintenance activities within the Township as provided in Section
F-102.1.1(2) of the Fire Prevention Code.
§ 13-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2208-02 § 1]
As used in this section.
FIRE HYDRANT — Shall mean any device designed for firefighting
applications and for accessing water mains.
MILLBURN FIRE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the duly authorized
municipal department charged with fire suppression activities in Millburn
Township.
MILLBURN FIRE DEPARTMENT FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU — Shall
mean the duly appointed officers, inspectors, and firefighters appointed to
the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Millburn Township Fire Department.
MILLBURN FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICER — Shall mean any Millburn
firefighter holding the rank of Captain, Battalion Chief, Deputy Chief, or
Chief of the Department.
§ 13-3.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2208-02 § 1]
The Millburn Fire Department, the Millburn Department of Public Works,
the Township Beautification League and the provider of water to any fire
hydrant shall be exempt from this Section 13-3.
§ 13-3.4. Fire Hydrant Regulations. [Ord. No. 2208-02 § 1]
f. The Millburn Township Bureau of Fire Prevention shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
a. No person shall conceal, cover, paint, or disguise any fire hydrant.
b. No person shall cover any fire hydrant with snow.
c. The owners or occupants of property adjacent to a fire hydrant shall not
allow brush, bushes, grass, flowers and trees to encroach or otherwise
conceal a fire hydrant or hamper the ability of the Fire Department to
access the fire hydrant. A clear zone of two (2') feet shall be maintained
around all fire hydrants.
§ 13-2 MILLBURN CODE § 13-3.5
AO:352
§ 13-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2208-02 § 1]
This Section 13-3 shall be enforced by the Millburn Police Department,
the Millburn Fire Department — Fire Prevention Bureau, any Millburn Fire
Department Officer, or the Millburn Township Forester.
§ 13-4. ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE ZONES.
§ 13-4.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
The Fire Department of the Township of Millburn may establish fire zones
or fire lanes upon all properties subject to the approval of the Township
Committee by ordinance. The number, location, width, length and markings
of such fire zones or fire lanes shall be determined by the Fire Department
with the approval of the Township Committee.
§ 13-4.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
The fire zones or fire lanes shall be established to insure fire equipment and
other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress and egress to such
properties and buildings, persons, vehicles, fire hydrants, Fire Department
connections and standpipes thereon in case of fire or other emergency.
§ 13-4.3. Designation. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
A description showing each fire zone and fire lane shall be set forth in
Section 7-45, Parking Prohibited in Fire Lanes. The fire zones or fire lanes
shall be clearly marked on the pavement and/or on the adjoining building
wall area. Appropriate signs stating "No Parking, Fire Zone" or "No Parking,
Fire Lane" shall be installed as directed by the Fire Department.
§ 13-4.4. Failure to Implement; Nonapproved Zone. [Ord. No.
2248-05 § 2]
§ 13-5. FIRE ZONE REGULATIONS.
§ 13-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
As used in this Section 13-5:
a. Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the
implementation or maintenance of a fire zone or fire lane as directed by
the Fire Department shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12 of the State Fire Code not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
b. Any person, firm or corporation that has established a fire zone or fire
lane which has not been approved by the Township Committee by
ordinance shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection
13-4.4a.
§ 13-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.1
AO:353
PARKING — Shall mean the standing or waiting of a vehicle not actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise, unless in
obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
STANDING — Shall mean a cessation of movement of a vehicle; whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control or
signal.
§ 13-5.2. No Parking or Standing. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
It shall be a violation of this Section 13-5 for anyone to park or stand a
vehicle in, or cause an obstruction to, a fire zone or fire lane.
§ 13-5.3. Snow Clearing. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
The owner or tenant of any real property upon which a fire zone or fire lane
has been established shall, within eight (8) hours of the daylight hour after
an accumulation of snow, remove such snow from all such fire zones or fire
lanes and ensure that such fire zones or fire lanes shall remain clear of snow
at all times thereafter.
§ 13-5.4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
§ 13-5.5. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
Any violation of this Section 13-5 may be appealed within fifteen (15) days
after receipt of the violation by filing an appeal in writing with the Essex
County Construction Code Board of Appeals.
§ 13-5.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
The Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Fire
Department to enforce the provisions of this Section 13-5.
§ 13-5.7. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2248-05 § 2]
The provisions of this Section 13-5 shall not apply to the following:
a. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
any person convicted of a violation of this Section 13-5 shall be liable
for a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both.
b. The total amount of the penalty due must be paid within thirty (30) days
after issuance of the violation. If full payment is not made within such
time, the matter will be referred to legal counsel for summary collection
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A-58-10).
a. Township police and fire motor vehicles.
§ 13-5.1 MILLBURN CODE § 13-5.7
AO:354
§ 13-6. RAPID ACCESS KEY BOXES, SECURITY CONNECTION
CAPS.
§ 13-6.1. Mandatory Key Boxes for Fire Suppression and Standpipe
Systems. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
When a building within the Township of Millburn is protected by an
automatic fire suppression or standpipe system it shall be equipped with a
key box. The key box shall be at a location approved by the Township of
Millburn Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal. The key box shall be a UL type
and size approved by the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal.
§ 13-6.2. Mandatory Key Boxes for Automatic Alarm Systems. [Ord.
No. 2282-06 § 1]
When a building is protected by an automatic alarm system and/or access
to or within a building, or an area within that building, is unduly difficult
because of secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for
life saving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal
may require a key box to be installed at a location approved by the Township
of Millburn Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal. The key box shall be a UL
type and size approved by the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal.
§ 13-6.3. Key Tamper Box Switch. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
The Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal may require a key box tamper
switch connected to the building's fire/security alarm system.
§ 13-6.4. Security Padlocks. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
When a property is protected by a locked fence or gate and where
immediate access to the property is necessary for life saving or firefighting
purposes, the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal may require a security
padlock to be installed at a location approved by the Township of Millburn
Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal. The padlock shall be UL type and size
approved by the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal.
§ 13-6.5. Security Caps. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system or standpipe
system and the Fire Department connection is exposed to undue vandalism
the Fire Subcode Official/Fire Marshal may require that a Fire Department
connection security cap(s) be installed. The Fire Department connection
security cap(s) shall be a type approved by the Fire Subcode Official/Fire
Marshal.
b. All other Township-owned motor vehicles parked while Township
employees are in the course of their employment.
c. Motor vehicles belonging to public utilities which are parked in
furtherance of the normal activities of the utility.
§ 13-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6.6
AO:355
§ 13-6.6. Nonapplicability to Certain Dwellings. [Ord. No. 2282-06
§ 1]
The term "building" used herein means any building or structure located in
the Township of Millburn, whether privately or publicly owned, including,
without limitation, any building owned by the Township of Millburn, the
Millburn Board of Education, or any other public, quasi-public, or private
entity or person provided however that this section shall not apply to owner
occupied one- and two-family dwellings.
§ 13-6.7. Rapid Response Key Boxes. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
The rapid key boxes shall contain the following:
§ 13-6.8. Time for Compliance. [Ord. No. 2282-06 § 1]
All existing buildings shall comply with this section six (6) months from
its effective date.49 All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied or
buildings currently under construction and all buildings or businesses
applying for a certificate of occupancy, shall comply immediately.
Chapter 14
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 14-1. RECYCLING.50
a. Keys to locked points of egress, whether in interior or exterior of such
buildings;
b. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
c. Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
d. Keys to the elevator controls;
e. Keys to any fence or secured areas;
f. Keys to any other area that may be required to by Fire Subcode Official/
Fire Marshal;
g. A card containing the emergency contact people and phone numbers
for such building.
In addition, a floor plan of the rooms within the building may be
required.
49.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2282-06, codified herein as Section 13-6, was adopted
December 5, 2006.
50.Editor's Note: For State law authorizing Township to provide for the collection removal
and disposal of ashes, garbage, refuse and waste matter, see N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.
§ 13-6.6 MILLBURN CODE § 14-1.1
AO:356
§ 14-1.1. Definitions. [1967 Code § 12-2-1; Ord. No. 17-74 § 1; Ord.
No. 15-87 § 1; Ord. No. 5-93 § 1; Ord. No. 13-94 § 1E; Ord. No.
2331-09 § 1]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS, FOIL AND FOOD CONTAINERS — Shall mean any
beverage containers constructed entirely (top, bottom and sides) from
aluminum material and also used, but clean, wrapping material, pans and
plates constructed of aluminum.
AUTOMOBILE LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Shall mean used batteries from
automobiles, trucks and other vehicles.
BRUSH — Shall mean tree and shrub branches which have been removed
from residential properties. Branches shall be free from roots, stumps and
other contaminants.
CHIPBOARD — Shall mean gray cardboard, including cereal boxes, gift
boxes, cracker and cookie boxes, and note pad backing.
CO-MINGLED CONTAINERS — Shall mean clear, brown and green glass;
aluminum cans, foil or food containers; tin and bimetal cans; and #1 and #2
and #5 plastic.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Shall mean recyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, roof shingles,
brick, block, wood waste, tree stumps and tires. (Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.34B and N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.1 et seq., any person or persons who
receive, store, process or transfer source-separated recyclable materials
other than metal, glass, paper, plastic containers and corrugated and other
cardboard, require the prior approval of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE). Therefore, recyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, roof shingles,
brick, block, wood waste, tree stumps and tires (Class B recyclable
materials) as identified in N.J.A.C. 7:26A-1.1 et seq. must be recycled as
NJDEPE-approved recycling centers, unless otherwise exempted, to be
eligible for tonnage grant funds.)
CORRUGATED PAPER — See mixed paper.
DEMOLITION DEBRIS — See construction debris.
ELECTRONIC WASTE/E-CYCLING — Shall mean a computer central
processing unit and associated hardware including keyboards, modems,
printers, scanners and fax machines, fluorescent tubes and cfl bulbs, a
cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display or similar
video display device with a screen that is greater than four (4") inches
measured diagonally and that contains one (1) or more circuit boards,
including a television, and cell phones.
FERROUS — Shall mean containing iron, especially valence 2.
HIGH GRADE PAPER, JUNK MAIL AND MAGAZINES — Shall mean white
office paper, computer paper and duplicator paper, but shall exclude paper
products coated with nonbiodegradable materials or contaminated by
§ 14-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.1
AO:357
carbon material, and shall include discarded mail, catalogs and envelopes,
and periodicals containing miscellaneous materials.
JUNK MAIL — See high grade paper.
LEAVES — Shall mean the leaves from the spring and fall yard collection
of bulk deciduous leaves from residential and commercial properties. No
plastic bags or other contaminants shall be included with the leaves.
MAGAZINES — See high grade paper.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean brown paper shopping bags, catalogs,
chipboard, colored paper, computer printouts, corrugated boxes, highgrade
paper, junk mail, magazines, newspaper and telephone books. Soft
cover and hard cover books shall not be included in mixed paper.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure, or
complex of buildings in which three (3) or more dwelling units are owneroccupied
or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential
purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or
persons appointed by the municipal Governing Body and who shall be
authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this section,
and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Shall mean all solid waste
generated at residential, commercial and institutional establishments
within the boundaries of the municipality of the Township of Millburn.
NEWSPAPERS — See mixed paper.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Shall mean co-mingled containers of #1 P.E.T.E.
and #2 H.D.P.E., commonly referred to as milk jugs, soda bottles and
detergent containers.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those post-consumer waste items
which otherwise become Municipal solid waste, but can be collected and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RECYCLING CENTER — Shall mean that area designated by the Township
as the area to recycle co-mingled glass, newspaper, aluminum, waste oil,
white goods and corrugated paper and other recyclable materials.
SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING — Shall mean that you can put out for
collection all recyclable materials on the same day in the same container or
separated and it will be picked up.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the
curb by the residents of the Township for regular twice weekly Municipal
collection.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
§ 14-1.1 MILLBURN CODE § 14-1.1
AO:358
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable
materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — Shall mean food containers constructed
entirely or in part of ferrous materials.
TIRES — Shall mean used truck and passenger automobile tires removed
from rims.
USED MOTOR OIL — Shall mean any waste crank case oil from periodic
maintenance of internal combustion engines.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Shall mean grass clippings, leaves, brush, tree
branches, herbaceous waste and twigs.
WHITE GOODS — Shall mean appliances such as air conditioners, stoves,
washers, dryers, steel or cast iron plumbing fixtures, dishwashers,
refrigerators, water heaters, etc.
§ 14-1.2. Mandatory Separation of Recyclable Materials From Other
Solid Waste. [1967 Code § 12-2-2; Ord. No. 17-74 § 2; Ord. No. 15-87
§ 1; Ord. No. 5-93 § 1; Ord. No. 13-94 § 2; Ord. No. 2336-09 § 1]
Every occupant, whether owner, apartment tenant, business tenant,
residential, commercial and institutional of any building or premises in
the Township shall separate from all other solid waste produces: leadacid
batteries, all structural steel or ferrous metal, case iron and steel
components, aluminum cans, foil and food containers, co-mingled glass,
plastic containers, tin and bimetal cans, leaves, grass clippings, brush,
white goods, used motor oil, antifreeze, newspaper, corrugated paper,
telephone books, high grade paper, junk mail, magazines, chipboard and
construction and demolition debris. Every occupant shall prepare the
aforementioned recyclable materials for pickup, collection and recycling
pursuant to this section. Tonnages of materials recycled by private vendors
shall be reported pursuant to subsection 14-1.6.
§ 14-1.3. Disposition of Recyclable Materials. [1967 Code § 12-2-3;
Ord. No. 17-74 § 3; Ord. No. 15-87 § 1; Ord. No. 3-88 § 1; Ord. No.
13-94 § 3; Ord. No. 2331-09 § 2]
a. Newspapers, corrugated paper, magazines, telephone books, junk mail,
high grade paper and chipboard from residents shall be flattened and
placed into securely tied bundles or placed in brown paper bags or
corrugated paper boxes. Aluminum cans and food containers, and tin
and bimetal cans shall be cleaned and drained of all food and liquid, left
in original shape, glass and plastic containers shall be cleaned and
drained free of food, liquid or other substances, the caps and all metal
removed and placed into a reusable recycling receptacle or container
not less in size than five (5) gallons or more than thirty-two (32) gallons.
Receptacles or containers when left for collection shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) pounds in weight.
§ 14-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.3
AO:359
b. Leaves and grass may be raked to the curb, but may only be placed in
the street on the days indicated on the Township Leaf Program
Calendar for collection. Bagged leaves and grass will be collected at
curbside on your first collection day through the end of the regular leaf
program. No brush and twigs is to be mixed in with the leaves.
c. All commercial residents shall provide for the recycling of corrugated
paper by making arrangements with a private contractor or depositing
material directly at the recycling center.
d. Vegetative waste from each private residence shall be picked up by the
Public Works Department on designated collection days or recycled
through private contractors or composted using approved composting
techniques on one's own property. Residents shall be limited to eight (8)
separate units not in excess of thirty-five (35) pounds each of vegetative
waste on each designated collection day. Brush shall be bundled in
lengths not exceeding three (3') feet and weighing not more than thirtyfive
(35) pounds and shall be tied with cord. The Public Works
Department shall not pick up stumps, roots, wood or old firewood.
e. White goods shall be picked up by prior arrangements with the Public
Works Department at curbside once per week or may be brought
directly to the recycling center. All concrete or other debris shall be
removed from white goods. Only large metal objects shall be picked up
by the Public Works Department. Any white goods which have a
compartment of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) cubic feet capacity
and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed, and
which cannot easily be opened from the inside, shall have the door or lid
locking or fastening device removed before being left unattended.
f. Used motor oil and antifreeze from vehicles and lawn mowers shall be
respectively placed in plastic bottles and containers and delivered to an
authorized and designated used oil recycling center, gas station or the
recycling center. Used motor oil will be collected or picked up by the
Township.
g. Recyclable materials to be collected by the Township shall be placed at
the curb on designated collection days. In no event shall recyclable
materials be placed in the street or right-of-way. Recyclable materials
shall be placed at the curb not earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day before
regular Municipal collection and not later than 7:30 a.m. on the day of
regular Municipal collection. After collection any empty containers
shall be removed promptly but not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of
collection. Placing recyclable materials at the curb for collection on
days other than those days designated for pickup shall be a violation of
this section.
h. Recyclable materials including ferrous metals, commingled glass,
aluminum cans, and food containers, tin and bimetal cans and plastic;
commingled newspaper, corrugated paper, brown paper bags,
telephone books, magazines, junk mail, high grade paper and
§ 14-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 14-1.3
AO:360
§ 14-1.4. Establishment of Rules and Regulations. [1967 Code
§ 12-2-4; Ord. No. 17-74 § 4; Ord. No. 15-87 § 1]
The Superintendent of Public Works, with the approval of the Business
Administrator, is hereby authorized to promulgate additional rules and
regulations relating to the separation, preparation, collection and times
of collection of the recyclable materials pursuant to the provisions of this
section; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall not be
inconsistent with terms and provisions of this section and shall be approved
by resolution of the Township Committee. Such rules and regulations shall
be duly promulgated by publication so that the public has adequate notice
thereof. Failure to comply with rules and regulations duly adopted pursuant
to this section shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 14-1.5. Recyclable Materials to Become Property of Township;
Unauthorized Collection. [1967 Code § 12-2-5; Ord. No. 17-74 § 5;
Ord. No. 15-87 § 1; Ord. No. 13-94 § 3]
From the time of placement of the recyclable materials herein defined
and designated at the curb or other designated place for collection by the
Township or its authorized agent pursuant to the provisions of this section
and any rules and regulations duly adopted hereunder, the recyclable
materials shall become and be the property of the Township or its
authorized agent.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person not duly authorized by
the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any recyclable materials at the curb or other designated place for collection
by the Township or its authorized agent pursuant to the provisions of this
section. Any and each such unauthorized collection in violation of this
section from one (1) or more residential or commercial premises shall
chipboard; waste oil, tires, antifreeze, automobile lead-acid batteries,
consumer batteries, and white goods may be delivered to the Recycling
Center at such times are set forth in the regulations.
i. Construction and demolition debris shall not be collected or disposed of
through the Township. Every occupant, whether owner, apartment
tenant, business tenant or otherwise, of any building or premises in the
Township shall arrange for the collection and recycling of construction
and demolition debris at an approved New Jersey Recycling Center for
Class B. Recyclable Materials.
j. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, partnership or
corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit. Such sale or
donation, however, shall be handled directly and privately and in a
manner that does not interfere with the regulated methods of
collection. No such person, partnership or corporation shall
appropriate recyclable material placed for collection at curbside in
accordance with this section.
§ 14-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.5
AO:361
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 14-1.6. Recycling Tonnages to Be Reported. [1967 Code § 12-2-6;
Ord. No. 17-74 § 6; Ord. No. 15-87 § 1]
Organizations recycling directly with a private contractor shall report
annual tonnages of materials recycled during the previous year to the
Township Recycling Coordinator within the first two (2) months of the next
calendar year.
§ 14-2. COLLECTION PROCEDURE FOR GARBAGE, REFUSE AND
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
§ 14-2.1. Purpose. [New]
The intent of this subsection is to provide economical means for disposal of
garbage and other refuse and return essential materials for reuse, prevent
littering, control of vermin, limit factors which are inimical to the health
of the residents of the Township, limit the time exposure of the waste
containers to public view and, in general, limit the impact of this activity on
the aesthetic values of our community.
§ 14-2.2. Time to Place Garbage for Collection. [New]
Every occupant, whether as owner, tenant, or otherwise of any building
or premises in the Township is hereby required to place or cause to be
placed, not earlier than 7:00 p.m. of the day preceding that upon which the
appropriate Municipal Department and/or its designated agent shall collect
from the premises, at the edge of the street at or near the curbline of the
street upon which the premises abut, but not so as to obstruct the drainage
system, all ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse matter and recyclable materials
required to be collected and removed by the Department or other approved
agencies. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be deemed to apply to
any occupant of premises who shall cause the collection and removal of
such ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter to be performed by
means of other than the municipal facilities, or its designated agent, unless
such waste or other material is collected at the curb.
§ 14-2.3. Containers. [New]
All ashes, garbage, and rubbish such as small paper containers and similar
debris susceptible to such disposition shall be placed at the curb in suitable
packaged containers that will prevent debris, such as paper, from being
scattered by the wind. The container or contents should not emit odors that
attract dogs or other animals to attack the package and scatter its contents.
The container should be of a strength to resist the necessary handling
of its contents without disruption for collection, even if wet. Unless the
container is the disposable type, its contents should be conditioned so that
§ 14-1.5 MILLBURN CODE § 14-2.3
AO:362
it can be freely removed in the collection procedure regardless of weather
conditions.
Water resistant disposable containers are permitted, thereby eliminating
the necessity of returning containers after collection, which improves
aesthetics, improves safety to traffic and decreases the cost of collection.
Such disposable containers should be made of material that will withstand
the collection operation and puncture by the contained material.
Biodegradable material is preferred for such disposable containers as they
disintegrate when landfilled and do not create operational problems when
waste is reduced by incineration or other process.
§ 14-2.4. Separation of Ashes. [New]
It is required that the garbage, rubbish and wet refuse matter, after
draining, be placed in containers separate from ashes. Hot ashes shall be
allowed to cool before placement in containers for collection.
§ 14-2.5. Packaging of Certain Garbage. [New]
To prevent the emission of odors it is required that grease, meat scraps, fish
and similar waste be suitably packaged in small closed containers before
placing same in larger containers. This will be further assurance against
attack by dogs or other animals resulting in a littered street area.
§ 14-2.6. Vines, Branches and Lawn Clippings. [New]
All vines and branches of trees shall be securely tied in bundles not over
three (3') feet in length and convenient in size for handling. Weeds and lawn
clippings will be collected when placed at the curb area in suitable water
resistant disposable containers.
§ 14-2.7. Newspapers and Cardboard. [New]
a. All newspapers and magazines shall be securely packaged in separate
bundles convenient for handling and when for the purpose of specially
scheduled curbside collection, on the date specified, for recycling it
should be segregated from waste by a significant space.
b. All cardboard and cartons shall be reduced to not over three (3') feet in
length and securely tied in bundles convenient for handling.
c. The purposes covered by paragraphs a and b above are directed to:
simplification of the operation when these materials are collected as
waste or specially scheduled curbside collection for recycling,
reduction of the number of empty containers left at the curb after their
contents are collected, removal of such items from cans as they
frequently jam and interfere with the collection operation and effect a
reduction in cost of collection and disposal. When residents deliver
these materials to the recycling center, the income from sale and the
§ 14-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.7
AO:363
§ 14-2.8. Additional Items for Recycling. [New]
The Superintendent of Public Works with the approval of the Township
Committee is authorized to specify other items to be packaged separately
either for delivery to a designated recycling center by residents or other
means of collection of such items.
Curb collection of waste and recyclable materials will be scheduled as to
date and interval when each item will be collected.
§ 14-2.9. Containers. [New]
§ 14-3. LEAF COLLECTION.
§ 14-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish leaf collection regulations in
the Township of Millburn in accordance with the Stormwater Management
Regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 14-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 2]
As used in this Chapter:
LEAF BAGS — Shall mean biodegradable paper bags which can be
composted together with leaves and have been approved by the Township.
Excluded is any type of plastic bag.
LEAVES — Shall mean and include leaves generated from residential or
commercial property located within the Township which have been sourcesavings
in collection and disposal cost results in an appreciable
reduction in the cost of the sanitary operations.
The savings in essential virgin materials and the elimination of possible
pollution from this volume of waste are additional benefits derived from
such cooperation by resident.
a. Weight Limited. No container from which garbage, ashes, rubbish or
other refuse matter may be collected and removed by the municipal
facilities shall exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, including contents.
b. Removal of Containers from Street. All containers from which contents
have been collected by the Municipal Department shall be removed by
the occupant not later than the same date of collection to a location not
visible from the street. This provision applies regardless of location of
container in the vicinity of the rights-of-way which includes driveway or
other construction bridging the right-of-way. Windblown containers
constitute a danger to vehicular traffic, and for that reason if used, they
should be removed promptly from the street after the contents are
collected.
§ 14-2.7 MILLBURN CODE § 14-3.2
AO:364
separated from solid waste. Excluded is any type of brush, branches, twigs
or grass clippings.
§ 14-3.3. Leaf Collection System. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 2]
Collection of leaves by the Township shall be in accordance with the rules
and regulations as promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. A leaf collection system, including a schedule
for the collection of leaves in the Township, shall be developed by the
Department of Public Works and the Township Business Administrator.
§ 14-3.4. Leaf Collection Regulations. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 1]
All persons occupying residential or commercial property within the
Township shall place leaves for collection in the manner provided for in this
subsection 14-3.4:
§ 14-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2331-09 § 3]
This Chapter shall be enforced by the Millburn Police Department, the
Department of Public Works, the Recycling Coordinator and the Health
Officer.
§ 14-3.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2263-05 § 1]
Any person who violates any section of this Chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense,
a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second offense,
and a fine of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for any
subsequent offense.
Chapter 15
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
a. On municipal roadways, leaves may be placed to the street for
collection by the Department of Public Works only on those days
designated for such placement by the Township.
b. On County roadways, leaves may be placed to the street collection by
Essex County in accordance with the collection schedule developed by
Essex County each year.
c. Leaves may be placed in biodegradable paper leaf bags and placed at
the curb for collection by the Department of Public Works only on the
first designated garbage collection day of the week.
d. Private landscapers and other businesses engaged by Township
residents may haul leaves to a privately-owned compost facility.
e. The owners or occupants of property adjacent to a storm drain inlet
shall not place any leaves within ten (10') feet of the inlet.
§ 14-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1
AO:365
§ 15-1. EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.
§ 15-1.1. Permit Required, Contents; Fee; Bond; Application to
Public Service Corporations. [1967 Code § 21-1-5; Ord. No. 7-2-73
§ 8; Ord. No. 2431-14; amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2546-19]
a. No person shall tear up or excavate any street maintained by the
Township for any purpose without first obtaining from the
Superintendent of Public Works a written permit. Such permit shall
state the location and purpose of the excavation and that it is granted
on condition that the person to whom it is issued shall fill in the
excavation and restore the road surface to the satisfaction of the
Township Committee. No such permit shall be issued unless the
applicant shall pay a fee of $100 for the first linear foot for a residential
road opening permit, or a fee of $250 for the first linear foot for a public
utility road opening permit, and in the case of both residential and
public utility road opening permits, the additional amount of $1 for each
additional linear foot. In addition to such fee, the applicant make a cash
deposit or, at the Township's option, give bond to the Township in the
sum of a minimum of $1,000 for up to the first linear foot plus $50 for
each linear foot thereafter, with such surety as may be approved by the
Township Attorney, conditioned for the filling in of the excavation and
restoration of the road surface to the satisfaction of the Township
Committee, or for the payment of all expenses of doing such work upon
certification by the Superintendent of Public Works of the cost thereof.
All restoration of the street excavation must be done in accordance with
guidelines provided by the permit.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall apply as well to public service
corporations having franchises to maintain pipes, tracks or other works
on or under the streets of the Township as to all other persons.
c. There shall be a five-year moratorium on the issuance of road opening
permits for newly paved streets. Exceptions shall be granted for utility
emergencies or road openings that impact the safety and welfare of
property owners (e.g., electric service to a new home). Any emergency
work or undue hardship shall be approved by the Administrator or their
designee.
1. In the event that an exception is granted during the moratorium
period, the applicant shall be responsible for limiting the area of
disturbance, saw-cutting all excavations and restoring the trench to
its original condition, including, but not limited to, the pavement,
surface treatments and striping.
2. The Administrator or their designee may require a larger area of
the roadway to be restored to avoid trench marks across the
roadway. This will be done in a manner that creates a rectangular
patch across the entire width of the roadway.
§ 15-1 MILLBURN CODE § 15-1.1
AO:366
§ 15-1.2. Materials and Construction. [New]
All materials and construction shall conform to and be as directed by the
Township Engineer. All pipes shall be of ductile iron. All drains, plates and
grates shall be of cast iron. If not specifically indicated by the Township
Engineer, all materials and methods of construction shall conform to the
New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," latest edition, as
amended.
§ 15-1.3. Advance Notice of Construction Required. [New]
A minimum of three work days' advance notice, in writing, is required
to the appropriate Township Department prior to commencement of any
construction or mobilization of equipment or forces.
§ 15-1.4. Duty of Permittee to Guard and Light Excavations;
Permittee to Save Township from Suit. [1967 Code § 21-1-7]
Whenever a permit shall issue to any person for the opening or excavation
of any street, it shall be his duty to properly guard and light the same,
and to save harmless the Township from prosecution or suit by indictment
or otherwise for negligence in connection with such excavation or the
guarding thereof, and to save harmless the Township from all liability for
damages and costs by reason of negligence. It shall be the duty of the
permittee to guard and illuminate the excavation site, and where applicable
for confined spaces, to perform the work under the safety standards
established by the State of New Jersey in N.J.A.C. 12:100-9.
§ 15-1.5. Provisions of This Section Construed as Contained in
Permits. [1967 Code § 21-1-8]
All permits issued under this section shall be construed as if the provisions
hereof were fully and at large contained therein.
3. An initial fee of $500 will be charged, with an additional $1 per
linear foot, to open a road within its moratorium.
4. Township's option, give bond to the Township in the sum of a
minimum of $1,000 for up to the first linear foot plus $50 for each
linear foot thereafter, with such surety as may be approved by the
Township Attorney, conditioned for the filling in of the excavation
and restoration of the road surface to the satisfaction of the
Township Committee, or for the payment of all expenses of doing
such work upon certification by the Superintendent of Public Works
of the cost thereof.
5. All restoration must be done in accordance with specifications
provided in the permit.
§ 15-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-2
AO:367
§ 15-2. PERMIT REQUIRED FOR STREET ENTRANCES AND
CULVERTS.
§ 15-2.1. Permit for Construction; When Required. [1967 Code
§ 21-3-1]
No pipe, culvert, bridge, ramp or other structural means of vehicular traffic
from a public street in the Township, over a gutter or drain running
longitudinally therein, into or appurtenant to a private driveway or roadway
leading into or from such street, shall be constructed without a permit
therefor as provided in this section.
§ 15-2.2. Application; Fee; Availability for Inspection. [1967 Code
§ 21-3-2]
Application for a permit, as required by subsection 15-2.1, shall be made
in writing, upon forms to be provided for that purpose, to the Township
Engineer, shall set forth in detail the name and address of the owner of
the proposed construction, the name and address of the contractor or other
person undertaking to construct the same, specifications of materials and
methods to be employed in the construction, and a plan and profile of the
construction proposed.
Every such application shall be signed by such owner and contractor and
shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If a permit is
issued pursuant to such application, the permit shall be kept available in the
possession of the person in charge of the work at all times, for inspection by
the appropriate enforcing authorities.
§ 15-2.3. Issuance Generally. [1967 Code § 21-3-3]
A permit, as required by subsection 15-2.1, shall be issued by the Township
Engineer.
§ 15-2.4. Materials and Construction. [New]
All materials and construction of sidewalks, sanitary sewer laterals, road
openings, curb cuts and drainage connections in the Township's public
streets or rights-of-way shall conform to and be as directed by the Township
Engineer. All pipes shall be of ductile iron. All drains, plates and grates
shall be of cast iron. If not specifically indicated by the Township Engineer,
all materials and methods of construction shall conform to the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) "Standards Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction," latest edition as amended."
§ 15-2.5. Advance Notice of Construction Required. [New]
A minimum of three (3) work days' advance notice, in writing, is required
to the appropriate Township Department prior to commencement of any
construction or mobilization of equipment or forces.
§ 15-2 MILLBURN CODE § 15-2.6
AO:368
§ 15-2.6. Denial of Permit. [New]
No permit shall be issued for any construction for which a permit is required
by this section, nor shall any such construction be undertaken or carried
out, which will constitute a hazard to life, limb or property, by reason of
the degree of encroachment thereof upon the public street; and all such
construction shall conform to the specifications of materials and methods to
be employed therein, as set forth in the application for such permit.
§ 15-3. CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS. [New]
§ 15-4. VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
§ 15-4.1. Duty of Owners. [Ord. No. 11-20-67 § 1; Ord. No. 21-81 § 1;
Ord. No. 26-82 § 1]
a. Pavements. All new pavements shall be placed on a dry compacted
subgrade which has been inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer. Base Course: The base course shall consist of five (5") inches
(compacted thickness) of NJDOT bituminous concrete mix I-52. Surface
Course: The surface course shall consist of two (2") inches (compacted
thickness) of NJDOT bituminous concrete mix I-5.
b. Street Width. The standard street width shall be thirty (30') feet.
c. Street Curbing. Where curbing is to be installed or replaced, the
standard curbing shall be granite block or Belgium block curbing, all
with a six (6") inch curb face, and conforming to the detail on file in the
office of the Township Engineer.
d. Specifications. All materials for and methods of construction for all
streets, curbs and any other related structures when not specified by
the Township shall be in accordance with NJDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition and as
amended.
a. The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the limits of the Township,
upon which shall be erected, planted, or growing any fence or other
structure, hedge, shrub, tree or other vegetation which encroaches
upon a public road or highway easement or is located so closely to the
boundary of such easement as to constitute an obstruction to vision
from vehicles lawfully operated upon such roadway, shall remove every
such encroachment and shall prevent and remove every such
obstruction to vision; provided, however, that shade trees near to,
although not within the boundaries of a public road or highway
easement, which might otherwise constitute such an obstruction to
vision, shall be kept trimmed to a height of at least ten (10') feet above
the nearest curbline.
b. Every such owner or tenant referred to in the preceding paragraph
shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life, growing within ten
§ 15-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-4.1
AO:369
§ 15-4.2. Action by Township. [Ord. No. 11-20-67 § 1; Ord. No. 21-81
§ 1; Ord. No. 26-82 § 1]
If the owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to cut the same in the
manner and within the time provided above, the Township shall have the
power to cut the same or cause the same to be cut by or under the direction
of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 15-4.3. Costs Assessed. [1967 Code § 21-1-17; Ord. No. 11-20-67
§ 1; Ord. No. 21-81 § 1; Ord. No. 26-82 § 1]
In all cases where brush, hedges and other plant life are cut from any lands
within the Township pursuant to this subsection, by or under the direction
of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, such officer shall
certify the cost thereof to the Township Committee, which shall examine the
certificate and if found to be correct shall cause the cost as shown thereon
to be charged against the lands, or in the event that such cost is excessive
to cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against the lands. The
amount so charged shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added
to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 15-5. NUMBERING OF PREMISES REQUIRED.
§ 15-5.1. Method. [1967 Code § 21-1-14; Ord. No. 2424-14 § 2]
The numbers of all premises within the limits of the Township shall
correspond with street names and numbers on the tax records of the
Township, filed with the office of the Township Tax Assessor.
§ 15-5.2. Duty of Property Owners and Tax Assessor. [1967 Code
§ 21-1-15; Ord. No. 2424-14 § 3]
(10') feet of any public roadway or highway easement, and within the
area bounded by the sidelines of any two (2) intersecting streets and a
diagonal line joining such street line between points distant thirty-five
(35') feet measured along each street line from the point of intersection
of such street lines, and, in the case of a rounded corner within the
area bounded by lines tangent to the curb of rounded corner extended
to a point of intersection on a diagonal line joining such tangent lines
between points distant thirty-five (35') feet measured along each such
tangent line from the point of intersection of such tangent line, cut
to a height of not more than two and one-half (2 1/2') feet in every
case where a greater height of any such vegetation might constitute
an obstruction to vision or other obstruction or hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, within ten (10) days after notice to cut the same, from
the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 15-4.1 MILLBURN CODE § 15-5.2
AO:370
§ 15-5.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2424-14 § 4]
Subsection 15-5.2 shall be enforced by the Millburn Police Department,
the Millburn Fire Department-Fire Prevention Bureau, any Millburn Fire
Department Officer, the Township Tax Assessor, the Construction Official, or
the Millburn Township Code Enforcement Officer.
a. It shall be the duty of all property owners to have their premises
identified in conformity with the street names and numbers, as the
same are designated on the tax records, the intent of which is to
provide emergency services with a clear readily evident and unique
identification of buildings.
b. In all cases where any number or street name is or shall be hereafter
affixed or placed onto any premises, it shall be the duty of the owner
thereof to apply to the Township Tax Assessor for the correct street
name and number of such premises, as the same is indicated on the tax
records of the Township, and upon application, the Assessor shall
furnish to the applicant the correct street name and number to
designate his/her property and the property owner shall thereupon
place and affix to his/her premises a sign indicating the number thereof
in conformity with the street name and number of such lot, as furnished
by the Assessor.
c. The number shall be in numerical figures of permanent materials and of
colors which contrast with the background on which they are mounted
or affixed. The numbers shall be at least four (4") inches in height
placed in or on the front of each building adjacent to and within two (2')
feet of the main entrance, or in such other location determined by the
Fire Official, Construction Official, or Code Enforcement Officer to meet
the intent of this section. Spelling out the address number in letters is
prohibited.
d. All numbers shall be clearly visible and legible from the right-of-way of
the public street, road, avenue, or highway and shall not be obstructed
by any bush, plant, fence, post or any other obstruction. In any case,
where the numbers are not clearly visible and legible, the Fire Official,
Construction Official, or Code Enforcement Officer may require
supplemental identification installed at or near the right-of-way which
is adjacent to the building's main entrance.
e. Where a building other than a one (1) family dwelling is located on a
corner lot and has an entrance on both sides facing the respective
streets, then each entrance shall be numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
f. No person shall affix, or allow to remain, upon any premises an
identification marker with a different number or street name than the
one designated by the Tax Assessor, with the exception of dates affixed
for historical purpose.
§ 15-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-5.4
AO:371
§ 15-5.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2424-14 § 5]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of subsection 15-5.2 shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in the Chapter 1, Section
1-5. Each violation of any of the provisions of subsection 15-5.2 and each
day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 15-6. MISCELLANEOUS STREET REGULATIONS.
§ 15-6.1. Record of Public Streets and Roads. [1967 Code § 21-1-1]
It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer to keep a record of all public
streets and roads in the Township. Such record shall state whether each
recorded street or road is maintained by the State, County or Township, and
if it be a Township street or road, the width and limits thereof and whether
the grade of same has been established by ordinance of the Township. All
streets and roads hereafter laid out or accepted by the Township shall be
duly recorded in such record of public streets.
§ 15-6.2. Removing or Disturbing Road Material. [1967 Code
§ 21-1-4]
No person, except an officer or employee of the Township acting in the
scope of his/her duty, shall remove or disturb any road material on any
street in the Township, belonging to the Township.
§ 15-6.3. Setting up Poles and Laying Pipe. [1967 Code § 21-1-9]
No telephone, telegraph or other poles shall be set up or pipes or conduits
installed within the limits of any street in the Township unless they be
authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Township Committee, or by
contract with the Township. This subsection shall not apply to companies
authorized by the statutes of the State to erect and maintain poles in public
highways without the consent of local townships.
§ 15-6.4. Defacing Road Machinery, Street Signs, Lamp Posts, Etc.
[1967 Code § 21-1-11]
No person, except an officer or employee of the Township acting in the
scope of his/her duty, shall remove, deface or injure any road machinery,
street sign, traffic post, post, lamp or lamp post belonging to the Township
or the State.
§ 15-6.5. Removal of Snow and Ice. [1967 Code § 21-1-12]
Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township to require removal of
snow and ice from sidewalks, see N.J.S.A. 40:65-12.
The owner or occupant of land abutting upon any street in the Township
shall remove all snow or ice from the sidewalks, public pathways and
§ 15-5.4 MILLBURN CODE § 15-6.5
AO:372
gutters in front of his/her premises within eight (8) hours of daylight after
the same has formed or fallen thereon.
No person, including the owner or occupant of any premises abutting on any
street, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street
in the Township except such as falls upon or is formed upon that portion of
the property so abutting such street lying within the sidewalk lines thereof.
It is the intent and purpose of this section to prohibit all persons from
throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulated
within the private property belonging to such persons, upon the sidewalks
or streets of the Township.
§ 15-6.6. Gutters to Be Cleaned and Maintained. [1967 Code
§ 21-1-13; New]
The owner or occupant of premises abutting upon any street in the
Township shall at all times keep the gutters in front of his/her premises
open and free from all weeds, mud, dirt, gravel, sticks, loose stones, leaves,
rubbish and other obstructions; and shall provide open gutters across or
adequate drains under his/her entrance walks or drives, which shall at all
times be kept thoroughly open, clean and free from obstructions of all sorts.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to keep the gutters in
a state of repair acceptable to the Township.
§ 15-6.7. Coasting on Roadways Prohibited. [1967 Code § 21-1-16]
Coasting and sliding, with sled, toboggan, skates, skis or other vehicle or
contrivance designed to roll or slide upon an inclined surface under the
influence of gravity, be and hereby is prohibited upon the vehicular roadway
of any public street in the Township.
§ 15-7. SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
§ 15-7.1. Specifications for Construction and Repair. [1967 Code
§ 21-2-1]
All sidewalks and paths in the Township shall be constructed and repaired
in accordance with plans and specifications promulgated by the Township
Engineer and approved by resolution of the Township Committee, adopted
June 7, 1982. A copy of such plans and specifications shall be kept on file in
the office of the Township Engineer for inspection by the public.
§ 15-7.2. Sidewalks in Need of Repair; May Become a Nuisance.
[1967 Code § 21-2-2]
It is hereby determined and declared that the presence of broken,
disintegrated, uneven and otherwise defective sidewalks upon and within
the public easement in public streets and highways in the Township may
constitute or become a public nuisance and hazard to the safety of
pedestrians entitled to pass along the same.
§ 15-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.3
AO:373
§ 15-7.3. Notice to Abutting Owners to Repair. [1967 Code § 21-2-3]
Whenever the pavement or surface of any public sidewalk or portion thereof
upon or along a public street or highway in the Township shall be found to
be broken, disintegrated, uneven or otherwise defective to such an extent
that it would be likely to cause a pedestrian to trip or fall in passing along
the same, and such condition shall be complained of to, or discovered by
the Superintendent of Public Works of the Township, he/she shall make, or
cause to be made, an inspection of the sidewalk or portion thereof, and
shall report the condition thereof by him/her so found, to the Business
Administrator with his/her recommendations for the correction or
elimination of such condition. If such condition shall be found to constitute
a hazard to pedestrians' use of the sidewalk or portion thereof, and may
be eliminated by repair or reconstruction, the Business Administrator or
his/her designee may cause written notice to be given to the owner of all
real estate abutting upon the sidewalk or portion thereof so found to be
dangerous or hazardous and to require reconstruction or repair, requiring
such owner to reconstruct or repair the sidewalk or portion thereof, within
thirty (30) days after the service of such notice, in the manner, to the extent
and in accordance with the specifications to be set forth in the notice. Such
notice shall also contain a description of the property abutting upon such
sidewalk or portion thereof so required to be reconstructed or repaired,
which description shall be sufficient to identify such property.
§ 15-7.4. Failure to Obey Notice. [1967 Code § 21-2-4]
An owner of real estate abutting upon a public sidewalk who, after receipt
of notice to reconstruct or repair the same as provided in subsection 15-7.3,
shall neglect or refuse to comply with such notice, and shall continue to
use and maintain such sidewalk, as an appurtenance to his/her property,
in a condition constituting a hazard to the safety of pedestrians having
lawful occasion to use such sidewalk, shall be deemed to have violated the
provisions of this section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided by Section 1-5.
§ 15-7.5. Procedure Where Repair May Affect Shade Trees. [1967
Code § 21-2-5; Ord. No. 14-97 § 4]
Whenever the condition of a public sidewalk or portion thereof which, by the
provisions of this section, may be required to be reconstructed or repaired
by the owner of real estate abutting thereon, results from or may affect any
trees or roots thereof under the control of the Department of Public Works
of the Township, and whenever any such reconstruction or repair may
affect any such tree or roots thereof, the owner of any property required
to make such reconstruction or repair shall first apply to and secure from
the Department of Public Works of the Township, permission to make the
reconstruction or repair so required and shall take such precautions in the
making of such reconstruction or repair as may be required by the Shade
Tree Commission for the protection of any such trees.
§ 15-7.3 MILLBURN CODE § 15-8
AO:374
§ 15-8. MISCELLANEOUS SIDEWALK REGULATIONS.
§ 15-8.1. Obstructing Sidewalks with Merchandise, Etc. [1967 Code
§ 21-2-6; Ord. No. 19-95 § 3]
No person shall obstruct the sidewalk of any street in this Township with
boxes, bales, goods, wares or merchandise except in the process of
unloading or loading. No such obstruction shall be permitted to remain
upon such sidewalk longer than thirty (30) minutes for purposes of or in
connection with the unloading or loading of the same; and, except as herein
otherwise noted, every public sidewalk shall be kept clear and free of all
obstruction throughout its length for a distance of eight (8') feet from the
outer edge of the curb or pavement of the street of which it forms a part,
except as permitted by Section 4-40 of this Code.
§ 15-8.2. Abutting Owners to Keep Sidewalks and Other Public
Places Clean; Weeds to Be Cut. [1967 Code § 21-2-7]
The owner or occupant of premises in the Township in front of which there
is a sidewalk shall keep the same neat and clean, and shall keep the grass
and weeds on either side thereof cut to a height not exceeding three (3")
inches.
The owner or occupant of premises in the Township having a parking lot,
plaza, promenade, mall, walkway or other area used by the public shall keep
the same neat and clean, and shall keep the grass and weeds on any area
covered by same cut to a height not exceeding three (3") inches.
§ 15-8.3. Coasting on Sidewalks or Streets Prohibited. [1967 Code
§ 21-2-8]
No person shall coast with sled or cart down or along the sidewalk of any
street within the Township.
§ 15-8.4. Horses Prohibited on Sidewalks or Paved Pathways. [1967
Code § 21-2-4]
No person shall drive or ride any horse or other animal on any sidewalk
or public paved pathway in the Township. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to members of the armed forces of the United States or of
the Police of the State or of the Township while in the performance of their
duties.
Chapter 16
SWIMMING POOLS
[Editor's Note: For State law as to swimming pools generally, see
N.J.S.A. 40:61-22.21.]
§ 15-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1
AO:375
§ 16-1. DEFINITION. [1967 Code § 22-1-1]
As used in this Chapter:
POOL — Shall mean any private swimming pool or tank on residential
property, whether permanently installed, portable, collapsible or otherwise,
having a depth of twelve (12") inches or more, or a capacity of one hundred
(100) cubic feet or more.
§ 16-2. MAINTENANCE. [1967 Code § 22-1-4; Ord. No. 2372-11 § 2]
§ 16-3. WATER SUPPLY, PIPE, PUMP AND FILTER SYSTEMS. [1967
Code §§ 22-1-5, 22-1-6]
a. All swimming pools shall be maintained and operated in such manner as
to be clean and sanitary at all times. The bottom and sides of the pool
shall be light in color. No type of paint considered injurious to health
shall be used, nor shall sand or dirt bottoms be permitted.
b. Markings shall be provided showing the location and depth of the
shallow and deep portions. This provision requiring markings shall
apply to all existing pools, as well as pools constructed subsequent to
December 21, 1964.
c. No private swimming pool shall be wholly or partially emptied into the
sanitary sewer system of the Township if a storm water drain is readily
accessible to the premises upon which the pool shall be located, for the
reception of water from such pool. Where, however, only the sanitary
sewer system is available for the reception of water dischargeable from
such pool, such discharge into such system shall be permitted only at a
time of which previous notice shall have been given to and for which
permission shall have been received from an authorized representative
of the Department of Public Works of the Township.
d. The discharge location shall not create a public nuisance which is any
thing, condition, or act which is or may become injurious or hazardous
to the public or adjacent property.
a. There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply system and any private swimming pool, wading
pool or portable pool below the maximum water line of the pool or to a
recirculating or heating system of such pool. The piping system shall be
designed to fill the pool and circulate the pool water through filtering
equipment. Potable water shall feed the pool with a downspout with an
air gap not less than six (6") inches above the pool overflow level.
Potable water siphons shall not be permitted to drain pools. The
installation, repair and control of plumbing facilities shall comply with
the Township Plumbing and Sanitary Codes.
b. All circulating units shall have sufficient capacity to recirculate the
entire contents of a pool within eighteen (18) hours or less.
§ 16-1 MILLBURN CODE § 16-3
AO:376
§ 16-4. LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION. [1967 Code
§ 22-1-7]
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any swimming pool in such a manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance
to neighboring properties. Such lighting shall not shine directly upon any
abutting property. All lighting shall be properly shielded.
§ 16-5. FENCING. [1967 Code § 22-1-9]
§ 16-6. DISINFECTION, FILTRATION AND RECIRCULATION. [1967
Code § 22-1-10]
All swimming pools shall be constructed, installed and maintained so as
to provide equipment necessary for the chlorination or other disinfection,
filtration and recirculation of the pool water so as to comply with such
bacteriological standards as may be promulgated by regulations issued by
the Board of Health of the Township and the State.
§ 16-7. COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS OF BOARD OF
HEALTH; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND HEALTH HAZARDS.
[1967 Code § 22-1-11]
Every private swimming pool constructed, installed, established or
maintained in the Township shall at all times comply with the requirements
of the Township Board of Health. Any nuisance or hazard to health which
c. All pools not equipped with facilities for the recirculation and reuse of
the pool water shall be subject to closure by order of the Board of
Health during any period of emergency water shortage.
d. All areas surrounding any swimming pool shall be maintained neatly,
and no rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to remain or
accumulate in or about any pool.
a. All private swimming pools existing on or constructed, installed,
established or maintained after December 21, 1964, shall be enclosed
by a permanent fence of durable material at least four (4') feet in
height, and shall be constructed so as not to have openings, mesh, holes
or gaps larger than four (4) square inches in any dimension, except for
doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the
horizontal dimension shall not exceed three (3") inches. All gates used
in conjunction with the fence shall meet the same specifications as the
fence itself, shall be equipped with approved latching devices and shall
be latched at all times when the private swimming pool is not attended.
b. All portable pools, unless enclosed by a fence of the type and
dimensions specified in paragraph a of this subsection, shall be either
(1) emptied when not in use or unattended; or (2) covered with a
suitable, strong protective covering, securely fastened or locked in
place, when not in use or unattended.
§ 16-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7
AO:377
may develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such private
swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool shall be forthwith abated and
removed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool
is located, upon receipt of notice from the Township Health Officer.
§ 16-8. APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO PORTABLE OR
COLLAPSIBLE POOLS, WADING POOLS AND FISH PONDS. [1967
Code § 22-1-12]
The provisions of this Chapter, whenever applicable, shall apply to portable
or collapsible pools, wading pools and fish ponds.
§ 16-9. ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER. [1967 Code § 22-1-14]
It shall be the duty of the Building Subcode Official and the Health Officer
to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 16-10. RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION OF POOLS. [1967
Code § 22-1-15]
The owner or operator of any pool within the Township shall allow the
Building Subcode Official and the Health Officer or other authorized official
access to any private swimming pool or wading pool or portable pool
and appurtenances thereto for the purposes of inspection to ascertain
compliance with this Chapter and all other pertinent Township ordinances,
at all reasonable times.
Chapter 17
GRADING, DRAINAGE, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: 1967 Code §§ 20-1-2—20-1-9,
Ordinance Nos. 2153-99, 2209-02.]
§ 17-1. LAND DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER.
§ 17-1.1. Land Development Applications to the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
All subdivisions, site plans and other land development applications which
are subject to the jurisdiction of the Millburn Township Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall comply with the requirements of Sections
507, 524, and 525 of the Millburn Development Regulations Ordinance. The
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any such land development
application where a plan meeting the requirements of the above cited
sections is approved as part of an application reviewed by a Board.
§ 17-1.2. Activities Regulated by this Chapter. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
§ 16-7 MILLBURN CODE § 17-1.2
AO:378
§ 17-1.3. Exempt Activities. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
The following activities shall be exempt from the regulations set forth in this
Chapter.
§ 17-2. GRADING PERMIT. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
Except as provided in subsection 17-1.1 with respect to subdivision, site
plans and other applications to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and except as provided in subsection 17-1.3 with respect to
exemptions, in the event that land is proposed to be cleared, graded,
transported, filled, excavated, removed or otherwise disturbed, a grading
permit shall be required. The grading permit shall be issued upon the
a. No person or entity shall clear, grade, transport, fill, excavate, remove
or otherwise disturb any land area within the Township unless:
1. There has been a valid grading permit issued in accordance with
Section 17-2 and this Chapter by the Township Engineer; or
2. The disturbance activity is exempt under subsection 17-1.3; or
3. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment has approved a plan to
provide for grading, drainage, soil erosion and sediment control for
such land.
b. Without limiting the effect of the preceding paragraph a., no
preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision application shall be
granted approval by the applicable Township Board unless a grading,
drainage and soil erosion and sediment control plan has also been
approved. No certificate of occupancy of any building or certificate of
approval of any structure shall be granted unless all necessary soil
erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. The applicant and owner shall bear the final
responsibility for the installation and construction of all required soil
erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with provisions
of this Chapter. The applicant and owner shall indemnify and hold the
Township harmless from and against any and all claims, demands and
damages arising out of such installation and construction work.
a. Construction or alteration of any structure where a building permit is
required and where the proposed new impervious area is less than two
hundred (200) square feet; or
b. Land disturbance where a building permit is not required and where
the proposed land disturbance is less than five hundred (500) square
feet; or
c. The proposed land disturbance is in connection with an application to
the Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment where
approval by that Board includes approval of a plan meeting the
requirements of subsection 17-1.1.
§ 17-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2
AO:379
approval of a grading, drainage, soil erosion and sediment control plan. A
separate application shall be required for each grading permit. All grading
permit applications shall be distributed to the Township Forester for review
and approval prior to issuance by the Township Engineer. Plans,
specifications, a written description of the scope of work, and time
schedules shall be submitted with each application for a grading permit,
together with the application fee. The plans shall be prepared and duly
signed and sealed by a professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect registered and licensed in the State of New Jersey.
§ 17-2.1. Minor Grading Permit. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
A minor grading permit shall be required where a building permit is
required and the proposed new impervious area computed on a horizontal
basis or the land to be disturbed is between two hundred (200) square
feet and five hundred (500) square feet, or where a building permit is not
required and the land to be disturbed is between five hundred (500) square
feet and one thousand (1000) square feet. Minor grading permits shall be
issued by the Township Engineer who may consult with the Construction
Code Official before issuing the permit. The application fee for a minor
grading permit shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). A fee of seventyfive
dollars ($75.00) shall be required for each revision review. The fee is
waived for the first revision.
§ 17-2.2. Major Grading Permit. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
Except for land disturbance which is exempt under subsection 17-1.3 or
which qualifies for a minor grading permit under subsection 17-2.1, all
other disturbance shall require a major grading permit to be issued before
work may commence. Major grading permits shall be issued by the
Township Engineer who shall consult with the Township Forester before
issuing the permit. The application fee for a major grading permit shall be
four hundred dollars ($400.00). A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall
be required for each revision review. The fee is waived for the first revision.
§ 17-3. PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
§ 17-3.1. Contents, Submission Requirements. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
The applicant shall submit a grading, drainage, soil erosion and sediment
control plan for the entire site, which shall be accompanied by payment of
the application fee. The plan shall include:
a. A date, north arrow, scale (not less than 1" = 30'), and block and lot.
b. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control, which must meet or
exceed the specifications and standards for soil erosion and sediment
control in New Jersey promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-1. et seq.
§ 17-2 MILLBURN CODE § 17-3.1
AO:380
§ 17-3.2. Submission of Revisions. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
All proposed revisions of required data shall be submitted for approval. An
additional fee shall be collected for each revision submitted for review. The
fee for the first revision is waived.
§ 17-4. DESIGN STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
In the preparation and implementation of a grading, drainage, soil erosion
and sediment control plan, the following principles of design shall be
adhered to:
c. A schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates and
the sequence of installation of planned erosion and sediment control
measures as related to the progress of the project, and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of such measures.
d. The location and description of existing natural and man-made features
on and within twenty-five (25') feet of the site, including existing and
proposed topography with two (2') foot contours, location of trees
greater than four (4") inches in diameter measured at four (4') feet
above the ground, utilities, and soil characteristics and a copy of the
soil survey where available.
e. The location and description of proposed changes to the site, including
proposed tree removals, and a sketch of the proposed development,
which shall include proposed landscaping plans.
f. Soil permeability test results, as required in the discretion of the
Township Engineer, supporting the design of any dry wells or other
stormwater detention facilities.
g. Wetlands, riparian lands, steep slopes, flood plains, and any associated
buffers or transition areas.
h. Easements.
a. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed disturbance
as it affects the specific lot and offsite installations, for example, roads,
street trees, and utilities.
b. Measure shall be instituted to prevent or control soil erosion and
sedimentation, and such measures shall be in operation during all
stages of development.
c. The smallest practicable area of land shall be exposed at any one (1)
time during development, and stripping of vegetation, grading or other
soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil
erosion and the duration of the disturbance.
d. Work shall be performed in stages where necessary.
§ 17-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-4
AO:381
e. The construction and installation of improvements such as diversions,
sediment basins and similar structures required to prevent soil erosion
and sedimentation shall be required prior to the start of construction or
on-site grading or disturbance.
f. Permanent improvements, such as roads, catch basins, curb and the
like shall be installed or constructed and completed as soon as possible.
g. Temporary diversions and outlets shall be constructed or installed to
accommodate the increased runoff caused by the changed soil and
surface conditions during development.
h. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be
installed to remove sediment from runoff waters and be cleaned of
trapped sediment after each rainfall event.
i. Sediment shall be retained on the site to the maximum extent feasible.
j. Stormwater runoff shall be minimized and retained on the site
wherever practicable by the construction of the following:
1. Detention basins designed in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Hydrologic and hydraulic studies and designs shall be in
accordance with applicable United States Soil Conservation
Service methods.
(b) The rate of runoff resulting from all storms recurring more
frequently than once in fifty (50) years shall be controlled so
that the rate will not exceed that which would be computed in
accordance with Soil Conservation Service methodology based
on the following hydrologic complex curve numbers:
Hydrologic Soft Group Hydrologic Curve Number
A 30
B 45
C 65
D 75
(c) The design of all detention facilities shall be as approved by the
Township Engineer.
2. Drywells for roadway, driveway, and impervious construction,
designed in accordance with requirements established by the
Township Engineer.
3. Roof drain drywells for any structure, designed to retain a
minimum of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet of storage volume for
every one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious area. For
impervious areas not evenly divisible by one thousand (1,000)
§ 17-4 MILLBURN CODE § 17-4
AO:382
§ 17-5. INSPECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
The Township Engineer and Township Forester shall make inspections and
issue their final reports to the Construction Official upon application for a
certificate of occupancy. All improvements on the approved plan shall be
required to be inspected by the Engineering Department and/or Forester.
The applicant shall schedule all required inspections.
square feet, the required storage volume shall be apportioned
accordingly. Details and location of the drywell facility shall be
shown on the grading plan. Impervious areas with less than two
hundred (200) square feet computed on a horizontal basis will be
exempt from this requirement.
k. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff and minimize
adverse impact on adjoining properties resulting from proposed
modified soil and surface conditions, during and after development or
any land disturbance.
l. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
All required vegetative or tree protection fencing shall be installed
prior to land disturbance.
m. Permanent final plant cover or lawn or ground cover shall be installed
on any site prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the
event that such permanent final plant cover cannot be installed because
of conditions of weather, the installation thereof shall be enforced by
appropriate provisions in a performance guarantee or other security
and improvement agreements. If permanent protection and cover has
not been and cannot be installed, temporary measures in accordance
with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee must be
installed until such time as permanent measures can be installed.
n. Either temporary seeding, mulching, plant cover or other suitable
stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed critical erosion
areas during construction or other land disturbance.
o. Any work in the Township's right-of-way shall require a Township road
opening permit (obtained from the Department of Public Works) to have
been issued before the work commences.
p. Storm drainage running offsite shall, where possible, be controlled and
connected to the Township's underground storm sewer system.
q. Land disturbance work shall be conducted in a manner as to prevent
the deposit of dirt upon any public street in the Township, and in the
event of such deposit the applicant and the applicant's contractors shall
be obligated to remove the dirt and clean the street where the dirt was
deposited.
§ 17-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-6
AO:383
§ 17-6. WAIVERS. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
The Township Engineer, or for minor grading permits, the Construction
Code Official, may waive the plan or design requirements of this Chapter, in
whole or in part, if sufficient evidence is submitted to support a conclusion
that a certain requirement need not be met. In passing upon requests for
waivers, the Township Engineer or Construction Code Official shall consider
all technical evaluations, relevant factors and standards specified in this
Chapter.
§ 17-7. MAINTENANCE. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
All necessary soil erosion, sediment control measures and storm detention
systems installed under this Chapter shall be adequately maintained by
the applicant and all subsequent owners of the property on which such
measures have been installed, until the possibility of soil erosion and
sediment pollution no longer exists.
§ 17-8. PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE. [Ord. No. 2439-15]
The requirements of the Code shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer at the direction of the Township Administrator (or his designee)
or the Township Engineer (or his designee) or the Township Forester. For
the violation of the provisions of this Chapter, unless a specific penalty is
otherwise provided in connection with the provision violated, the maximum
penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00);
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days;
or to a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 18
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 18-1. ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSCIOUS GROUNDS AND
MAINTENANCE POLICY.
§ 18-1.1. Statement of Policy. [Ord. No. 2404-13]
The Township of Millburn hereby establishes procedures, methods and
practices that benefit our natural lands and environment, health of our
workers and citizens and minimizes negative environmental impacts. Using
practices that reduce waste by increasing product and method efficiency,
and minimize environmental impacts, toxics, pollution and hazards to the
community, as well as reduce waste, as sustainable, conserve energy and
water, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, use unbleached or chlorine free
manufacturing processes, reduce use of chemicals and are lead-free and
mercury-free, when and where practicable.
§ 17-6 MILLBURN CODE § 18-1.2
AO:384
§ 18-1.2. Purpose and Objectives. [Ord. No. 2404-13]
The goal of this policy is to encourage and increase the use of
environmentally preferable methods, products, and services in the
Township of Millburn. By including environmental considerations in
municipal building and grounds decisions, Millburn can promote practices
that are beneficial to our land, beneficial to public and worker health and
conserve natural resources. The policy objectives are to:
§ 18-1.3. Research, Evaluation and Implementation. [Ord. No.
2404-13]
a. Conserve natural resources;
b. Minimize environmental impacts such as pollution and use of water and
energy;
c. Eliminate or reduce toxics that create hazards to workers and our
community;
d. Support strong recycling markets;
e. Reduce materials that are routinely landfilled;
f. Increase the use and availability of environmentally preferable
products that protect the environment;
g. Identify environmentally preferable techniques, methods, and
distribution systems;
h. Create a model for sustainable buildings and grounds maintenance that
encourages others in our community to adopt similar goals.
a. The Public Works Division, members of the Environmental
Commission's Green Team and representatives from other Millburn
Township Departments will research, evaluate sustainable methods to
buildings and grounds maintenance objectives.
They will focus their research evaluation in the following areas:
1. Water and energy efficient projects and processes (e.g. solar
applications, irrigation, energy efficient lighting, appliances,
vehicles and motorized equipment);
2. Landscape and grounds management (e.g. integrated pest and
vegetation management, use of drought tolerant/indigenous plants,
recycled mulches, etc.);
3. Renewable products (e.g. certified forest materials, renewable
energy resources, etc.);
4. Waste and pollution reduction (e.g. integrated waste management,
construction debris, recycling practices, longer lasting materials
and machines, etc.);
§ 18-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1.3
AO:385
§ 18-1.4. Specifications. [Ord. No. 2404-13]
5. Recycled content products (e.g. paper, playground equipment,
construction materials, motor oils and lubricants, carpets, matting,
plastic lumber, trash bags, parking stops, etc.);
6. Reduction of chemical and toxic substances and processes (e.g.
cleaning products, pest management, chemicals, phosphates,
paint, solvents, etc.).
b. Green Building Program (e.g. designing and renovating for energy and
resource conservation, using recycled products in construction and
renovation, disposal of building materials in an environmental
thoughtful means, etc.).
c. The Green Team is aware that the evaluation and implementation
phases of the project will require changes in awareness, behaviors,
practices and procedures. To the extent possible it is the Green Team's
intention to have as large of a participative process as possible as it
researches and evaluates the policy recommendations.
a. Energy and Water Efficiency in Products and Processes.
1. Where applicable, energy-efficient equipment shall be utilized with
the most up-to-date energy efficiency functions. This includes, but
is not limited to high efficiency space heating systems, high
efficiency space cooling equipment, compressors, generators,
motors and pumps.
2. To the extent possible, the Township shall replace inefficient
interior lighting with energy-efficient equipment.
3. When practicable, the Township shall replace inefficient exterior
lighting, street lighting and traffic signal lights with energyefficient
equipment. Exterior lighting shall be minimized where
possible to avoid light pollution and unnecessary lighting of
architectural and landscape features while providing adequate
illumination for safety and accessibility.
4. All products utilized by the Township and for which the U.S. EPA
ENERGY STAR® certification is available shall meet ENERGY
STAR® certification, when practicable. When ENERGY STAR® labels
are not available, the Township shall choose energy-efficient
products that are in the upper 255 of energy efficiency as
designated by the Federal Energy Management Program.
5. To the extent practicable the Township shall purchase and utilize
water-saving methods. This includes, but is not limited to, highperformance
fixtures like toilets, low-flow faucets and aerators, and
upgraded irrigation systems.
b. Landscaping and Grounds Maintenance.
§ 18-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 18-1.4
AO:386
1. All landscape renovations, construction and maintenance
performed by the Township, including workers and contractors
providing landscaping services for the Township, shall employ
sustainable landscape management techniques for design,
construction and maintenance whenever possible, including, but
not limited to, integrated pest management, grass cycling, drip
irrigation, composting, and procurement and use of mulch and
compost that give preference to those produced from regionally
generated plant debris and/or food waste programs.
2. Plants should be selected to minimize waste by choosing species
that are appropriate to the microclimate; species that can grow to
their natural size in the space allotted them, and perennials rather
than annuals for color. Native and drought-tolerant plants that
require no or minimal watering once established are preferred.
3. Hardscapes and landscape structures constructed of recycled
content materials are encouraged to be utilized, when and where
practicable. The Township shall strive to limit the amount of
impervious surfaces in the landscape, wherever practicable.
Permeable substitutes, such as permeable asphalt or pavers are
encouraged for walkways, patios and driveways.
c. Recycled/Renewable Methods and Products.
1. All products for which the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (U.S. EPA) has established minimum recycled content
standard guidelines in the Agency's Comprehensive Procurement
Guidelines, such as those for printing paper, office paper, janitorial
paper, construction, landscaping, parks and recreation,
transportation, vehicles, miscellaneous, and non-paper office
products, shall contain the highest post-consumer content
practicable, but no less than the minimum recycled content
standards established by the U.S. EPA Guidelines.
2. In accordance with the New Jersey Code and the manufacturer's
recommendations, the Township shall purchase re-refined
lubricating and industrial oil for use in its vehicles and other
equipment, as long as it is certified by the American Petroleum
Institute (API) as appropriate for use in such equipment.
3. When specifying asphalt concrete, aggregate base or Portland
cement concrete for road construction projects, the Township shall
use recycled, reusable or reground materials when practicable.
4. To the extent practicable the Township shall specify and purchase
recycled content maintenance products, including signs, cones,
parking stops, delineators, skirts and barricades, which shall
contain the highest post-consumer content practicable, but no less
than the minimum recycled content standards established by the
U.S. EPA Comprehensive Procurement Guidelines.
§ 18-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1.4
AO:387
d. Waste Reduction.
1. To the extent practicable the Township shall institute practices that
reduce waste and result in the purchase of fewer products
whenever practicable and cost-effective, but without reducing
safety or workplace quality.
2. To the extent practicable the Township shall purchase
remanufactured products such as pumps, tires, furniture,
equipment and automotive parts whenever practicable, but without
reducing safety, quality or effectiveness.
3. To the extent practicable the Township shall require all equipment
bought after the adoption of this policy to be compatible with
source reduction goals where practicable.
e. Toxic Chemical and Pollution Reduction.
1. The use of chlorofluorocarbon and Halon containing refrigerants,
solvents and other products shall be phased out and new utilization
of heating/ventilating/air conditioning, refrigeration, insulation and
fire suppression systems shall not contain them.
2. All surfactants and detergents shall be readily biodegradable and,
where practicable, shall not contain phosphates.
3. When maintaining and furnishing buildings, the Township shall
strive to use products with the lowest amount of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), highest recycled content, and low or no
formaldehyde when practicable when purchasing materials such as
paint, carpeting, adhesives, furniture and casework.
4. For fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, environmentally
responsible products are to be considered first, especially at high
use park areas, all playgrounds, all school grounds and high use
recreational areas; additional technical materials will be
considered following Integrated Pest Management strategies.
f. Forestry Conservation Methods.
1. To the extent practicable, the Township shall strive not to procure
or utilize wood products such as lumber and paper that originate
from forests harvested in an environmentally unsustainable
manner. When practicable, the Township shall give preference to
wood products that are certified to be sustainably harvested by a
comprehensive, performance-based certification system. The
certification system shall include independent third-party audits,
with standards equivalent to, or stricter than, those of the Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) certification.
2. To the extent practicable, the Township encourages the purchase
or use of recycled, previously used, and salvaged wood and wood
products whenever possible.
§ 18-1.4 MILLBURN CODE § 18-1.5
AO:388
§ 18-1.5. Priorities. [Ord. No. 2404-13]
§ 18-1.6. Implementation of Policy. [Ord. No. 2404-13]
§ 18-2. SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS AND POLYSTYRENE
CONTAINERS AND SINGLE-USE STRAWS. [Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 2547-19]
§ 18-2.1. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this section:
COMPLIANT BAG — Recyclable paper carryout bags and reusable bags.
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods or services from a retail
establishment.
FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS — A business that sells or provides food for
consumption on or off the premises, and includes, but is not limited to, any
restaurant, cafe, delicatessen, coffee shop, supermarket or grocery store,
vending truck or cart, food truck, movie theater, or business or institutional
a. The health and safety of workers and citizens is of utmost importance
and takes precedence over all other policies.
b. To the fullest extent possible, the Township has made significant
investments in development of a successful recycling system and
recognizes that recycled content products are essential to the
continuing viability of that recycling system and for the foundation of an
environmentally sound production system. Therefore, to the greatest
extent practicable, recycled content shall be included in products that
also meet other specifications, such as chlorine free or bio-based.
c. Nothing contained in this policy shall be construed as requiring the
Township, departments, purchaser or contractor to take any action that
shall conflict with local State, County or Federal requirements.
a. The Director of Public Works and other responsible Township officials
shall encourage implementation of this policy.
b. Vendors, contractors and grantees shall be encouraged to comply with
applicable sections of this policy for products and services provided to
the Township, where practicable.
RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG — A paper bag that is 100%
recyclable and displays the word "Recyclable" in a visible manner on
the outside of the bag.
a.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag with handles that is designed and
manufactured to withstand repeated uses over a period of time andis
machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned and
disinfected regularly.
b.
§ 18-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.1
AO:389
cafeteria, including those operated by or on behalf of any governmental
entity.
OPERATOR — The person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the
operation of a retail establishment, which may include, but is not limited to,
the owner of the retail establishment.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group, however organized.
PLASTIC — A synthetic material made from linking monomers through a
chemical reaction to create an organic polymer chain that can be molded or
extruded at high heat into various solid forms retaining their defined shapes
during the life cycle and after disposal.
POLYSTYRENE CONTAINER — A container comprising a synthetic
thermoplastic material obtained by polymerizing styrene; formed into a
white rigid foam (expanded polystyrene) for insulating and packaging,
including cups, clamshells and any other take-out containers from
restaurants and prepared food providers.
PRODUCT BAG — A very thin bag without handles used exclusively to carry
produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a retail
establishment or, for reasons of public health and safety, to prevent such
food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items.
RECYCLABLE — Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted
through available recycling collection programs for the purpose of reusing
the altered, incinerated, converted, or otherwise thermally destroyed solid
waste generated therefrom.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any store or commercial establishment that
sells perishable or nonperishable goods, including, but not limited to:
clothing, food, and personal items, directly to the customer and is located
within or doing business within the geographical limits of the Township
of Millburn. Retail establishments include, for example: a business
establishment that generates a sales or use tax; a drugstore, a pharmacy,
a supermarket, grocery store, convenience food store, food mart, or other
commercial entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line of goods
that includes milk, bread, soda, snack foods and alcoholic beverages; a
public eating establishment (i.e., a restaurant, take-out food establishment,
or any other business that prepares and sells food to be eaten on or off
its premises); and a business establishment that sells clothing, hardware,
electronics, books, jewelry, furniture, cosmetics or any other nonperishable
goods. "Retail establishment" does not include nonprofit charitable
resellers, as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, or a distinct operating unit or division of the charitable organization
that reuses and recycles donated goods or materials and receives more than
50% of its revenues from the handling and sale of those donated goods or
materials.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG OR POLYSTYRENE CONTAINER
— Any bag or container produced or manufactured from material commonly
known as "plastic" or "polystyrene" that is provided by the operator of a
§ 18-2.1 MILLBURN CODE § 18-2.1
AO:390
retail establishment at the point of sale or other point of departure from the
premises for transporting goods or products out of the establishment for
off-site delivery. The term includes compostable and biodegradable bags but
does not include reusable bags or product bags. This definition specifically
exempts the following:
§ 18-2.2. Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bags and Polystyrene
Containers Prohibited.
No retail establishment may provide to any customer a single-use plastic
carryout bag or a polystyrene container provided for the purpose of
carrying goods away from the point of sale. This does not apply to product
bags. The prohibition also applies to single-use plastic carryout bags and
polystyrene containers for take-out and deliveries from retail
establishments. The point of sale in such transactions is deemed to be at the
retail establishment, regardless of where payment for the transaction and
delivery of the goods physically occurs; provided, however, that the charge
established pursuant to § 18.2.4 shall not be made to off-site recipients of
deliveries from retail establishments for products delivered in compliant
bags and containers.
§ 18-2.3. Compliant Bags fr a Fee.
Bags made available by operators to consumers inside retail
establishments:
To package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains,
candies, or small hardware items;
1.
To contain or wrap frozen and nonfrozen foods, meat, or fish,
whether packaged or not;
2.
To contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be an issue;
3.
4. To contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
5. As pharmacy prescription bags;
6. To contain articles of clothing in garment bags.
a.
Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry and/or dry-cleaning bags,
or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended as food
storage bags, garbage bags, yard waste bags, or pet waste bags.
b.
a. All retail establishments may make available to customers, for a fee,
compliant bags, as defined herein, for the purpose of carrying goods or
other materials away from the point of sale, subject to the provisions of
this section. The fee charged shall be reflected in the sales receipt.
b. Nothing in this section prohibits customers from bringing bags of any
type that they choose to retail establishments themselves, in lieu of
§ 18-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-2.3
AO:391
§ 18-2.4. Regulation of Recyclable Paper Carryout Bags.
§ 18-2.5. Provision of Complaint Bags; Education and Promotion.
§ 18-2.6. Straws.
§ 18-2.7. Enforcement and Violation Penalties; Appeals.
bags available for a fee from the retail establishment, or from carrying
away goods that are not placed in a bag.
a. All retail establishments may make compliant recyclable paper carryout
bags available to customers upon request for a fee of $0.05 per bag if
customers choose not to bring their own reusable bags.
b. A retail establishment may provide customers with a compliant
reusable bag, as defined herein, for a fee of at least $0.10.
a. All retail establishments must provide customers with compliant bags,
upon request, if customers fail to bring their own bags, in accordance
with the fee structure set forth in § 18- 2.4 above. A retail establishment
may choose, in its discretion, to provide a credit to customers that
choose to bring their own bags.
b. Each retail establishment shall be strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to promote the reusable bags, to post signs encouraging customers
to choose reusable bags rather than recyclable paper carryout bags,
and to ask customers if a bag is needed prior to dispensing.
a. A food service business may provide a single-use straw to a person only
upon request.
a. The Millburn Township Code Enforcement Officer or the Health Officer,
or their designees, have the responsibility for enforcement of this
section, including, but not limited to, investigating violations and
issuing fines.
b. Penalties.
1. Any retail establishment that violates or fails to comply with any of
the requirements of this section after an initial written warning
notice has been issued for that violation shall be liable for a penalty.
2. If a retail establishment has subsequent violations of this section
after the issuance of an initial written warning notice of a violation,
the following penalties will be imposed and shall be payable by the
operator of the retail establishment:
(a) A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation after the
written warning notice is given;
(b) A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation after the
written warning notice is given; and
§ 18-2.3 MILLBURN CODE § 18-2.7
AO:392
§ 18-2.8. No Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this section is intended to create any requirement, power or duty
that is in conflict with any federal or state law.
Chapter 19
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 19-1. CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
§ 19-1.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 13-92 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds that:
§ 19-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 13-92 § 1]
As used in this Chapter:
DISCHARGE — Shall mean the meaning set forth in the Discharges of
Petroleum and Other Hazardous Substances Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:1E.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Shall mean any substance defined as such
pursuant to the Discharges of Petroleum and Other Hazardous Substances
Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:1E.
§ 19-1.3. Release of Hazardous Substances; Cleanup; Expenses;
Responsibility Therefor. [Ord. No. 13-92 § 1]
In the event there occurs a spill, discharge, leakage or any other type
of release of hazardous substances onto any private or public property,
including waterways, roadways or any other place in the Township, the
individuals or entities having ownership and control of the facility, building,
(c) A fine not exceeding $500 for the third and any subsequent
violations after the written warning notice is given.
3. A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed
to continue.
c. Any appeal of a written warning notice or fine shall be conducted
pursuant to municipal regulations and procedures concerning appeals
already adopted by the Township of Millburn.
a. Spills and the discharge and release of hazardous substances constitute
a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the Township and its
citizens.
b. The response by the Township to such incidents necessitates
expenditures for personnel and equipment and for the storage,
treatment, transportation or disposal of hazardous substances, and
imposes a significant financial burden upon the Township.
§ 18-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.3
AO:393
vehicle, system or container from which the release emanated shall be
responsible for all reasonable costs associated with and necessitated by
the Township's response thereto; including, but not limited to, costs of
manpower, equipment, materials, supplies and any other expense
reasonably related to the response by the Township.
§ 19-1.4. Recovery of Costs. [Ord. No. 13-92 § 1]
Upon the conclusion of response, containment and/or cleanup efforts, the
heads of the Township Departments involved in the response shall prepare
an accounting of all costs and expenses associated with the response;
including, but not limited to, a pro rata cost for personnel time, equipment,
materials, supplies and any other expense reasonably related thereto. The
accounting shall be presented, in writing, as soon as practicable to the
Township Comptroller and Business Administrator for verification and
approval, and shall then be transmitted to the Township Attorney for
recommendation for follow-up action.
Chapter 20
HOTELS
§ 20-1. HOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 20-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2219-03 § 1]
The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorize the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed one
(1%) percent on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1,
2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed three (3%) percent on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room
or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3(d)
which tax shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 20-1.2. Imposition of Hotel Room Occupancy Tax. [Ord. No.
2219-03 § 1]
A hotel room occupancy tax is hereby established in the Township which
shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of one (1%) percent on charges
of rent for every occupancy of a hotel room in the Township of Millburn
on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and three (3%) percent
on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Millburn on or after July 1, 2004 of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3(d).
§ 19-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 20-1.2
AO:394
The hotel room occupancy tax hereby imposed shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution
by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 20-1.3. Prohibitions and Requirements. [Ord. No. 2219-03 § 1]
In accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48F-2.
§ 20-1.4. Collection. [Ord. No. 2219-03 § 1]
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel customer. Each person
required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for
the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such
person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided, however, that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be
joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
Chapter 21
ABANDONED PROPERTIES
§ 21-1. ABANDONED PROPERTY REHABILITATION ACT;
ABANDONED PROPERTY LIST; REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED
PROPERTY.
§ 21-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Shall mean any property that is determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.
a. All taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this Chapter.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
e. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Section 1-5 of this
Code for each offense.
§ 20-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:395
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the Code Enforcement Official or such
other person designated or appointed by the Municipal Governing Body
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5.
§ 21-1.2. Inventory of Abandoned Property; Registration of Property
by Owner. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
The Township of Millburn may direct the public officer to identify
abandoned property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property
list throughout the Township, or within those parts of the Township as
the Governing Body may designate. Each item of abandoned property so
identified shall include the tax block and lot number, the name of the owner
of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.
a. The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." The Township
of Millburn may add properties to the abandoned property list at any
time and may delete properties at any time when the public officer finds
that the property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned
property. An interested party may request that a property be included
on the abandoned property list following that procedure set forth at
N.J.S.A. 55:19-105.
b. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Township of Millburn has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate which has been
placed on the abandoned property list may be removed in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
c. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list or any
additions thereto by publication in the official newspaper of the
Township of Millburn, which publication shall constitute public notice,
and, within 10 days after publication, shall send a notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail to the owner of
record of every property included on the list. The published and mailed
notices shall identify property determined to be abandoned, setting
forth the owner of record, if known, the tax lot and block number and
street address. The public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector,
shall also send out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization that receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A.
54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known for a particular
property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable
diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but instead
shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for the
public officer's finding that the property is abandoned property as that
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and the rules and regulations
§ 21-1.1 MILLBURN CODE § 21-1.2
AO:396
promulgated thereunder, specifying the information relied upon in
making such finding. In all cases a copy of the mailed or posted notice
shall also be filed by the public officer in the office of the County Clerk
or Register of Deeds and Mortgages, as the case may be, of the County
wherein the property is situated. This filing shall have the same force
and effect as a notice of lis pendens under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice
shall be indexed by the name of the property owner as defendant and
the name of the Township as plaintiff, as though an action had been
commenced by the Township against the owner.
d. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list determined pursuant to paragraph b of this
subsection by appealing that determination to the public officer within
30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified notice or 40 days from the
date upon which the notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not
known to the public officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which
notice was published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge the
inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list. For good cause
shown, the public officer shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within
30 days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings contained in
the notice pursuant to paragraph d of this subsection, the public officer
shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any
property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned
property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification by the property owner averring that the property is not
abandoned and stating the reasons for such averment, can demonstrate
that the property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or
certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation, such
as but not limited to photographs, and repair invoices, bills and
construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the
property in question is not abandoned property as that term is defined
in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The public officer shall decide any timely filed
appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify
the property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
e. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer pursuant to paragraph d of this
subsection, by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court
Rules, a summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law Division,
sitting in the County in which the property is located, which action shall
be tried de novo. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the
date of the notice of decision mailed by the public officer pursuant to
paragraph e of this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the
property in question is not abandoned property as that term is defined
in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a
timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the
adverse determination, except that, for good cause shown, the court
may extend the deadline for instituting the action.
§ 21-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.2
AO:397
f. The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined not to be abandoned
on appeal.
g. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
of Millburn shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect
to properties on the abandoned property list at such time as any one
property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions
of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect
to that property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the property
owner.
h. Registration of Property.
1. The owner of a property on the abandoned property list shall,
within 30 days of the property being so listed, or within 30 days of
acquiring ownership of such a property, file a registration
statement for said property with the Township of Millburn on forms
provided by the Township of Millburn for the purpose. The owner
shall review the registration annually, no later than January 31, as
long as the property remains on the abandoned property list and
shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in
paragraph h3 of this subsection. A fee required to be paid during
the course of a particular year shall be prorated for the duration
from the time of filing and December 31 of that year. The owner of a
property on the abandoned property list shall notify the Township
of Millburn within 30 days of any change in the registration
information by filing an amended registration statement on the
form provided by the Township of Millburn for the purpose. The
registration statement shall be deemed to be prima facie proof of
the information contained therein in any administrative
enforcement proceeding or judicial proceeding instituted by the
Township of Millburn against the owner of said property.
2. After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration
statement, the owner of such property shall provide interior and
exterior access to the Township of Millburn Construction Official
and/or the Public Officer, if requested, following reasonable notice,
during the period covered by the initial registration or any
subsequent renewal. The registration statement shall include
relevant information including the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of ordinance violations and for receiving process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding,
on behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the
enforcement of any applicable code. The designated agent must
have a contact number that will be available 24 hours per day on an
emergency basis. The statement shall also include the name of the
person responsible for maintaining and securing the property, if
different from the designated agent. An owner who is a natural
§ 21-1.2 MILLBURN CODE § 21-1.2
AO:398
§ 21-1.3. Sale of Tax Lien. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
person and who meets the requirements of this subsection as to
availability of a contact number on a twenty-four hour emergency
basis may designate himself or herself as agent. By designating
an authorized agent under the provisions of this subsection, the
owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce ordinance provisions concerning the registered property
by service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any
owner who has designated an authorized agent under the
provisions of this subsection shall be deemed to consent to the
continuation of the agent's designation for the purpose of this
subsection until the owner notifies the Township of Millburn of
a change of the authorized agent or until the owner files a new
annual registration statement. The designation of an authorized
agent does not release the owner from any requirement of this
section.
3. The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee
for the first renewal is $1,500. The fee for the second renewal is
$3,000. For any subsequent renewal, the registration fee shall be
$5,000. The initial fee shall be prorated according to paragraph h1.
a. Notwithstanding N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or the provisions of any other law to
the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned property list
and the property taxes or other Township liens due on the property are
delinquent six (6) or more quarters as of the date of expiration of the
right to appeal inclusion on the list, or, if an appeal has been filed, as of
the date that all opportunities for appeal of inclusion on the list have
been exhausted, then the tax lien on the property may be sold in
accordance with the procedures in the "Tax Sale Law," N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et
seq., on or after the 90th day following the expiration of that time of
appeal or final determination on an appeal, as appropriate. The
Township of Millburn may, at its option, require that the sale of the tax
sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax sale
certificate held by the Township be subject to the express condition that
the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude any
rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from the
abandoned property list pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and to post a bond in favor of the Township to
guarantee the rehabilitation or repair of the property. The public officer
may waive a requirement to post a bond imposed by the Township of
Millburn for any purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax sale
certificate that provides documentation acceptable to the public officer
that the purchaser, assignee or transferee is a qualified rehabilitation
entity as defined in Section 3 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-80).
The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be
added to the amount required to be paid by the owner for redemption of
§ 21-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.3
AO:399
the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale
certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall
be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the Tax Collector,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of monies
expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at
the delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67 of the Township of Millburn in effect for the
time period when the amounts were expended. The tax sale certificate
purchaser, assignee or transferee, under the auspices and with the
authority of the Township of Millburn, shall be permitted to enter in
and upon the property for the purposes of appraising the costs of
rehabilitation and repair and to perform all other acts required to
guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation or repair of the property.
No rehabilitation or repair work shall be commenced, however, until
proof of adequate liability insurance and an indemnification agreement
holding the Township of Millburn harmless is filed with the public
officer. If the tax sale certificate is not purchased at the initial auction
of the tax sale certificate and the Township of Millburn purchases the
certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, then the Township of Millburn
shall retain all of its right, title and interest in that certificate, however,
any portion of the amount paid to the Tax Collector to redeem the tax
sale certificate that represents tax or other Township lien delinquencies
and subsequent Township liens, including interest, shall be returned by
the Tax Collector of the Township of Millburn.
b. Remediation.
1. If the Township acquires the tax sale certificate for a property on
the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written notice to
the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the filing of
the lis pendens notice under Subsection d of Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), that entity shall be permitted to
enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that caused
the property to be included on the abandoned property list. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day
period the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the Township of
Millburn, in writing, that the owner or mortgagee has elected to
perform the remediation itself. When the owner or mortgagee
elects to perform the remediation itself, it shall be required to post
bond in favor of the Township of Millburn, in order to ensure
performance. The amount and conditions of the bond shall be
determined by the public officer.
2. The cost of remediation incurred by the Township of Millburn
pursuant to this subsection, as so certified by the entity incurring
the cost upon completion of the remediation, shall constitute a lien
upon the property first in time and right to any other lien, whether
the other lien was filed prior to or after the filing of any lien by the
§ 21-1.3 MILLBURN CODE § 21-1.3
AO:400
§ 21-1.4. Removal from List. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
Township of Millburn, except for Township taxes, liens and
assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the "Spill
Compensation and Control Act," P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11 et seq.), together with any interest thereon. The
certification of cost shall be filed and recorded as a lien by the
entity incurring the cost with the County Clerk or Register of Deeds
and Mortgages, as appropriate, in the County in which the property
is located.
c. Failure to Remediate.
1. Failure of an owner or lienholder to remove a property from the
abandoned property list within the period of time for appeal of
inclusion of the property on the list pursuant to Subsection e of
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), shall be prima
facie evidence of the intent of the owner to continue to maintain the
property as abandoned property.
2. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to paragraph
c1 of this subsection shall be a public purpose and public use for
which the power of eminent domain may be exercised.
a. An owner may remove a property from the list of abandoned properties
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and Township
liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
1. By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55) and posting cash or a bond to cover the cost of any
environmental cleanup required on the property, evidenced by a
certification by a licensed engineer retained by the owner and
reviewed and approved by the public officer stating that the cash or
bond adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
2. By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the public officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the public officer
finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55), as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on the
property, the public officer may grant an extension of time of not
more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work, during
which time no further proceedings will be taken against the owner
or the property.
§ 21-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.4
AO:401
§ 21-1.5. Action to Foreclose Right of Redemption. [Ord. No.
2466-16]
b. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Department
of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent order, as the
case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the owner has
failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the agreement
or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the Township, which
shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has accrued thereon
for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the property or
performing the environmental remediation. Any funds remaining after
the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be
returned to the owner.
a. When a person other than the Township of Millburn or its subsidiaries
acquires a tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property
list at tax sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the
right of redemption at any time after the expiration of six (6) months
following the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
b. When the Township of Millburn is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, or
when the Township or any of its subsidiaries acquires the tax sale
certificate pursuant to Subsection a of Section 37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 54:5-104.34), an action to foreclose the right of redemption
may be instituted in accordance with the provisions of Subsection b of
N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
c. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
1. Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), as
determined by the court; or
2. Demonstrates to the court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56) have been remedied in full.
§ 21-1.4 MILLBURN CODE § 21-1.6
AO:402
§ 21-1.6. Final Judgment. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
Entry of final judgment barring right of redemption; grounds for reopening
judgment (from N.J.S.A. 55:19-59). Once a final judgment barring the right
of redemption with respect to a property on the list of abandoned properties
has been recorded, no court shall reopen such judgment at any time except
on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction or fraud in the conduct of the action;
in any such proceeding, the provisions of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20
et al.) shall be construed liberally in favor of the purchaser, assignee or
transferee of the tax sale certificate.
§ 21-2. REHABILITATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES.
§ 21-2.1. Legislative Findings and Declarations. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
§ 21-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
a. Abandoned properties create a wide range of problems for the
Township of Millburn, fostering criminal activity, creating public health
problems and otherwise diminishing the quality of life for residents and
business operators in those areas.
b. Abandoned properties diminish the property values of neighboring
properties and have a negative effect on the quality of life of adjacent
property owners, increasing the risk of property damage through arson
and vandalism and discouraging neighborhood stability and
revitalization.
c. For these reasons, abandoned properties are presumptively considered
to be nuisances, in view of their negative effects on nearby properties
and the residents or users of those properties.
d. The continued presence of abandoned properties in the Township of
Millburn acts as a significant barrier to the Township's continue
progressive development and revitalization.
e. The responsibility of a property owner to maintain a property in sound
condition and prevent it from becoming a nuisance to others extends to
properties which are not in use and "demolition by neglect," leading to
the deterioration and loss of the property, or failure by an owner to
comply with legitimate orders to demolish, stabilize or otherwise repair
his or her property creates a presumption that the owner has
abandoned the property.
§ 21-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.2
AO:403
LIENHOLDER OR MORTGAGE HOLDER — Shall mean any person or entity
holding a note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any
part thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of title to an abandoned
property.
PROPERTY — Shall mean any building or structure and the land
appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the person designated by the Township
of Millburn pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5)
or any officer of the Township of Millburn qualified to carry out the
responsibilities set forth in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) and
designated by the Mayor and Council of Millburn Township.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — Shall mean an entity organized
or authorized to do business under the New Jersey statutes, which shall
have as one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential
or nonresidential buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the
restoration of abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of
urban neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified
by virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior
activities set forth in P.L. 2003, c. 10 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) to carry out
the rehabilitation of vacant buildings in urban area.
§ 21-2.3. Abandoned Property; Criteria. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
a. Except as provided in Section 6 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-83),
any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six (6)
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria
may be deemed to be abandoned property upon a determination by the
public officer that:
1. The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
2. Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six (6) months as of
the date of a determination by the public officer pursuant to this
section;
3. At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of the Revised Statutes as of the date of a determination by the
public officer pursuant to this section; or
4. The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with Section 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-82).
§ 21-2.2 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.3
AO:404
§ 21-2.4. Nuisance Property; Criteria. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
§ 21-2.5. Property Deemed Not Abandoned; Criteria; Certification of
Abandonment Provided Upon Request. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
b. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et al.) so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of
the building was previously legally occupied as residential space and
none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at least six
(6) months at the time of the determination of abandonment by the
public officer and the property meets the criteria of either paragraph a1
or a4 of this subsection.
a. A property may be determined to be a nuisance if:
1. The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3);
2. The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the
risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
3. The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable
and necessary measures to secure the property; or the Township of
Millburn has secured the property in order to prevent such hazards
after the owner has failed to do so;
4. The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds
have created potential health and safety hazards and the owner has
failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remove the
hazards; or
5. The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of
the residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the
owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to
remedy the conditions.
b. A public officer who determines a property to be a nuisance pursuant to
paragraphs a2 through a5 of this subsection shall follow the notification
procedures set forth in P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.).
a. If an entity other than the Township of Millburn has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate on a property
that has not been legally occupied for a period of six (6) months, that
property shall not be placed on the abandoned property list pursuant to
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) if: 1) the owner of the
certificate has continued to pay all Township of Millburn taxes and liens
on the property in the tax year when due; and 2) the owner of the
§ 21-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.5
AO:405
§ 21-2.6. Transfer of Possession and Control of Abandoned Property.
[Ord. No. 2466-16]
certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six
(6) months after the property is eligible for foreclosure pursuant to
either Subsection a or Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate,
and diligently pursues foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion
thereafter.
b. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two (2) of the additional
criteria set forth in Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
c. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
d. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection B of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the
Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of abandoned
according to the criteria set forth in Sections 4 and 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and N.J.S.A. 55:19-82).
a. A summary action or otherwise to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Township of
Millburn may be brought by the Township of Millburn in the Superior
Court in the County in which the property is situated. If the court shall
find that the property is abandoned pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 2003,
c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81) and the owner or party in interest has failed to
submit and initiate a rehabilitation plan, then the court may authorize
the Township of Millburn to take possession and control of the property
and develop a rehabilitation plan.
b. The Township of Millburn granted possession and control may
commence and maintain those further proceedings for the
conservation, protection or disposal of the property or any part thereof
that are required to rehabilitate the property, necessary to recoup the
cost and expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the court for reinstatement of control of
the property as provided in Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-92).
c. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit plans for
rehabilitation to the Township of Millburn, obtain appropriate
construction permits for rehabilitation or, in the alternative, submit
formal applications for funding the cost of rehabilitation to local, State
or Federal agencies providing such funding within that six-month
§ 21-2.5 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.6
AO:406
§ 21-2.7. Filing of Complaint; Required Information. [Ord. No.
2466-16]
A complaint filed pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-84) shall include:
§ 21-2.8. Filing of Complaint; Notice Requirements; Entry to
Secure, Stabilize, Repair or Inspect the Property. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
period shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the owner has failed
to take any action to further the rehabilitation of the property.
a. Documentation that the property is on the municipal abandoned
property list or a certification by the public officer that the property is
abandoned; and
b. A statement by an individual holding appropriate professional
qualifications that there are sound reasons that the building should be
rehabilitated rather than demolished based upon the physical, aesthetic
or historical character of the building or the relationship of the building
to other buildings and lands within its immediate vicinity.
a. Within 10 days of filing a complaint pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.), the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis pendens
with the County Recording Officer of the County within which the
building is located.
b. At least 30 days before filing the complaint, the Township of Millburn
shall serve a notice of intention to take possession of an abandoned
building. The notice shall inform the owner and interested parties that
the property has not been legally occupied for six (6) months and of
those criteria that led to a determination of abandonment pursuant to
Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
1. The notice shall provide that unless the owner or a party in interest
prepares and submits a rehabilitation plan to the appropriate
Township of Millburn officials, the Township of Millburn will seek to
gain possession of the building to rehabilitate the property and the
associated cost shall be a lien against the property, which may be
satisfied by the sale of the property, unless the owner applies to the
court for reinstatement of control of the property as provided in
Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92).
2. After the complaint is filed, the complaint shall be served on the
parties in interest in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
c. After serving the notice of intent pursuant to paragraph b of this
subsection, the Township of Millburn or its designee may enter upon
that property after written notice to the owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in order to secure, stabilize or repair the property, or
in order to inspect the property for purposes of preparing the plan to be
§ 21-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.8
AO:407
§ 21-2.9. Property Owner, Defense Against Complaint;
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
submitted to the court pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-89).
a. Any owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to Section 7
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84) by submitting a plan for the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property which is the subject of the
complaint and by posting a bond equal to 125% of the amount
determined by the public officer or the court to be the projected cost of
rehabilitation. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a
complaint shall be submitted within 60 days after the complaint has
been filed, unless the court provides the owner with an extension of
time for good cause shown.
b. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall include, but
not be limited to:
1. A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
2. A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
3. A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
4. Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
c. Court Approval.
1. The court shall approve any plan that, in the judgment of the court,
is realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and
reuse of the property which is the subject of the complaint.
2. If the court approves the owner's plan, then it may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the
owner fails to carry out any step in the approved plan, then the
Township of Millburn may apply to the court to have the owner's
bond forfeited, possession of the building transferred to the
Township of Millburn to complete the rehabilitation plan and
authorization to use the bond proceeds for rehabilitation of the
property.
§ 21-2.8 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.9
AO:408
§ 21-2.10. Owner Unsuccessful in Defending Against Complaint;
Mortgage or Lienholders to Be Designated in Possession of
Property. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
§ 21-2.11. Township of Millburn to Be Designated in Possession of
Property; Submission of Plan to Court. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
3. The owner shall provide quarterly reports to the Township of
Millburn on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation and
reuse of the property. The owner shall provide those reports to the
court on its activities that the court determines are necessary.
d. The court may reject a plan and bond if it finds that the plan does not
represent a realistic and expeditious means of ensuring the
rehabilitation of the property or that the owner or his representatives
or agents, or both, lack the qualifications, background or other criteria
necessary to ensure that the plan will be carried out successfully.
a. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84), the
mortgage holder or lienholder may seek to be designated in possession
of the property by submitting a plan and posting a bond meeting the
same conditions as set forth in Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-87). The plan shall be submitted within 60 days after the court
has rejected the owner's plan, unless the court provides the mortgage
holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause shown. If
the court approves any such mortgage holder's or lienholder's plan, it
shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation and reuse and may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the party's compliance.
1. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall
provide quarterly reports to the court and the Township of Millburn
on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the
property.
2. If the mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material
step in the approved plan, then the public officer shall notify the
court, which may order the bond forfeit, grant the Township of
Millburn possession of the property, and authorize the Township of
Millburn to use the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation of the
property.
b. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property pursuant to paragraph a of this subsection, including court
costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be added to the unpaid
balance due that mortgage holder or lienholder, with interest calculated
at the same rate set forth in the note or security agreement or, in the
case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest rate for subsequent
liens.
§ 21-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.11
AO:409
§ 21-2.12. Township of Millburn Exercise of Rights to Further
Rehabilitation and Reuse of Property; Designation of Qualified
Rehabilitation Entity. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
a. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of Section 11
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-88), then the Township of Millburn
shall submit a plan to the court which conforms with the provisions of
Subsection b of Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-87). The
plan shall designate the entity which shall implement the plan, which
may be the Township of Millburn or that entity designated in
accordance with the provisions of Section 13 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-90).
b. The court shall grant the Township of Millburn possession of the
property if it finds that:
1. The proposed rehabilitation and reuse of the property is
appropriate and beneficial;
2. The Township of Millburn is qualified to undertake the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property; and
3. The plan submitted by the Township of Millburn represents a
realistic and timely plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property.
c. The Township of Millburn shall take all steps necessary and appropriate
to further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with
the plan submitted to the court. In making its findings pursuant to this
section, the court may consult with qualified parties, including the
Department of Community Affairs, and, upon request by a party in
interest, may hold a hearing on the plan.
d. Where either a redevelopment plan pursuant to P.L. 1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.) or a neighborhood revitalization plan pursuant to
P.L. 2001, c. 415 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-490 et seq.) has been adopted or
approved by the Department of Community Affairs, as appropriate,
encompassing the property which is the subject of a complaint, the
court shall make a further finding that the proposed rehabilitation and
reuse of the property are not inconsistent with any provision of either
plan.
a. The Township of Millburn may exercise its rights under P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) directly, or may designate a qualified
rehabilitation entity to act as its designee for the purpose of exercising
the Township's rights where that designation will further the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with Township's
plans and objectives. This designation shall be made by resolution of
the Mayor and the Council of the Township of Millburn The Governing
Body or Mayor, as the case may be, may delegate this authority to the
public officer.
§ 21-2.11 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.12
AO:410
§ 21-2.13. Township Deemed Possessor of Property; Borrowing of
Funds; Reporting and Filing Requirements. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
b. Regardless of whether the Township of Millburn exercises its rights
directly or designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to this
section, while in possession of a property pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.), the Township of Millburn shall maintain,
safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property. Notwithstanding
the Township's possession of the property, nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) shall be deemed to relieve the owner of the
property of any civil or criminal liability or any duty imposed by reason
of acts or omissions of the owner.
a. If the Township of Millburn has been granted possession of a property
pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-89), that
Township shall be deemed to have an ownership interest in the property
for the purpose of filing plans with public agencies and boards, seeking
and obtaining construction permits and other approvals, and
submitting applications for financing or other assistance to public or
private entities.
1. For the purposes of any State program of grants or loans, including
but not limited to programs of the Department of Community
Affairs and the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency,
possession of a property under this section shall be considered
legal control of the property.
2. Notwithstanding the granting of possession to the Township of
Millburn, nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) shall
be deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any obligation
the owner or any other person may have for the payment of taxes or
other Township of Millburn liens and charges, or mortgages or
liens to any party, whether those taxes, charges or liens are
incurred before or after the granting of possession.
3. The granting of possession shall not suspend any obligation the
owner may have as of the date of the granting of possession for
payment of any operating or maintenance expense associated with
the property, whether or not billed at the time of the granting of
possession.
b. The court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Township of
Millburn to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security
interests with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than
municipal liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the court shall find
that: 1) the Township of Millburn sought to obtain the necessary
financing from the senior lienholder, which declined to provide such
financing on reasonable terms; 2) the Township of Millburn sought to
obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior lienholder, which
refused to provide such subordination; and 3) lien priority is necessary
in order to induce another lender to provide financing on reasonable
§ 21-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.13
AO:411
§ 21-2.14. Petition for Reinstatement of Control and Possession by
Owner. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
terms. No lien authorized by the court shall take effect unless recorded
in the office of the Clerk of the County in which the property is located.
For the purposes of this section, the cost of rehabilitation shall include
reasonable no construction costs such as architectural fees or
construction permit fees customarily included in the financing of the
rehabilitation of residential property.
c. Where the Township of Millburn has been granted possession by the
court in the name of the Township, the Township of Millburn may seek
the approval of the court to assign its rights to another entity, which
approval shall be granted by the court when it finds that: 1) the entity to
which the Township's rights will be assigned is a qualified rehabilitation
entity; and 2) the assignment will further the purposes of this section.
d. Where the Township of Millburn has designated a qualified
rehabilitation entity to act on its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation
entity shall provide quarterly reports to the Township of Millburn on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
The Township of Millburn or qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case
may be, shall provide such reports to the court as the court determines
to be necessary. If the court finds that the Township of Millburn or its
designee have failed to take diligent action toward rehabilitation of the
property within one year from the grant of possession, then the court
may request the Township of Millburn to designate another qualified
rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights, or if the Township of Millburn
fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession and return the
property to its owner.
e. The Township of Millburn shall file a notice of completion with the
court, and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage
holder or lienholder, at such time as the Township of Millburn has
determined that no more than six (6) months remain to the anticipated
date on which rehabilitation will be complete. This notice shall include
an affidavit of the public officer attesting that rehabilitation can
realistically be anticipated to be complete within that time period and a
statement setting forth such actions as it plans to undertake to ensure
that reuse of the property takes place consistent with the plan.
a. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the grant of
possession, but no later than 30 days after the Township of Millburn has
filed a notice of completion with the court or, in the event the notice of
completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of possession,
within 30 days after the Township of Millburn has filed notice.
b. The court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the Township of Millburn, or affect any of the terms
§ 21-2.13 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.14
AO:412
§ 21-2.15. Contents of Petition; Filing and Payment Requirements.
[Ord. No. 2466-16]
Any petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of the
property filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92)
shall:
§ 21-2.16. Obligations of Owner Prior to Grant of Petition. [Ord. No.
2466-16]
or conditions under which the Township of Millburn has applied for or
received financing for the rehabilitation of the property.
a. Include a plan for completion of the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property consistent with the plan previously approved by the court;
b. Provide legally binding assurances that the owner will comply with all
conditions of any grant or loan secured by the Township of Millburn or
repay those grants or loans in full, at the discretion of the maker of the
loan or grant; and
c. Be accompanied by payment equal to the sum of:
1. All Township liens outstanding on the property;
2. All costs incurred by the Township of Millburn in bringing action
with respect to the property;
3. Any costs incurred by the Township of Millburn not covered by
grants or loans to be assumed or repaid pursuant to this section;
and
4. Any costs remaining to complete rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, as determined by the public officer, which payment shall
be placed in escrow with the Clerk of the Court pending disposition
of the petition.
a. Prior to the granting of a petition on the part of the owner by the court
pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), the
owner may be required to post a bond or other security in an amount
determined by the court, after consultation with the public officer, as
likely to ensure that the owner will continue to maintain the property in
sound condition. That bond or other security shall be made available to
the Township of Millburn to make any repair on the property in the
event of a code violation which is not corrected in timely fashion by the
owner. The bond or other security may be forfeit in full in the event that
the owner fails to comply with any requirement imposed as a condition
of the reinstatement petition filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c.
210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92).
b. The owner may seek approval of the court to be relieved of this
requirement after five (5) years, which shall be granted if the court
§ 21-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.16
AO:413
§ 21-2.17. Failure of Owner to Petition for Reinstatement of Control
and Possession of Property; Granting of Title to the Township;
Authority to Sell. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and possession
of the property within 30 days after the entity in possession has filed a
notice of completion or in any event within two (2) years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that may
be set by the court in granting a reinstatement petition filed pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), upon petition from the
entity in possession, the court may grant the Township of Millburn title
or authorize the Township of Millburn to sell the property, subject to the
provisions of Section 19 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-96).
§ 21-2.18. Procedure of Township Seeking to Gain Title to Property;
Authorization to Sell; Proceeds. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
finds that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during
that period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety
of the tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has
remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion.
a. Where the Township of Millburn seeks to gain title to the property, it
shall purchase the property for fair market value on such terms as the
court shall approve and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with
the court.
1. The court may authorize the Township of Millburn to sell the
building free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which
event all such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred
to the proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to
resale in accordance with the provisions of this section, except that
municipal liens shall be paid at settlement.
2. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be distributed as
set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-97).
b. The Township of Millburn may seek approval of the court to sell the
property to a third party when the court finds that such conveyance will
further the effective and timely rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
c. Upon approval by the court, the Township of Millburn shall sell the
property on such terms and at such price as the court shall approve,
and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the court. The court
shall order a distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs
in the order of priority set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-97).
§ 21-2.16 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.19
AO:414
§ 21-2.19. Distribution of Proceeds. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
The proceeds paid pursuant to Subsection c of Section 19 of P.L. 2003, c.
210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-96) shall be distributed in the following order of priority:
§ 21-2.20. Public Officer; Authority to Place Lien on Property;
Remedies. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
§ 21-2.21. Court's Denial of Rights and Remedies to Lienholders
and Mortgage Holders. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et al.), a court may in its discretion deny a lienholder or mortgage
holder any or all rights or remedies afforded lienholders and mortgage
a. The costs and expenses of sale;
b. Other governmental liens;
c. Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or indebtedness
incurred by the Township of Millburn and granted priority lien status
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 21 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-98);
d. A reasonable development fee to the Township of Millburn consistent
with the standards for development fees established for rehabilitation
programs by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or the
New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency;
e. Other valid liens and security interests, in accordance with their
priority; and
f. The owner.
a. The public officer, with the approval of the court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the Township of Millburn in
connection with a proceeding under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78
et al.) incurred prior to the grant by the court of an order of possession
under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.), which may include
costs incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can
be rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a Township lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 with the
rights and status of a Township lien pursuant thereto.
b. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
Section 24 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-101), the remedies
available under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) shall be
available to the Township of Millburn with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the Township of Millburn has established an
abandoned property list as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and whether or not the property has been included
on any such list.
§ 21-2.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.21
AO:415
holders under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.), if the court finds
that the owner of a property subject to any of the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) owns or controls more than a 50 percent
interest in, or effective control of, the lienholder or mortgage holder or that
the familial or business relationship between the lienholder or mortgage
holder and the owner precludes a separate interest on the part of the
lienholder or mortgage holder.
§ 21-2.22. Recourse of Township Against Individuals or
Corporations. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
With respect to any lien placed against any real property pursuant to the
provisions of Section 1 or Section 3 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3
or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5) or Section 1 of P.L. 1989, c. 91 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3a)
or any receiver's lien pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 295 (N.J.S.A. 2A:42-114 et
al.), the Township of Millburn shall have recourse with respect to the lien
against any asset of the owner of the property, if an individual; against
any asset of any partner, if a partnership; and against any asset of any
owner of a ten-percent interest or greater, if the owner is any other business
organization or entity recognized pursuant to law.
§ 21-2.23. Properties Eligible for Tax Sales; Township Requirements
of Municipalities; Notice. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
The Township of Millburn may hold special tax sales with respect to those
properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are also
on an abandoned property list established by the Township of Millburn
pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). If the Township
of Millburn elects to hold a special tax sale, it shall conduct that sale subject
to the following provisions:
a. The Township of Millburn shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on
properties at the sale, which may include, but shall not be limited to:
documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse
the property consistent with Township plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property consistent with Township plans and regulations; commitments
by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax lien by a date
certain; and such other criteria as the Township of Millburn may
determine are necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold will be
rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the
public interest;
b. The Township of Millburn may establish minimum bid requirements for
a special tax sale that may be less than the full amount of the taxes,
interest and penalties due, the amount of such minimum bid to be at the
sole discretion of the Township of Millburn, in order to ensure that the
properties to be sold will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a
manner consistent with the public interest;
§ 21-2.21 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.23
AO:416
§ 21-2.24. Eminent Domain Proceedings; Establishment of Fair
Market Value. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
With respect to any eminent domain proceeding carried out under Section
37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), the fair market value of the
property shall be established on the basis of an analysis which determines
independently:
c. The Township of Millburn may combine properties into bid packages,
and require that bidders place a single bid on each package, and reject
any and all bids on individual properties that have been included in bid
packages;
d. The Township of Millburn may sell properties subject to provisions that,
if the purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been set
forth as a condition of sale pursuant to paragraph a of this subsection or
misrepresents any material qualification that has been established as a
condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto, then the properties and
any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser shall revert to the
Township of Millburn, and any amount paid by the purchaser to the
Township of Millburn at the special tax sale shall be forfeit to the City;
e. In the event there are two (2) or more qualified bidders for any property
or bid package in a special tax sale, the Township of Millburn may
designate the unsuccessful but qualified bidder whose bid was closest
to the successful bid as an eligible purchaser;
f. In the event that the purchaser of that property or bid package fails to
meet any of the conditions of sale established by the Township of
Millburn pursuant to this section, and their interest in the property or
properties reverts to the Township of Millburn, the Township of
Millburn may subsequently designate the entity previously designated
as an eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties, and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis
of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and
conditions of the special tax sale.
g. The Township of Millburn shall provide notice of a special tax sale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms
of sale established by the Township of Millburn pursuant to paragraphs
b, c or d of this subsection. Nothing shall prohibit the Township of
Millburn from holding a special tax sale on the same day as a standard
or accelerated tax sale.
a. The cost to rehabilitate and reuse the property for such purpose as is
appropriate under existing planning and zoning regulations governing
its reuse or to demolish the existing property and construct a new
building on the site, including all costs ancillary to rehabilitation such
as, but not limited to, marketing and legal costs;
§ 21-2.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.24
AO:417
§ 21-2.25. Removal of Property from Abandoned Property List. [Ord.
No. 2466-16]
If a property, which an entity other than the Township of Millburn has
purchased or taken assignment from the Township of Millburn of a tax sale
certificate, is placed on the abandoned property list, the property shall be
removed from the list if the owner of the certificate pays all Township taxes
and liens due on the property within 30 days after the property is placed on
the list; provided, however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate
foreclosure proceedings within six (6) months after the property was first
placed on the list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned property
list.
§ 21-2.26. Request for Property to Be Placed on Abandoned
Property List. [Ord. No. 2466-16]
b. The realistic market value of the reused property after rehabilitation or
new construction, taking into account the market conditions particular
to the neighborhood or subarea of the Township of Millburn in which
the property is located; and
c. The extent to which the cost exceeds or does not exceed the market
value after rehabilitation, or demolition and new construction, and the
extent to which any "as is" value of the property prior to rehabilitation
can be added to the cost of rehabilitation or demolition and new
construction without the resulting combined cost exceeding the market
value as separately determined. If the appraisal finds that the cost of
rehabilitation or demolition and new construction, as appropriate,
exceeds the realistic market value after rehabilitation or demolition and
new construction, there shall be a rebuttable presumption in all
proceedings under this subsection that the fair market value of the
abandoned property is zero, and that no compensation is due the owner.
a. Any interested party may submit in writing a request to the public
officer that a property be included on the abandoned property list
prepared pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55),
specifying the street address and block and lot number of the property
to be included and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30 days of
receipt of any such request, the public officer shall provide a written
response to the party, either indicating that the property will be added
to the list of abandoned properties or, if not, the reasons for not adding
the property to the list. For the purposes of this subsection, "interested
party" shall include any resident of the Township of Millburn, any owner
or operator of a business within the Township of Millburn, or any
organization representing the interests of residents or engaged in
furthering the revitalization and improvement of the neighborhood in
which the property is located.
b. Any interested party may participate in any redetermination hearing
held by the public officer pursuant to Subsection e of Section 36 of P.L.
§ 21-2.24 MILLBURN CODE § 21-2.26
AO:418
Dispostion List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2274-06 9/5/06 Establish § 525.3 Stormwater Control
2276-06 10/18/06 Amend § 516.11e Concerning Location of
Parking and Loading Areas
2278-06 10/17/06 Amend § 410-6d Concerning Technical
Review Fees
2286-07 5/1/07 Amend § 606.2e Residential R-3, R-4, R-5
and R-6
2287-07 5/1/07 Amend Article 7 Flood Damage
Prevention in entirety
2300-07 10/23/07 Adopt Conservation—Educational/
Cultural CE Zone § 606.12
2302-07 10/23/07 Delete §§ 516.9, 516.10, 516.11; add
§ 607 Off-Street Parking and Loading
2305-07 12/4/07 Amend Definitions § 301.12 Commercial
Off Premises Outdoor Advertising Signs,
Amend § 526.7 regarding Billboards,
Amend Conditional Uses § 606.9 in CMO
Zone
2311-08 3/18/08 Replace Industrial I-1 Zone with
Commercial/Medical Office Zone CMO
§ 606.9
1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). Upon written request by any interested
party, the public officer shall provide the party with at least 20 days'
notice of any such hearing. The party shall provide the public officer
with notice at least 10 days before the hearing of its intention to
participate and the nature of the testimony or other information that is
proposes to submit at the hearing.
§ 21-2.26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:419
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2312-08 4-1-08 Political contributions from developers
engaged in redevelopment activities
prohibited, 2-48B
19
2313-08 5/20/08 Amend §§ 606.2e and 606.3e Area and
Setback Maximums in Residential Zones
2314-08 5/6/08 Amend Definitions § 301.44 PODS,
Amend § 606.2 Accessory Uses in
Residential Zones
2318-08 5/20/08 Amend § 403 Appeal
2325-08 8/19/08 Readopt Ordinance 2300-07 to Amend
Development Regulations and Zones
Conservation-Educational/Cultural CE
§ 606.12
2326-08 8/19/08 Readopt Ordinance 2311-08 to Amend
Development Regulations and Zones
Commercial/Medical Office CMO § 606.9
2332-09 4/21/09 Amend Article 3, § 300 Definitions, in
entirety
2333-09 3/17/09 Amend Notice § 424
2338-09 5/19/09 Amend § 606.6.1 Area and Setback
Maximums in B-3 Zone
2344-09 10/20/09 Amend § 515 Nonconforming Structures
2351-10 3/16/10 Add § 608 Protection of Steep Slope
Areas
2358-10 6/23/10 Amend § 607.2 Parking Requirements for
Retail Stores and Shopping Centers
2359-10 8/17/10 Add § 531 Sustainable Building and
Design Standards
2369-11 2-1-11 Special Improvement District, Special 16
2370-11 3-1-11 Development Regulations—Accessory
uses in the R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6
Districts, 606
16
2371-11 3-1-11 Licensing—Commercial and movie
filming, 4-41
16
2372-11 5-3-11 Sump pumps and pipe drains discharge
control, 10-5; discharge locations, 16-2d
16
2373-11 5-3-11 Lease agreement, Special 16
2374-11 5-3-11 Development Regulations—Riparian
Zones, 706
16
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § DL-1
AO:420
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2375-11 Bond, Special 16
2376-11 Capital Ordinance, Special 16
2377-11 6-21-11 Development Regulations—Conditional
uses in the B-3 District, 606.6.1
16
2378-11 Vacate property, Special 16
2379-11 7-19-11 Sewer connection fees, 9-1.6, 9-1.7 16
2380-11 Tabled 16
2381-11 Vacate property, Special 16
2382-11 10-25-11 Development Regulations—Readopt
Ordinance No. 2377-11 Conditional Uses
in the B-3 Zone District, 606.6.1
16
2383-11 Authorize easement, Special 16
2384-11 12-6-11 Indemnification of employees, 2-46.3,
2-46.5, 2-46.6, 2-46.7, 2-46.8
16
2385-11 Bond, Special 16
2386-11 12-6-11 Capital Ordinance, Special 16
2387-12 2-21-12 Bond, Special 17
2388-12 2-21-12 Stop intersections, 7-20 17
2389-12 3-6-12 Grant of easement, Special 17
2390-12 Not adopted 17
2391-12 6-5-12 Acquisition, Special 17
2392-12 8-24-12 CAP Ordinance, Special 17
2393-12 8-24-12 Bond, Special 17
2394-12 9-11-12 Zoning-Dumpsters/refuse containers,
525.1.1
17
2395-12 9-11-12 Zoning-Retrofitting of Existing Private
Storm Drain inlets, 525.1.2
17
2396-12 9-24-12 Through streets, 7-19; stop intersections,
7-20
17
2397-12 10-23-12 Haykell easement, Special 17
2398-12 11-20-12 Parking time limited, 7-11.1; parking
prohibited in fire lanes, 7-45
17
2399-12 12-18-12 Capital Ordinance, Special 17
2400-13 2-5-13 Recreation fees, 8-11 18
2401-13 3-5-13 Sewer easement agreement, Special 18
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:421
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2402-13 4-2-13 Parking areas—Municipal or Board of
Education property, 7-35.4
18
2403-13 4-2-13 Time limit parking, 7-11.1; parking
prohibited certain hours on certain
streets, 7-14
18
2404-13 4-16-13 Environmentally conscious grounds and
maintenance policy, 18-1
18
2405-13 6-18-13 Capital improvements, Special 18
2406-13 6-18-13 Capital improvements, Special 18
2407-13 6-18-13 Bond, Special 18
2408-13 6-18-13 Lane use reservations, 7-27 18
2409-13 7-16-13 Bond, Special 18
2410-13 8-20-13 Development Regulations—Advertising
signs, 606.9; parking, 607.3
18
2411-13 11-12-13 Acquisition of property, Special 18
2412-13 11-12-13 Execution of easement agreement,
Special
18
2413-13 11-12-13 Parking prohibited in fire lanes, 7-45 18
2414-13 12-17-13 Off-street parking lots; permit
parking—fees, 7-35
18
2415-13 12-17-13 Development Regulations—flood damage
prevention, 704.2, 704.3, 704.3.2, 704.4.1
18
2416-13 12-17-13 Development Regulations—Emergency
generators, 501.6
18
2417-13 12-17-13 Development Regulations—conditional
uses in the Residential R-3, R-4, R-5 and
R-6 Districts, 606.2d; minimum parking
requirements, 607.2
18
2418-14 4-1-14 CAP Bank, Special 19
2419-14 4-1-14 Bond, Special 19
2420-14 5-6-14 Mobile ice cream vendors-licensing, 4-10 19
2421-14 5-20-14 Acquisition of conservation easement and
deed restriction-Far Brook School,
Special
19
2422-14 5-20-14 Fees for copies of public records, 2-61.1,
2-61.2
19
2423-14 5-20-14 Parking time limited, 7-11.1 19
2424-14 5-20-14 House numbering, 15-5 19
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § DL-1
AO:422
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2425-14 6-17-14 Appropriation, Special 19
2426-14 6-17-14 Bond, Special 19
2427-14 6-17-14 Uniform Fire Code fees, 13-1.3 19
2428-14 6-3-14 Salary, Special 19
2429-14 10-7-14 Smoking prohibited on public property,
3-29
19
2430-14 11-12-14 Litter on private and public property,
10-1.2
19
2431-14 11-12-14 Streets and sidewalks-excavation, permit
required, 15-1.1
19
2432-14 11-12-14 Lease agreement, Special 19
2433-14 12-2-14 Meter parking, 7-11.2; types of lots,
7-35.7; permits, issuance, schedule of
fees, 7-35.13
19
2434-14 12-16-14 Development Regulations-steep slopes,
608; repeal § 606.2e(4), lots with slopes
in excess of 15%
19
2435-14 12-16-14 Development Regulations-withholding of
demolition permit, § 423
19
2436-14 12-2-14 Preservation of trees, permit procedure,
11-2.2
19
2437-15 2-17-15 Amends Development Regulations and
Zoning-606.8 Office Research OR-1,
OR-2, OR-3
20
2438-15 2-17-15 Parking prohibited certain hours, 7-14 20
2439-15 4-21-15 Amends Ch. 17, Grading, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control
20
2440-15 4-21-15 Lease agreement with Millburn-Short
Hills Historic Society, Special
20
2441-15 5-5-15 Lease agreement with Cora Hartshorn
Aboretum and Bird Sanctuary
20
2442-15 6-2-15 CAP Bank, Special 20
2443-15 7-14-15 Deletes Ch. 11, Preservation of Trees and
Ch. 11A, Protection of Township Trees;
creates new Ch. 11, Tree Preservation
20
2444-15 9-1-15 Bond, Special 20
2445-15 9-1-15 Appropriation 20
2446-15 10-6-15 Capital, Special 20
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:423
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2447-15 10-29-15 Grant of easement, Special 20
2448-15 12-1-15 Bond, Special 20
2449-15 12-15-15 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations; adds
3-30, Fireworks
20
2450-15 12-15-15 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-11, parking time
limited; 7-13, parking prohibited all times
20
2451-15 12-15-15 Amends Ch. 8, Parks and Recreational
Areas; 8-11, recreation fees
20
2452-16 2-16-16 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-19 Through
Streets; 7-20 Stop Intersections
21
2453-16 3-1-16 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-1
Membership of Township Committee
21
2454-16 3-15-16 Amends Ch. 2 Administration, 2-16.2,
2-16.3 Police Department
21
2455-16 3-15-16 Bond, Special 21
2456-16 5-17-16 CAP Bank, Special 21
2457-16 4-19-16 Lease Agreement, Open Air Café, Special 21
2458-16 5-17-16 Amends Ch. V Animal Control; 5-5.2
Licensing Requirements, Cats; 5-6.1
License and Tag Fees, Dogs
21
2459-16 5-17-16 Amends Ch. BH2 Administration; BH2-3
Board of Health Fees; amends BH4 Retail
Food Establishments; BH4-3 Plan Review
21
2460-16 6-21-16 Bond, Special 21
2461-16 6-21-16 Capital, Special 21
2462-16 8-16-16 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-19, Through
Streets; Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-20, Stop
Intersections
21
2463-16 8-16-16 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-35.19,
Regulations as to Operation of Vehicles
on Lots
21
2464-16 8-16-16 CAP Improvements, Special 21
2465-16 9-20-16 CAP Ordinance, Special 21
2466-16 11-14-16 Creates Ch. 21 Abandoned Properties;
21-1 Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act; 21-2 Rehabilitation of Abandoned
Properties
21
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § DL-1
AO:424
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2467-16 11-14-16 Amends Development and Zoning
Regulations; 410 Fees, 410.5, 410.6,
410.7, 410.8, 410.9, 410.10, 410.11, add
425 Checklists, 425.1 Checklist A, 425.2
Checklist B, 425.3 Checklist C
21
2468-16 11-14-16 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-22 Turn
Prohibitions
21
2469-16 11-14-16 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.13 Permits-
Issuance,
7-35.16 Term of Permit
21
2470-16 12-20-16 Amends Development and Zoning
Regulations; amends Article 8, Historic
Preservation in entirety
21
2471-16 12-20-16 Amends Development and Zoning
Regulations; delete 501, 502, 503, 504,
505, 507, 510, 513, 515, 526, 529, 530,
amends 609 Supplemental Regulations;
606.7 Central Business B-4 District,
Permitted Uses; 607.2 Minimum Parking
Requirements; adds 607.4 Waiver of
Parking Requirements in the B-4 District;
607.5 Marking of Below Building/Ground
Level Parking
21
2472-16 12-20-16 Bond, Special 21
2473-16 12-20-16 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-22 Turn
Prohibitions
21
2474-17 3-7-17 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing; 4-39.11
Storage and Garage Facilities; amends
4-39.14 Towing and Storage Charges
22
2475-17 Not Adopted 22
2476-17 3-21-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-13 Parking
Prohibited at All Times On Certain
Streets
22
2477-17 5-2-17 CAP Bank, Special 22
2478-17 5-16-17 Creates new street named Town Hall
Plaza, Special
22
2479-17 5-16-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-2.2
Appointment and Qualifications, Business
Administrator
22
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:425
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2480-17 6-6-17 Amends Development Regulations and
Zoning; Article 5, adds 507 Drainage,
507.1—507.8; deletes 517 Principal Use
22
2481-17 6-20-17 Bond, Special 22
2482-17 6-20-17 Capital, Special 22
2483-17 Not Adopted 22
2484-17 8-15-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-29 Speed Limits 22
2485-17 8-15-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.2 Metered
Time Limit Parking; amends 7-18 One-
Way Streets; amends 7-20 Stop
Intersections; amends 7-50.3
Handicapped Parking On-Street
22
2486-17 9-5-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; renames 7-52 to
Parking and Traffic on Millburn
Education Properties; 7-52.1 Purpose;
7-52.2 Definitions; amends 7-52.5 No Left
Turns
22
2487-17 8-15-17 Names a street Cora Way, Special 22
2488-17 10-3-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-20 Stop
Intersections
22
2489-17 10-17-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.1 Time Limit
Parking; 7-13 Parking Prohibited at All
Times on Certain Streets; 7-14 Parking
Prohibited Certain Hours on Certain
Streets
22
2490-17 11-13-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-45 Parking
Prohibited in Fire Lanes
22
2491-17 12-19-17 Amends Development Regulations and
Zoning; Article 6 Zoning Provisions,
606.3 Residential R-7
22
2492-17 12-19-17 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.13 Permits-
Issuance Schedule of Fees-Commuter
Permit
22
2492-18 3-6-18 Renames Canoe Brook Road to Fineran
Way, Special
23
2493-18 3-6-18 Vacation of Easement, Special 23
2494-18 3-16-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-20 Stop
Intersections
23
2495-18 3-20-18 Bond, Special 23
2496-18 3-20-18 Salary, Special 23
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § DL-1
AO:426
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2497-18 3-20-18 Bond, Special 23
2498-18 4-17-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-24 Loading Zone 23
2499-18 4-17-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.1 Time Limit
Parking; 7-13 Parking Prohibited at All
Times on Certain Streets, 7-14 Parking
Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets
23
2500-18 5-15-18 Amends Development Regulations and
Zoning; renames 411 to Installation of
Improvements; Required Guarantees
23
2501-18 5-15-18 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; adds 2-4BC
Establishes Government Energy
Aggregation Program, 2-48C.1 —
2-48C.5
23
2502-18 6-5-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.1 Time Limit
Parking
23
2503-18 6-19-18 Bond, Special 23
2504-18 6-19-18 Capital Ordinance, Special 23
2505-18 7-17-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.4 Parking
Area; Manner of Parking
2506-18 7-17-18 Amends Ch. BH4 Retail Food
Establishments; adds BH4-2.10
Temporary Food License Fee for Food
Vendors at Temporary Events
23
2507-18 8-14-18 Amends Ch. 9Building and Housing;
9-1.15 Inspection of Construction by
Enforcing Agency; Right of Entry; Stop
Construction Orders; amends 9-1.16
Certificates of Occupancy
23
2508-18 8-14-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.1 Time Limit
Parking; amends 7-11.2 Metered Time
Limit Parking; adds
7-11.3 On Street Permit Parking
23
2509-18 9-17-18 Amends Ch. 5 Animal Control; adds 5-10
Keeping of Chickens, Permit Required
23
2510-18 8-14-18 Amends Development Regulations;
Article 6 Zoning Provisions, 606.5
Regional Business B-1; 607.2 Minimum
Parking Requirements
23
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:427
Ord.
No. Date Title Supp. No.
2511-18 10-2-18 Amends Special Improvement District
(Amends Ord. 12-92), Special
23
2512-18 10-2-18 Authorizes Assignment of Open-Air Cafe
Property Lease Agreement Between the
Township and CB Millburn, LLC, to JGIL
Millburn, LLC
23
2513-18 11-20-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-11.1 Time Limit
Parking
23
2514-18 11-20-18 Amends Ch. 8 Parks and Recreational
Areas; 8-2.1 Certain Acts Prohibited;
amends Ch. 13 Fire Prevention; 13-1.3
Amendments (Fees, Etc.)
23
2515-18 12-18-18 Acquisition of Easement, Special 23
2516-18 12-18-18 Acquisition of Easement, Special 23
2517-18 12-18-18 Amends Development Regulations; Art. 6
Zoning, 609.6 Fences and Walls
23
2518-18 12-18-18 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations; 3-8
Construction Activity Mitigation, 3-8.1 —
3-8.7
23
2519-18 12-18-18 Amends Ch. 8 Parks and Recreational
Areas; 8-11 Recreation Fees
23
2520-18 12-18-18 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-1.3,7-11.1,
7-11.2, 7-11.3, 7-13, 7-14, 7-14.2, 7-16,
7-17, 7-23, 7-24, 7-25, 7-35.6, 7-35.7,
7-35.11, 7-35.13, 7-35.20
23
2521-18 12-18-18 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-20 Stop
Intersections
23
2522-18 12-18-18 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing; Adds
4-2 Right-of-Way Permits, 4-2.1 — 4-2.7
23
2523-19 2-5-19 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-29 Speed Limits 23
Ord. No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2524-19 Not Adopted 24
2525-19 Not Adopted 24
2526-19 3-19-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 24
2527-19 3-19-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § DL-1
AO:428
Ord. No. Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2528-19 3-19-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
2529-19 4-16-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 24
2530-19 4-16-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 24
2531-19 5-21-2019 Easement NCM 24
2532-19 6-18-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
2533-19 6-18-2019 Appropriation NCM 24
2534-19 6-18-2019 Bond NCM 24
2535-19 6-18-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 24
2536-19 6-18-2019 Lease NCM 24
2537-19 Not Adopted 24
2538-19 7-16-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 24
2539-19 8-13-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
2540-19 7-30-2019 Bond NCM 24
2541-19 10-2-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
2542-19 9-17-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
2543-19 10-2-2019 Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. DRZ 24
2544-19 11-12-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 24
2545-19 12-3-2019 Building and Housing
Amendment
Ch. 9 24
2546-19 12-3-2019 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 15 24
2547-19 12-3-2019 Environmental
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 18 24
2548-19 12-17-2019 Salaries NCM 24
2549-19 12-17-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 24
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:429
Board of Health
Chapter BH1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
[Editor's Note: The general power to adopt health ordinances is
contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3 et seq. The penalties that may be provided
for a violation of health provisions are contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78. In addition to the health regulations contained
in this chapter, the State Sanitary Code promulgated by the State
Public Health Council is by reason of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9 enforceable in
every municipality in this State.]
§ BH1-1. TITLE. [New]
This Code shall be known as the "Revised General Ordinances of the Board
of Health of the Township of Millburn, 1996" and may be referred to as "the
Revision" or the "Board of Health Code."
§ BH1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1967 San. Code; New]
As used in this Code:
BOARD OF HEALTH, OR BOARD, OR THIS BOARD — Shall be held to mean
the Board of Health of the Township of Millburn, County of Essex, New
Jersey.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Shall be held to include any disease of an
infectious, contagious or pestilential nature and also any other disease
publicly declared by the Board to be dangerous to the public health.
DIRT — Shall be held to mean natural soil, earth and store.
GARBAGE — Shall mean and include every accumulation of animal or
vegetable matter, or both, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation,
storage or vending of meats, fish, birds, fruits, vegetables or other organic
substances whether for private or public consumption.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — Shall be held to mean the Health Department of
the Township of Millburn, County of Essex, New Jersey.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall be held to mean the Health Officer of the
Township of Millburn, County of Essex, New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP, THE TOWNSHIP, THIS TOWNSHIP, THE TOWNSHIP OF
MILLBURN — Shall be held to mean the Township of Millburn, County of
Essex, New Jersey.
PERSON — Shall be held to mean any person, persons, firm or corporation
or association.
PERMIT — Shall be construed to mean the permission in writing of this
Board, issued according to its rules and regulations and Sanitary Code.
§ DL-1 MILLBURN CODE § BH1-2
AO:430
PUBLIC PLACES — Shall mean and include parks and water and open
spaces thereto adjacent, and also public yards, grounds and areas, and all
open spaces between buildings and streets.
STREET — Shall include avenues, sidewalks, gutters and public alleys; and
RUBBISH — Shall mean and include all the loose inorganic matter,
household or commercial waste and dirt-like substance which accumulates
from residences or business places;
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Shall be held to include special rules and
regulations which latter will be from time to time issued and will contain
more detailed provisions than can be herein conveniently set forth.
All words and phrases herein defined shall also include their usual and
natural meanings, as well as those herein especially given.
§ BH1-3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. [1967 San. Code; New]
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ BH1-4. PENALTY.
§ BH1-4.1. Maximum Penalty. [1967 San. Code § 98; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health of the Township or any order of the Board of Health or of
the Health Officer made in pursuance thereof or of existing law, shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than five ($5.00) dollars, nor
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each offense. Complaint shall
be made in the Municipal Court of the Township or before another judicial
officer having authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey. The Court
shall have the power to impose other and additional penalties provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
§ BH1-4.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the Board of Health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ BH1-4.3. Collection of Fees and Penalties. [New]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Township of
Millburn.
§ BH1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-4.4
AO:431
§ BH1-4.4. Imprisonment. [1967 San. Code § 99]
Any person upon whom a penalty shall have been imposed who refuses or
neglects to pay the amount of the judgment, including all costs and charges
incident thereto, may, unless an appeal is granted, be committed to the
county jail for any period not exceeding ninety (90) days; provided further,
that if any such person shall have been convicted within six (6) months of
a violation of the Code and due proof of the same is made, he may become
liable, in addition to the payment of the penalty aforesaid to imprisonment
in the county jail, with or without hard labor, for any number of days not
exceeding one for each dollar of the penalty.
§ BH1-4.5. Costs to Be Added to Penalty. [1967 San. Code § 97]
In proceedings for violations of any provision of this Code, the costs thereof
shall be added to the fine or penalty. The amount of costs shall be the same
as those allowed in similar proceedings in police or similar courts.
Chapter BH2
ADMINISTRATION
§ BH2-1. ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS. [1967 San.
Code § 15]
The Board of Health shall have the power to adopt such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary concerning any matter which involves
the protection or promotion of health, and all persons concerned shall
comply with the provision thereof.
§ BH2-2. PERSONNEL.
§ BH2-2.1. Health Officer and Other Personnel. [1967 San. Code
§ 16]
The Board of Health may appoint a person qualified by competitive Civil
Service examination to be known as Health Officer of the Township of
Millburn. The Health Officer shall be, subject to the authority of the Board,
its general agent for the enforcement of its ordinances and the sanitary laws
of the State within the Township and shall perform such other appropriate
duties as the Board may direct. The Health Officer shall have and exercise
all of the powers and authority conferred by law upon the Board of Health
which the Board may lawfully delegate.
The Board of Health may also employ physicians, inspectors, nurses, clerks
and any other persons as may be deemed necessary to assist the Health
Officer in the performance of the duties of this office.
§ BH1-4.4 MILLBURN CODE § BH2-2.2
AO:432
§ BH2-2.2. Secretary of the Board of Health; Office Established.
[New]
In accordance with applicable State Statutes, the office of Secretary of the
Board of Health is hereby established. The Secretary of the Board of Health
shall be employed for a period of one (1) year beginning on January 1 and
terminating on December 31 annually, at a salary established in the Board
of Health Salary Ordinance.
§ BH2-2.3. Registrar of Vital Statistics. [1967 San. Code § 16A]
The Board shall appoint a person qualified as provided by law as the
Registrar of Vital Statistics for a term of three (3) years and until a
successor has been appointed and qualified; provided always, however, that
if the Registrar is the Clerk or Secretary of the Board, the term of office
shall be concurrent with the term of office as Clerk or Secretary; further
provided, that any such appointment shall be subject to approval of the
State Department of Health, as required by law; and further provided,
that any and all appointments heretofore made in and for the registration
district of the Township are hereby ratified and confirmed.
The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall have, exercise and perform the rights,
powers and duties provided by law.
§ BH2-3. BOARD OF HEALTH FEES. [1967 San. Code § 20A; Ord.
No. BH:1-95 § 1; Ord. No. 1-04 § 1; BH:Ord. No. 2-04 § 1; Ord. No.
BH:1-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2459-16 § 1]
§ BH2-4. ENFORCEMENT OF CODE.
§ BH2-4.1. Right of Entry of Members of Board or Health
Department; Service of Notices. [1967 San. Code § 14]
The Board of Health, Health Department, and its members, agents or
employees shall have the right of entry into and upon any public or private
building or premises, for the purpose of enforcing or determining whether
the provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations of the Board are
a. Transcripts of Death, Birth, Marriage or Domestic Partnerships. The fee
for a transcript of a death, birth, marriage or domestic partnership
certificate, which the Registrar shall furnish to any applicant therefor,
shall be twenty ($20.00) dollars, other than to such officer or board as
may be entitled by law to receive the same without payment of fee, or
upon payment of a lower fee. The fee shall be five ($5.00) dollars for
each correction of a transcript of a birth, marriage or domestic
partnership certificate or death transcript.
b. Burial Permits. The fee for a burial permit shall be five ($5.00) dollars.
c. Accounting for Fees. All fees shall be accounted for and paid over as
required by law.
§ BH2-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-4.1
AO:433
being complied with or obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry or hinder
or interfere with the Board of Health, Health Department or any of its
members, agents or employees in the performance of their duty. Every
notice or order required to be served by any of the sections of this Code
may be served personally or by mail, addressed to the last known place of
residence, except where otherwise specifically provided.
Chapter BH3
NUISANCES
§ BH3-1. NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
§ BH3-1.1. Defined. [1967 San. Code § 52; BH:Ord. 1/3/80; New]
Any thing, condition or act which is or may become a detriment or menace
to human health and the following specified things, conditions and acts are,
each and all of them, hereby declared to be and are defined as follows:
a. Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any household
wastewater, sewage, garbage, dead animals, tins cans, unused
appliances, furniture and construction materials, offal or excrement;
any decaying fruit, vegetables, fish, meat or bones; any oyster or clam
shells; or any foul, putrid or obnoxious liquid or substance; any manure
or compound (stable manure used as fertilizer and kept as hereinafter
provided, excepted).
b. Allowing or permitting any household wastewater, sewage or other
nauseous or offensive liquid matter of any kind to be cast off or to run
into any pipe, drain, sewer, cesspool or sink which the pipe, drain,
sewer, cesspool or sink empties its contents into or near any brook,
running stream, pond, spring or sunken lot or other ground, public or
private in the Township.
c. Any full, foul, or leaky privy vault or cesspool or other defective or
inadequate receptacle for filth; also any privy vault, cesspool or catch
basin which is beneath any dwelling or other building or is attached to
the foundation wall of any dwelling or other building.
d. Allowing or permitting any night soil, garbage or any offensive or
decomposing solid or liquid matter or substance to leak or ooze or
escape from any cart of wagon or vessel in which the same may be held
or carried.
e. Carrying or conveying through any street any substance which has
been removed from any privy vault or cesspool, unless the same shall be
enclosed in watertight and flyproof receptacles.
f. Any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae exist.
§ BH2-4.1 MILLBURN CODE § BH3-1.1
AO:434
g. Any accumulation of manure or vegetable or animal matter in which fly
larvae exist.
h. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household
purposes which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed that it
may become polluted.
i. Permitting poison ivy, ragweed or other noxious vegetation to be or to
grow upon any private property within two hundred (200) feet from the
street line or from any boundary of any lot.
j. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet, urinal or
other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human
beings.
k. Any imperfect trap, sink or water closet within any house or any other
drainage appliance or fixture within any house from which there shall
arise any foul or obnoxious gas or odor.
l. Whatever is dangerous to human life or to health and whatever renders
food or water unwholesome.
m. Whatever building, or part thereof is not provided with adequate means
of ingress and egress, or is not sufficiently supported, ventilated,
drained, cleaned or lighted.
n. Furnishing or permitting to be used in any railroad station, theatre,
hotel, factory, store, automobile service station, or any other place to
which the public at large is invited, and in or in connection with which
facilities for the washing of the face, hands or other portions of the body
are furnished by the owner or person in possession or control thereof,
of any towel composed of cloth or similar material which may or is
intended to be used, before complete sterilization, by more than one (1)
person.
o. No person owning, keeping, harboring, walking or in charge of, any dog
shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such dog to soil, defile, or defecate
on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway, road,
bypath, play area, park, or place where people congregate or walk, or
upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the private property in the last
instance. When the dog shall defecate on the areas aforesaid it shall not
be considered a violation of this ordinance if, and only if, the person
owning or in charge or control shall immediately remove and dispose of
all feces thus deposited in a sanitary manner.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
§ BH3-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-1.2
AO:435
§ BH3-1.2. Creation, Commission or Maintenance of Nuisances
Prohibited. [1967 San. Code § 53]
No person, firm or corporation shall create, commit, maintain or permit to
be created, committed or maintained any nuisance defined in subsection
BH3-1.1.
§ BH3-1.3. Factories, etc., Dangerous to Life, Detrimental to
Health. [1967 San. Code § 54]
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter erect, start or establish in
this Township any factory or place of business that will or does generate any
unwholesome, offensive or deleterious gas, smoke, deposit or exhalation,
or any business whatsoever that is or may become dangerous to life or
detrimental to health unless the applicant first obtains the written consent
of the Board of Health.
§ BH3-1.4. Burial of Dead Animals. [1967 San. Code § 55]
No dead horse or cow or other animal shall be buried within the limits of the
Township without a permit from the Health Officer designating the place
and conditions of the burial.
§ BH3-1.5. Receptacles for Garbage and Refuse. [1967 San. Code
§ 57]
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any dwelling, market,
restaurant or other building where refuse matter shall accumulate in the
Township, shall provide and keep on the premises suitable receptacles for
receiving and holding such garbage and refuse. A separate receptacle shall
be provided for ashes and rubbish and another for garbage. Ashes and
rubbish shall not be placed or kept in the same receptacle with garbage.
Garbage shall be kept only in watertight and flyproof containers.
§ BH3-1.6. Importing or Storage of Rags, Refuse, etc. [1967 San.
Code § 58]
No rags, bones, scraps or refuse shall be brought into or stored or kept
within the Township, except by permission of the Board, the Board
reserving the right of revocation of such permits at any time.
§ BH3-1.7. Offensive Odors. [1967 San. Code § 59]
No owner, or occupant, as tenants or otherwise, of any lot, house, building,
shed, cellar or other place within the Township shall suffer or permit any
noxious, offensive or unwholesome smell to arise from any lot, house,
building, shed, cellar or place, or allow the same to become offensive,
noxious or detrimental to the health of any of the inhabitants of the
Township by reason of any matter, thing, or substance of any kind which
may be placed or remain, or be permitted or suffered to remain, in or upon
any lot, house, building, shed, cellar or place.
§ BH3-1.2 MILLBURN CODE § BH3-1.7
AO:436
Chapter BH4
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ BH4-1. STATE SANITARY CODE, CHAPTER XII, SANITATION IN
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD AND BEVERAGE
VENDING MACHINES.
§ BH4-1.1. Adoption by Reference; Title. [New]; BH:Ord. No. 1-04
§ 2
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
A copy of such code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein. The code established and adopted by
this section is commonly known as the State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII
Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines.
§ BH4-1.2. Public Record. [New]
Three (3) copies of such "State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII, Sanitation in
Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines"
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health
and will remain on file for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH4-1.3. Violations. [New]
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this
section or code established herein shall, upon conviction, be liable to a
penalty established in Chapter BH1, Section BH1-4. Each day a particular
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ BH4-2. LICENSE.
§ BH4-2.1. License Required. [New; BH:Ord. No. 1-04 § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food establishment as
defined in and governed by the State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII Sanitation
in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines
established by Chapter BH4 without first having procured a license from
the Board of Health so to do or without complying with any or all of the
provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the establishment as
contained in the State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
§ BH3-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-2.2
AO:437
§ BH4-2.2. When License Not Required. [New]
No license shall be required for any public eating establishment operated by
or in conjunction with any public school, church or incorporated charitable
institution.
§ BH4-2.3. (Reserved)51
§ BH4-2.4. Transferability; Duration. [New]
The license shall not be transferable and shall continue in force and effect
until the first day of January next ensuing after the date of granting thereof.
§ BH4-2.5. Revocation or Suspension of License; Grounds. [New;
BH:Ord. No. 1-04]
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this section may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health for the violation by the
licensee of any provision of such sections or the State Sanitary Code,
Chapter XII Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines or whenever it shall appear that the business,
trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation
to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper
manner, or in violation of any law of the United States, the State or any
ordinance of this Township, or that the person or persons conducting the
retail food establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or
that the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for
which the license was issued.
§ BH4-2.6. Hearing on Revocation or Suspension. [New]
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this section shall not be
revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing shall have been held by
the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be served upon the licensee at least three (3) days prior to the date
set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement of the
grounds for revoking, cancelling or suspending the license. Notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or be
deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon such license. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the
person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter
be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the Board of
Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Governing Body concludes
that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke,
cancel or suspend the license.
51.Editor's Note: Former subsection 4-2.3, License Fee, previously codified herein was
repealed in its entirety by BH:Ord. No. 1-04.
§ BH4-2.2 MILLBURN CODE § BH4-2.7
AO:438
§ BH4-2.7. Reissuance of Revoked License. [New]
If any license has been revoked, neither the holder nor any person acting
for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to carry on
the same business within the Township unless the application for the license
is approved by the Board of Health.
§ BH4-2.8. Inspections. [New; BH: Ord. No. 1-04 § 5]
The Health Officer or Registered Environmental Health Specialist shall
make inspection of food establishments in the Township to determine
compliance with the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter XII
Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines and shall report thereon. A copy of such inspection shall be
posted upon the inside wall of such food establishment by the Health Officer
or other representative of the Board of Health at the time of each inspection
of such establishment. Such inspection report shall not be defaced or
removed except by the Health Officer or other representative of the Board.
§ BH4-2.9. License Fees for Retail Food Establishments. [BH:Ord.
11/19/87; BH:Ord. No. 1-95A § 1; BH:Ord. No. 1-04 § 6]
The fees for licensing of retail food establishments are hereby fixed as
follows:
a. Restaurants
50 seats or less $100.00
51 seats or more $200.00
b. Stores
5,000 square feet or less $100.00
More than 5,000 square
feet
$200.00
c. Limited sales (sale of packaged,
nonperishable foods only) $50.00
d. The Health Officer or Registered Environmental Health Specialist may
conduct or request food sampling of potentially hazardous foods sold
from any licensed retail food establishment, at the expense of the
establishment. The sampling is to be conducted by a licensed New
Jersey Certified laboratory. Bacteriological analysis of potentially
hazardous ready-to-eat food products as defined in N.J.S.A. 24:5-8 may
include:
1. Chicken salad
2. Chopped chicken liver
§ BH4-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-2.9
AO:439
§ BH4-2.10. Temporary Food License Fee for Food Vendors at
Temporary Events. [Ord. No. 2506-18]
All food vendors or food retailers wishing to sell or give away food at a
temporary event within the Township of Millburn must obtain a license
from the Board of Health and pay a fifty-dollar ($50) temporary event
license fee, unless the food vendor or food retailer is a licensed retail food
establishment of the Township of Millburn.
3. Coleslaw
4. Egg salad
5. Macaroni salad
6. Potato salad
7. Shrimp salad
8. Tuna salad
9. Turkey salad
e. Vending Machines.
1. Defined. Food and beverage vending machine -- shall mean any
device offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins
or tokens, or by other means, dispenses a unit serving of food or
beverage, either in bulk or in package, without the necessity of
replenishing the device between each vending operation.
2. License Required. No person shall maintain or permit to be
maintained any food and beverage vending machine unless a
license to sell or dispense food or beverage from the machine has
been obtained from the Township Department of Health.
3. License Fee; Expiration of License.
(a) A fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per license for each food
and beverage vending machine approved by the Township
Department of Health is hereby established.
(b) Each vending machine permit shall expire on the 31st of
December of each year.
4. Restricted Location of Machines. No person shall place, erect,
operate or maintain any vending machine for sale of food or
beverage in any location, or sell or dispense any food or beverage
from a vending machine, except in a store, factory, theater, school,
office, club, lodge, community center, recreational building,
charitable institution, personal service establishment or building of
public assembly.
§ BH4-2.9 MILLBURN CODE § BH4-2.10
AO:440
For the purposes of this subsection Temporary Event shall mean a singular
event or celebration lasting no more than five (5) consecutive days, or no
more than five (5) intermittent days during a calendar year. For licensing
purposes however, a Farmers' Market shall be considered a Temporary
Event.
For the purposes of this subsection Farmers' Market shall mean an
established area where several farmers/growers gather on a regular,
recurring basis to sell a variety of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as
other farm products directly to the consumer.
§ BH4-3. PLAN REVIEW. [BH:Ord. No. 1-04 § 7; Ord. No. 2459-16
§ 2]
Chapter BH5
CONDITION OF BUILDINGS
§ BH5-1. BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
§ BH5-1.1. Notice to Vacate. [1967 San. Code § 86]
Whenever it is decided by the Board of Health that any building or part
thereof is unfit for human habitation because it is infected with the germs of
a communicable disease, or is in a condition dangerous to health or life, or is
likely to cause sickness among the occupants, notice of such decision shall
be affixed conspicuously on the building or any part thereof and personally
served upon the owner, agent or lessee, if the same can be found in the
State. The notice shall require all persons to vacate the building or part
thereof for the persons stated therein. Such building or part thereof shall
within ten (10) days thereafter be vacated, or, in case of special emergency,
within such shorter time as the notice may specify.
Chapter BH6
SWIMMING POOL CODE
a. When a retail food establishment is constructed, altered or renovated,
plans and specifications pertaining to the health and sanitary aspects of
the operation, such as proposed equipment layout and construction
materials of food related work areas, shall be submitted to the Division
of Health for review and approval before construction, renovations or
conversion is begun.
b. There shall be a seventy-five ($75.00) dollar plan review fee payable to
the Township of Millburn for any construction, alteration, renovation of
a retail food establishment.
c. This fee shall be in addition to any other fee required by the Township of
Millburn or the State of New Jersey.
§ BH4-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH6-1
AO:441
§ BH6-1. ADOPTION OF CODE. [BH: Ord. 6/7/79; BH: Ord. 12/3/87
§ 3; BH: Ord. No. 1-95A; BH: Ord. No. 1-04 § 8]
The code entitled New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX Public
Recreational Bathing, N.J.A.C. 8:26 as approved by the State Health
Department, is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7
and 26:4A-7.
Chapter BH7
DISPOSAL OF WASTE WATER
§ BH7-1. SEWERS.
§ BH7-1.1. Sewer Connections Required; Penalty for Failure to
Make Connections. [1967 San. Code § 88]
Owners of real property abutting on streets in which a sewer is now laid
or may hereafter be laid shall connect their houses and other buildings
therewith, and every such owner who fails so to do within thirty (30) days
after notice in writing by the Board of Health or Health Officer shall pay a
fine of two hundred ($200.00) dollars and an additional fine of fifty ($50.00)
dollars for each and every day after the thirty (30) days that the notice shall
not be complied with. The notice shall be served as provided by chapter 314
of the Laws of 1913, and the supplements thereto and amendments thereof.
§ BH7-1.2. Permit Required for Connection with Sewer, Septic Tank,
etc. [1967 San. Code § 90]
No connection nor alteration of such connection shall be made between
any septic tank or cesspool and any ground, building, structure or place
of business without a permit for that purpose obtained from the Board of
Health.
§ BH7-2. REGULATION OF SEPTIC TANK OR CESSPOOL WASTE.
§ BH7-2.1. Spilling, Dumping, etc., of Wastes on Streets, Streams,
Ground, etc., Prohibited. [1967 San. Code § 90H]
No sewage wastes from any cesspool or septic tank shall be dumped,
emptied or suffered to fall, spill or remain upon the surface of any land,
street or building, or stream or source or body of water in the Township of
Millburn.
§ BH7-2.2. Penalties for Violations of Section; Section Made Part of
Sanitary Code. [1967 San. Code § 90L; New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
liable, upon conviction, to the penalties established in BH1-4.
§ BH6-1 MILLBURN CODE § BH7-3
AO:442
§ BH7-3. PENALTIES.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of any section
of this Code or any orders of the Board of Health or of the Health Officer
shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter BH1,
Section BH1-4.
Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance
Chapter DRZ
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND ZONING ORDINANCE
§ BH7-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH7-3
AO:443

ARTICLE 1
Short Title
§ DRZ-101. Short title.
This ordinance may be known as "The Millburn Development Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance."
§ DRZ-101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-101
AO:445

ARTICLE 2
Purpose
§ DRZ-201. Purpose.
The purposes of this ordinance are to establish a pattern for the use of land
and structures based on the Master Plan, to implement the Master Plan,
and to encourage private and municipal action that will foster development
of the Township in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the people. This ordinance is intended to
carry out the purposes set forth in the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law.
§ DRZ-201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-201
AO:447

ARTICLE 3
Definitions
[Amended by Ord. Nos. 1-87, 4-87, 9-87, 13-89, 7-91, 10-91, 17-91,
5-92, 11-93, 16-93A, 19-94, 15-95, 20-95, 6-96, 16-97, 2241-04,
2246-05, 2254-05, 2305-07, 2314-08, 2326-08; amended in it
entirety by Ord. No. 2332-09]
§ DRZ-300. Definitions.
Any word or term not defined shall be understood in the context of standard
usage, or shall be understood as defined in the New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, as amended.
§ DRZ-301. Words and phrases defined.
Certain phrases and words are herewith defined.
301.1. ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building,
structure or use which is customarily associated with and is
subordinate and incidental to the principal building, structure or use
and which is located on the same lot therewith. An accessory building
attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building. See specific zone requirements for permitted
accessory uses.
301.2. ACCESS POINT; ACCESS DRIVE — The location of the intersection
of a driveway with a street.
301.3. ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
301.4. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — For the Planning Board, the
administrative officer shall be the Municipal Engineer; for the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the administrative officer shall be the Zoning
Official.
301.5. ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress.
301.6.AMBULATORY SURGERY FACILITY — An out-patient health care
facility, licensed by the State of New Jersey, which performs surgical
procedures without an overnight stay, with such surgery generally
requiring some form of anesthesia and with a post-surgery period of at
least one hour. An ambulatory surgery facility shall not be considered to
be an office or a medical office.
301.7. APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen
facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit.
301.7.1. ART GALLERY — A building or space used for the display of art for
the purpose of promoting and selling artworks. [Added 10-2-2019 by
Ord. No. 2543-19]
§ DRZ-300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-301
AO:449
301.7.2. ART STUDIO — A place of work for an artist, artisan, or
craftsperson, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or
performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or
instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing. [Added
10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
301.8. BUILDING COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by all buildings
measured on a horizontal plane around the perimeter of the
foundation(s) and including the area under the roof of any structure
supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured around the
edge of the roof above the columns. The first two feet of roof and
building overhang projections shall be excluded.
301.9. BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average ground
elevation around the foundation to the building's highest point. The
average ground elevation shall be calculated by measuring the
elevation at ten-foot intervals around the perimeter of the foundation.
When measuring to the highest point of the building, the following
building elements are to be excluded from the height calculation:
chimneys, satellite dishes and antennas, mechanical equipment,
elevator towers and flag poles.
a. The building height shall not exceed the maximum allowed in the
zoning district by more than five feet from the lowest elevation
around the perimeter of the foundation.
b. The excluded building elements listed above shall not exceed the
permitted building height by more than 12 feet, or the maximum
building height specified for a particular zone by more than eight
feet.
c. Where soil or rock removal lowers the ground elevation around the
perimeter of the foundation, the building height calculation shall be
based on the lowered elevation.
d. Where fill raises the ground elevation around the perimeter of the
foundation, building height calculation shall be based on the
elevation as it existed prior to the use of fill.
e. All roof-top mechanical equipment screening shall be no higher
than the equipment being screened.
301.10.CAMPER — A self-propelled vehicle built as one unit on a chassis or
a vehicle built on a chassis designed to be towed by another vehicle,
designed for temporary living containing cooking, sleeping, and/or
sanitary facilities; or a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed as a trailer with a flat top not more than four feet above the
ground which can be converted into a temporary tent erected above the
four-foot level for camping activities. See also Trailer definition.
301.11.CHANGE OF USE — A change of the use category of a building or
portion thereof.
§ DRZ-301 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-301
AO:450
301.12.COMMERCIAL OFF PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
SIGNS — Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered or pictorial
matter is displayed for advertising purposes and that is located on a site
other than the building or site to which the advertising relates.
301.13.COMPLETE APPLICATION — Submission of an application form
and checklist provided by the Township and completed by the applicant
together with all accompanying documents required by this ordinance
and the Planning Board's or Zoning Board of Adjustment's Rules and
Regulations for approval of the application for development, including
where applicable, but not limited to, a site plan or subdivision plat. The
Township's checklists are set forth in Appendix A52 to this ordinance
and hereby made a part hereof. The approving authority may require
additional information not specified in the ordinance, and revisions in
the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
consideration of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the approving authority. An application shall be certified
as complete immediately upon the meeting of all requirements specified
in the ordinance, the applicable checklist and the rules and regulations
of the approving authority, and shall be deemed complete as of the day
it is so certified by the administrative officer for purposes of the
commencement of the time period for action by the approving authority.
301.14.DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of connected rooms
containing living, kitchen, sleeping, and private bath facilities for one
family.
301.15.DWELLING, ATTACHED — One dwelling unit in a building
containing three or more dwelling units, with each dwelling unit
extending from the ground to the roof and having individual outside
access and no interior rooms or hallways shared with other dwelling
units.
301.16.DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building containing more than two
dwelling units.
301.17.DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY — A detached building containing one
dwelling unit.
301.18.DWELLING, TWO FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling
units.
301.18.1.EDUCATIONAL PLAY CENTER — A multipurpose children's
activity space devoted to learning, recreation and entertainment, which
may offer classes and organized events such as birthday parties, and
which may include accessory retail sales. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2543-19]
52.Editor's Note: Appendix A and the Checklists are on file at the Township offices.
§ DRZ-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-301
AO:451
301.19. FAMILY — A person or a group of persons occupying a dwelling unit
as a single housekeeping unit. There shall be no more than six persons
comprising said group who are not related by blood, marriage, civil
union or adoption.
301.20.FENCE — Any structure or partition enclosing a parcel of land, or
dividing a parcel of land into portions, or separating contiguous lots.
301.21. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Establishments operating primarily
to provide financial services to the public on site. Establishments
providing financial services that do not primarily provide such services
on site shall be deemed offices for the purposes of this ordinance.
Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges and similar
entities shall be considered offices, not financial institutions unless they
primarily deal with the public on site.
301.22.FLOOR AREA RATIO RESIDENTIAL — The area on the first and
second floors of a building computed by using the outside dimensions of
the exterior walls of the building, not including basements and
uninhabitable attics, compared to the total lot area. In addition,
habitable attics and floors above garages shall be included in the
calculation if the habitable portion is more than 50% of the area of the
floor immediately below. Habitable areas shall be areas having a ceiling
height greater than six feet six inches. Deviation from this standard
shall require variance relief under MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)(4).
301.23.GARAGE — A structure used to store vehicles, and other items
associated with residential structures. A garage shall not include
kitchen, sleeping, or private bath facilities.
301.24.GROSS FLOOR AREA - NONRESIDENTIAL — The sum of the area
of all floors of a building or structure compared to the total lot area. The
area of all floors shall be computed by using the outside dimension of
the exterior walls of the building or structure. Deviation from this
standard shall require variance relief under MLUL, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c).
301.25.GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) — The total floor area designed for
tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines,
and upper floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the
center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. It is the space
for which tenants pay rent, including sales areas and integral stock
areas. Basement areas which are included in the lease but are
nevertheless devoted exclusively to tenant storage and/or utility space
shall not be included in GLA. Included in GLA is any common space that
is temporarily rented or occupied by a tenant.
301.25.1.HEALTH AND FITNESS FACILITY — An establishment open to the
public on a membership basis which provides facilities for personal
training, aerobic exercise, running and jogging, weight training and
strength conditioning, game courts, swimming facilities and exercise
equipment and which may include accessory sauna/steam rooms,
§ DRZ-301 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-301
AO:452
showers, lockers, spa treatments including massage, snack/juice bars
and accessory retail sales of related sports apparel and equipment.
[Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
301.26.HOTEL — A commercial establishment offering temporary lodging.
Hotels may include accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to such principal use, such as restaurants and other facilities
for the consumption of food and beverages on the premises, public
meeting rooms, retail facilities, indoor health and recreational facilities,
provided that the aforesaid accessory uses shall be contained within the
hotel building. Outdoor health and recreational facilities shall also be
permitted as an accessory use, however, outdoor tennis courts and an
outdoor swimming pool at said establishment shall not be considered in
computing the gross floor area - nonresidential.
301.27.HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A church, synagogue, temple, mosque or
other facility that is used for prayer and other religious observances by
persons of similar beliefs and that is architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting formal religious
services on a regular basis.
301.27.1.INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION — An establishment
where entertainment or recreation services are provided to the general
public and for which user fees are charged. Uses include, but are not
limited to, roller and ice skating rinks, indoor climbing gyms,
gymnastics centers, bowling alleys, arcades, escape rooms, billiards
and virtual experience centers. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2543-19]
301.27.2. INSTRUCTIONAL SCHOOLS AND STUDIO — Establishments
which provide classes, instruction and workshops for dance, yoga,
pilates, personal training, culinary, creative arts and crafts, music,
martial arts, academics and athletics. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2543-19]
301.28. LOADING SPACE — An off-street berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a vehicle
while loading or unloading.
301.29. LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines but not
including any portion of a street. The minimum lot area of a lot fronting
on a street proposed to be widened in the Master Plan shall be the
minimum area required for the district in which it is located plus the
additional area needed for the future widening of the street.
301.30. LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the area of a lot covered by
paved and/or impervious surfaces, accessory uses, buildings, or any
other structure, expressed as a percentage of lot area. For the purposes
of this ordinance, gravel driveways, gravel parking areas, and pavers
made of brick, stone, concrete or similar materials shall be considered
to be paved and/or impervious surfaces.
§ DRZ-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-301
AO:453
301.31. LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front
lot line and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the
midpoint of the rear lot line.
301.32. LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lot lines
measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the
same as the lot width except that on curved alignments with an outside
radius of less than 500 feet, the lot frontage may be reduced to not be
less than 75% of the required minimum lot width. In the case of a
corner lot, the lot frontage and front yard setback shall be met from all
streets.
301.33. LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of
a lot. The front lot line is the same as the street line for any portion of a
lot abutting a street. Lot lines extend vertically in both directions from
ground level.
301.34. LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines
measured at the minimum required building setback from the street
line.
301.35. LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of, and having frontage on,
two or more intersecting streets, or a lot bounded on two or more sides
by the same street, provided the angle of intersection is less than 135°.
301.36.MAJOR SITE PLAN — A site plan not defined as "minor" or
"exempt."
301.37.MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a "minor
subdivision."
301.38. MEDICAL OFFICE — The office of a licensed medical or health care
practitioner providing health care services to a person for the purpose
of maintaining or restoring a person's physical or mental health,
including but not limited to a physician, dentist, chiropractor,
podiatrist, osteopath, acupuncturist, bodywork therapist, optometrist,
orthotist, prosthetist, pharmacist, physician assistant, physician or
surgeon, physical, occupational or speech therapist, psychologist,
registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, a home health aide or
nurse's aide, marriage or family therapist, massage therapist, advanced
practice nurse, respiratory therapist, social worker, or somatic
therapist. The term "licensed" is defined in the New Jersey
Administrative Code. The medical office may include an accessory
medical testing laboratory.
301.39.MINOR SITE PLAN — A site plan for a development or building
alteration or building addition requiring less than 10 parking spaces,
containing less than 2,500 square feet of new floor area, and having
less than 50% building coverage.
301.40.MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not
involve: (a) the creation of one or more new lots; (b) a planned
§ DRZ-301 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-301
AO:454
development; (c) any new street; or (d) the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
301.41.MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a building
containing three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be
occupied by persons living independently of each other, or a group of
such buildings.
301.42. OFFICE — A place for conducting the affairs of a business,
profession other than those covered by Section 301.38, service,
industry or government and generally furnished with desks, tables, files
and communication equipment, but where no retail sales or retail
services are offered, and no manufacturing, assembling, or fabricating
takes place.
301.43. PARKING SPACE — A space within a structure or in the open for
parking motor vehicles. The width and length of each space shall be
measured perpendicular to each other regardless of the angle of the
parking space to the access aisle or driveway.
301.43.1. PET CARE AND GROOMING FACILITY — An establishment that
provides temporary boarding, training, grooming and care for dogs,
cats or other domestic animals or household pets. This shall not include
overnight boarding of pets, the breeding or sale of animals or
veterinary services customarily offered at an animal clinic or hospital.
[Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
301.44.PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any container, storage unit
or portable structure (commonly known as PODS) designed to be used
on a temporary basis and without a foundation for the purpose of
storing tangible property and not for occupancy by persons.
301.45. PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot, structure,
or building or portion thereof is used.
301.46. PRIVATE SCHOOL — A privately owned or operated educational
institution of elementary or high school grade operating as a day school
and accredited by the New Jersey Department of Education. Nursery
schools offering educational instruction with qualified teachers shall be
considered private schools for the purpose of this ordinance, regardless
of whether they also serve as day-care centers. Day-care centers
without the educational component as set forth herein for nursery
schools are not to be considered as private schools.
301.47. PUBLIC PURPOSE — The use of land by a municipal, County, State,
or Federal agency or authority.
301.48. REAR YARD-UNOCCUPIED — That portion of the rear yard not
covered by driveways, parking areas, patios, sidewalks, paved surfaces,
accessory uses, buildings, or any other structure on or above the
surface of the land.
§ DRZ-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-301
AO:455
301.49. RECYCLING AREA — The space allocated for collection and storage
of source separated recyclable materials.
301.50. RESTAURANT — An establishment primarily serving food and drink
for consumption at seating tables and counters on premises. Sales for
off-site consumption are permitted if subordinate and incidental to the
principal use.
301.51. RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to
the customer in a ready to consume state for consumption either within
the restaurant building or off the premises.
301.52. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment in which food
or drink is offered or prepared primarily for retail sale in packages or in
bulk for off-premises consumption. Sales for on-site consumption are
permitted if subordinate and incidental to the principal use.
301.53. RETAIL SALES — Establishments engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.
301.54. RETAIL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal
goods or apparel, such as laundry, cleaning and garment services;
photographic portrait studios; beauty and barber shops; and shoe
repair shops. Retail services shall not include establishments primarily
engaged in the sale of products or merchandise, including food or
drink, to the general public. Retail services shall not include those uses
defined under "Medical Office" as defined in this ordinance. [Amended
3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2528-19]
301.55. RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width and length of the course of a
street, watercourse, utility alignment, or other way within which
improvements and rights of access are confined.
301.56.ROADWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street
customarily used by vehicles. Where there are curbs, the roadway
includes only that portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs,
the roadway is that portion between the edges of the paved width.
301.57. SETBACK — The distance between a street line or lot line and that
portion of the lot where structures are located, based on the setback
requirements of this ordinance. All setbacks from public streets shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way or as shown on the official tax
map. Roof overhangs may project a maximum of two feet beyond a
required setback line except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
301.57.1.SHOWROOM — An establishment offering household furnishings,
fixtures or appliances to the general public and where sample products
are displayed within a room or rooms on the premises. Such
§ DRZ-301 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-301
AO:456
establishments may also offer remodeling, decorating or design
services. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
301.58. SIGHT TRIANGLE — The portion of a lot restricted in its use to
assure clear sight distance for motorists.
301.59. SIGNS — Any street graphic, announcement, declaration,
demonstration, billboard, display, illustration, or insignia used to
promote or advertise the interests of any person, group of persons,
services, or product when placed, erected, attached, painted, or printed
for public viewing.
301.60. SITE PLAN EXEMPT — [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2543-19]
a. Site plan approval shall not be required for single-family and twofamily
dwellings, unless such uses involve a home professional
office.
b. Building alterations and/or changes of use and/or changes of
tenancy which do not involve an increase in the required number of
off-street parking spaces or additional gross floor area -
nonresidential shall be site plan exempt.
c. Changes of use which require additional parking or which generate
a vehicular traffic increase of more than 10% in excess of the
previous user during any of the following time periods shall not be
exempt: twenty-four-hour daily traffic, A.M. peak street hour of
adjacent street traffic; P.M. peak street hour of adjacent street
traffic; or Saturday peak hour of generator. Parking requirements
shall be based on the off-street parking standards set forth in this
ordinance. Estimates of the number of vehicular trips shall be
determined by use of the data and the statistics relating to usegenerated
traffic by the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip
Generation Manual, 5th edition.
d. The use and access through, over and across lands located within
the Township of Millburn in order to gain access to and from an
existing or proposed nonresidential use located outside and beyond
the borders and boundaries of the Township of Millburn shall not
be exempt and shall require site plan review and approval
consistent with the terms and standards of this ordinance.
301.61. STORY — That portion of a building between a floor and the floor or
roof above it.
301.62. STREET GRAPHIC — Any letter, symbol, number, or display which
can be seen from the right-of-way of a street, including signs, other than
public information signs. Ground graphic is a street graphic erected on
the ground. Wall graphic is a street graphic on the wall of a building.
§ DRZ-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-301
AO:457
301.63. STREET LINE — The edge of any street right-of-way, as proposed or
shown on the official tax map.
301.64.SWIMMING POOL — As defined in the Code of the Township of
Millburn as a "pool."
301.65.THEATERS — Buildings used for the presentation of legitimate live
or recorded productions.
301.66. TRAILER — A portable vehicular structure on a chassis which can
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, or other shortterm
uses and may contain kitchen, sleeping, private bath, and general
living facilities. See also "Camper" definition.
301.67. UTILITY — Services including, but not limited to, sewage
treatment, water supply, gas, electricity, telephone, and cable TV.
301.68. YARD — Space unoccupied, except as permitted in this ordinance,
extending between any building and a lot line or street line. See also
"Setback" definition.
301.69. YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of a lot
between the street line and the nearest point of the building to the
street, extending to the side lot lines from such point in lines parallel or
concentric to the street line. For corner lots, there shall be two front
yards. The division line for the two front yards shall be a line from the
intersection or radius point (if applicable) of the front yard setback lines
to the point of intersection (of tangents) of the street lines.
301.70. YARD, REAR — The area extending across the full width of a lot
between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the principal building
to the rear lot line, extending to the side lot lines from such point in
lines parallel or concentric to the street line. See "Corner Lots" and
"Rear Yard-Unoccupied" definition.
301.71. YARD, SIDE — The area lying between each side lot line and the
nearest point of the principal building to each side lot line, excluding
front and rear yards. For single-family dwellings in the R-3 through R-6
Districts, certain side yard standards relate to the height of building
segments. For the purpose of this provision, the height of a building
segment shall be the vertical distance from the average ground
elevation to the highest portion of the building which lies between the
minimum setback for building segments up to 18 feet in height, as
regulated in this ordinance. The average ground elevation shall be
calculated by measuring the ground elevation at ten-foot intervals
around the perimeter of the foundation of the portion of the building
which lies in closest proximity to the side lot line.
§ DRZ-301 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-301
AO:458
ARTICLE 4
General Provisions
§ DRZ-401. Administration.
These rules, regulations, and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Township of Millburn.
§ DRZ-402. Amendments.
All provisions of this ordinance may be amended in accordance with
applicable laws.
§ DRZ-403. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2318-08]
Any and all appeals from final decisions of the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment pursuant hereto shall be made to and filed in the Superior
Court of New Jersey pursuant to the Rules of Court.
§ DRZ-404. Board of Adjustment.
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69
et seq. consisting of seven regular members and two alternates who shall
be residents of the Township of Millburn appointed by the Governing Body.
§ DRZ-405. Building permits, site plan approvals, and variances
outstanding.
Nothing in this ordinance shall require any change in a building permit,
site plan, or variance which was approved before the enactment of this
ordinance, but is in violation of this ordinance, provided that construction
based on such a building permit shall have been started within one year
from the effective date of this ordinance and, in the case of a site plan or
variance, a building permit shall have been issued within one year following
the effective date of this ordinance. In all instances the project shall be
continuously pursued to completion, otherwise all approvals and permits
shall be void.
§ DRZ-406. Compliance.
All zoning requirements shall be met at the time of any erection,
enlargement, or change in use.
§ DRZ-407. Conditional uses.
Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use, applications shall
be made to the approving authority, in accordance with the procedures
outlined in the rules and regulations adopted by the approving authority.
§ DRZ-401 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-408
AO:459
§ DRZ-408. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage, publication of notice,
and filing with the County Planning Board according to law.
§ DRZ-409. Enforcing officers.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
zoning provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Municipal
Engineer to enforce the provisions of subdivision and site plan approvals.
See Section 420, Zoning Permits.
§ DRZ-410. Fees. [Ord. No. 15-89]
The applicant shall, at the time of filing an application for development,
pay the following fees to the Township by check or bank money order.
The application fee is nonrefundable. Proposals requiring a combination of
approvals, such as subdivision, site plan, and/or variance, shall pay a fee
totaling the full amount for the approval with the highest fee, plus one-half
the fee of the next highest approval required and nothing for additional
approvals.
410.1. Subdivision Application.
a. Informal Review or Concept Plan: No fee.
b. Minor Fee: $100.
c. Major - Preliminary Plat Fee: $200 + $50 per lot; minimum of $700.
d. Major - Final Plat Fee: $100 + $25 per lot; minimum of $350.
e. Resubmission of plat that was previously approved, but not filed,
shall be one-half the required fee, provided there are no changes.
410.2. Site Plan Application.
a. Informal Review of Concept Plan: No fee.
b. Minor Fee: $100.
c. Major - Preliminary Plat, Nonresidential Fee: $200 + $100 per acre
or fraction thereof, plus $25 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area up to 10,000 square feet, plus $10 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet.
d. Major - Preliminary Plat, Residential Fee: $200 + $30 per unit up to
10 units, plus $20 per unit from 11-100 units, plus $10 per unit for
over 100 units.
e. Major - Final Plat Fee: $100.
410.3. Variances and Other Appeals.
§ DRZ-408 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:460
a. Fee: $350 for day one and day two (if required) of hearing. If any
number of additional hearing days are required beyond day 2, an
additional $350 shall be paid. [Ord. No. 2155-99]
b. For a variance for a fence the fee shall be $100. [Ord. No.
2155-99]
410.4. Conditional Use Application. Fee: $100.
410.5. Historic Preservation Applications. [Ord. No. 2467-16]
a. Concept Review by the Commission: No fee.
b. Application for Certificate of Appropriateness: $200.
c. Minor Application Review: $100.
410.6. Street Graphics. [Ord. No. 2467-16]
a. Single-family dwellings: $5 fee per application.
b. Other uses: $10 plus $1 per square foot of graphic area, up to a
maximum of $100.
410.7. Technical Review Fees. In addition to the filing fees required by
Sections 410.1 through 410.6, an applicant shall pay fees equal to the
costs incurred for the technical review of the application by the
Township Engineer, planning and engineering consultants to the
Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission; the Attorney for the Planning Board, the Board of
Adjustment or Historical Preservation Commission, and any other
professional expert or consultant whose review, study, research and
reports and/or testimony is deemed necessary by the municipal agency
in order to assure compliance with State and Township laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. Technical review fees shall be
calculated in accordance with the actual time required for review at
rates established by a schedule of professional fees adopted and from
time to time amended by resolution of the Township Committee, which
schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Township Clerk for
public inspection. If the salary and overhead for a professional are
provided by the Township, the hourly rate charged to the deposit from
said professional shall be 200% of the sum of the product resulting from
multiplying the hourly base salary of each of the professionals by the
number of hours spent by the respective professional on review of the
application for development or inspection of the developer's
improvements, as the case may be. Unless such fees are waived or
deferred by the applicable agency, at the time of filing an application for
development with the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Historic Preservation Commission, the applicant shall pay to the
Township an initial deposit for technical review fees in accordance with
the following schedule: [Ord. No. 2278-06; Ord. No. 2467-16]
a. Minimum Escrow Fees for Anticipated Legal Services:
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-410
AO:461
Minor and Major Subdivisions $750
Site Plan $750
Special Meetings & Misc. As set by resolution of the
Township Committee
b. Minimum Escrow Fees for Anticipated Professional Planner
Services:
Minor Subdivision $1,100
Major Subdivision $2,500
Site Plan $1,100
Site Inspection $750 each visit
Attendance at meetings $500
Hourly billing rate As set by resolution of the
Township Committee
c. Minimum Escrow Fees for Anticipated Professional Engineering
Services for Plan Review:
Minor Subdivision $400
Major Subdivision - Sketch Plat $200 + $50/Lot
Major Subdivision - Preliminary
Plat
$600 + $200/Lot
Major Subdivision - Final Plat $300 + $50/Lot
Site Plan - Preliminary $1,000 plus
(based on the cost of site improvements exclusive of the
buildings):
3% (0 - $10,000)
$300 + 1A 1/2% over $10,000 ($10,001 - $25,000)
$525. + 1% over $25,000 ($25,001 - $100,000)
$1,275 + 1/2% over $100,000. ($100,001 - $250,000)
$2,025 + 1/2% over $250,000. (Over $250,000)
Site Plan - Final 1/3 of Preliminary Fee
Hourly Billing Rate As set by resolution of Township
Committee
d. The minimum escrow fee deposit for anticipated professional
review by the Historic Preservation Consultant to the Historic
Preservation Commission: $750. Thereafter, if additional services
are required, the Historic Preservation Consultant shall be paid in
accordance with the hourly rate established by Township
Resolution.
§ DRZ-410 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:462
e. A review fee of $1,000 for all proposals concerning wireless
telecommunications installation where a new tower or other
structure is proposed in addition to all other required fees.
f. Miscellaneous special services. Traffic or other relevant
professional study and analysis if required as determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
No major application for development shall be deemed complete
until such time as the applicant shall have posted with the
Township in cash or certified check the amount of escrow deposit
determined by the Township Engineer based upon the following
criteria: (a) complexity of the application; (b) proximity of the
proposed development to other uses; (c) traffic considerations; (d)
public safety considerations; (e) infrastructure needs and impact;
and (f) related considerations. The Township Engineer's
determination of the escrow may be modified by the Chairperson of
the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission or by a vote of the entire applicable board.
410.8. Inspection Fees and Costs. The applicant shall pay fees equal to the
expenses incurred by the Township with respect to: [Ord. No.
2467-16]
a. The inspection of on-site, on-tract, off-site and off-tract
improvements constructed or installed by the applicant in
accordance with the terms and conditions of subdivision and/or site
plan approval or the grant of a variance;
b. The testing of materials or construction work performed by the
applicant in the event that such testing is deemed necessary by the
Township;
c. Analyses or tests to determine compliance by the applicant with
any monitoring standards established by the terms and conditions
of subdivision or site plan approval; and
d. The inspection of improvements constructed or installed by the
applicant for purposes of determining compliance with any
maintenance obligations of the applicant.
The improvements constructed or installed to meet the
requirements of subdivision or site plan approval, which are the
subject of inspection, include the following: pavement subgrade,
base course pavement, surface course pavement, sidewalks, storm
drainage facilities, sanitary sewerage facilities, street signs, topsoil
and erosion protection, grading, landscaping and monuments. An
applicant shall give notice at least 24 hours in advance of the
undertaking of any work which is the subject of inspection.
Overtime inspection will not be provided unless special
arrangements are made therefor prior to the overtime period.
Inspection fees shall be calculated in accordance with the actual
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-410
AO:463
time required for inspection at rates established by a schedule of
inspection fees, which schedule shall be adopted and from time
to time amended by resolution of the Township Committee and
maintained in the office of the Township Clerk for public inspection.
At the time of the grant of final subdivision or site plan approval, or
prior to the commencement of any work on subdivision or site plan
improvements, if such work is undertaken before final approval,
the applicant shall pay to the Township an initial deposit for
inspection fees and costs. Such initial deposit shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
Estimated Costs of Improvements (exclusive of building)
Under $5,000 8%
$5,000 - $10,000 $400 + 5% over $5,000
$10,000 - $50,000 $650 + 4.5% over $10,000
$50,000 - $100,000 $2,450 + 4% over $50,000
Over $100,000 $4,450 + 3% over $100,000
Hourly Billing Rate As set by resolution of the
Township Committee
The Estimated Costs of Improvements shall be determined by
the Township Engineer based on plans and certified quantity
estimates prepared by the applicant's engineer and shall include a
20% excess contingency.
Inspection shall not relieve the applicant from the obligation of
performing work strictly in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved therefor or the obligation of performing
work in a workmanlike manner using first-class materials. Until
such time as the Township Committee shall approve the
construction and installation of any improvement by a resolution
adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, any
improvement not meeting the aforesaid plans, specifications or
standards shall be replaced, reconstructed or repaired by the
applicant despite any previous oversight or error in inspection.
e. When an application to the Historic Preservation Commission has
been approved and the Construction Code Official and/or the
Township Engineer has issued a Construction Permit and/or any
other associated permits then in addition to construction code and
engineering inspections with respect thereto, the Construction
Code Official and/or Township Engineer shall request that the
Historic Preservation Commission Consultant inspect the project
for compliance with approved historic architectural elements or
construction, then the HPC Consultant shall be paid therefor upon
presentation of a bill associated with such inspections from the
§ DRZ-410 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:464
escrow deposit made by the applicant and administered by the
Township Treasurer as required by law.
410.9. Fee Deposits Held in Escrow. Each deposit for anticipated municipal
expenses for professional services shall be held in escrow by the
Township in an account separate from the general funds of the
Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. The account shall be in a
banking institution or savings and loan association in this State, insured
by an agency of the Federal government, or in any other fund or
depository approved for such deposits by the State, in an account
bearing interest at the minimum rate bearing interest at the minimum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or savings
deposits. The Township Treasurer shall notify the applicant in writing of
the name and address of the institution or depository in which the
deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. All interest earned on
any account shall be retained in the account until paid over as
hereinafter provided. The Township Business Administrator shall from
time to time certify to the Township Committee the inspection fee as
determined in accordance with the aforementioned schedule of
professional fees, as well as any inspection costs. Such fees or charges
shall be based upon a schedule established by resolution pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. If the Township Committee determines the costs
as certified to be reasonable, then such amount shall be withdrawn
from the escrow account and paid over to the Township as an item of
miscellaneous revenue. An applicant may at any time examine
Township records with respect to an escrow account and expenditures
therefrom. All deposits for inspection fees shall be made prior to the
performance of the inspection services which the deposit is intended to
cover. In the event that the initial deposit made by an applicant is not
sufficient to cover all technical review fees or costs with respect to the
application for which the deposit was made or all inspection fees and/or
costs with respect to the application for which the deposit was made,
upon request by the Township, the applicant shall make such further
deposit or deposits as may be necessary to cover further inspection fees
and/or costs. Whenever the interest earned on any escrow account shall
exceed $100 in any calendar year, the Township Treasurer shall pay to
the applicant 66 2/3% of the interest earned during the calendar year
on such account, with the remaining 33 1/3% of such interest being
paid over to the Township for administrative expenses. Such payments
shall be made within 30 days after the termination of the calendar year
in which the interest was earned or upon the termination of the account
in the event that the account shall be terminated prior to the end of the
calendar year. Whenever the interest earned on any escrow account is
no more than $100 in any calendar year, all of such interest shall remain
in the account until the termination of the account at which time all of
such interest shall be paid over by the Township Treasurer to the
Township for administrative expenses. After the issuance of a report by
the Township Engineer that all subdivision and/or site plan
improvements have been completed, inspected and approved, and after
all inspection fees and/or costs have been paid from the escrow account
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-410
AO:465
for such application, the Township Treasurer shall refund to the
applicant all deposit moneys remaining in the escrow account, together
with the interest, if any, which the applicant is entitled to receive.
After the interest which the Township is entitled to receive is paid over
to the Township, the escrow account shall be terminated. [Ord. No.
2467-16]
410.10.Off-Tract Improvement Charges. [Ord. No. 2467-16]
a. Construction or Contribution Required. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, where the need for off-tract
improvements for water, sewer, drainage, street improvements and
other improvements as provided by law are, in whole or in part,
made necessary or required as a result of a proposed development
application, the Planning Board may require the developer, as a
condition of subdivision or site plan approval, to construct such offtract
improvements, or to contribute its pro rata share of the cost of
the construction of such off-tract improvements in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
1. Determinations by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
review all subdivision and site plan applications to determine
their impact on the Township's infrastructure. The Board's
determination shall include a review of whether the off-tract
improvement is a benefit solely to the developer, and/or
whether additional parties will receive a benefit as a result of
the construction of the off-tract improvement. In making its
determination, the Board shall be guided by the rules and
regulations specified in this ordinance. The Board may also be
guided by recommendations regarding the subject matter from
the Board Attorney, Township Engineer, Municipal Officials and
other qualified experts. Thereafter, the Planning Board shall,
with the assistance of such professionals:
(a) Determine the Need for off-tract improvements.
(b) Determine the total cost of the off-tract improvement(s).
For the purposes of this section, total cost of
improvements may include: all payments to contractors
and subcontractors; design and engineering costs;
bonding costs; permit, inspection and application fees;
property and/or easement acquisition costs; and costs for
overhead, project supervision and legal fees. All costs for
off-tract improvements shall be verified by the Township in
the event that the Township or any other entity shall make
any contribution toward the completion of any off-tract
improvement.
(c) Determine the amount, if any, by which all properties to be
serviced thereby including the developer's property will be
specially benefited therefrom.
§ DRZ-410 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:466
(d) In cases where reasonable and necessary need for the offtract
improvement or improvements is necessitated or
required by the proposed development application and
where no other property owners receive a special benefit
thereby, the Planning Board shall require the developer, as
a condition of approval, at the developer's expense, to
provide for and construct such improvements as if such
were on-tract improvements and shall forward a report of
its findings to the Township Committee.
(e) In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is
necessitated by the proposed development application and
where the Planning Board determines that properties
outside the development could also be benefited by the
improvement, the Planning Board shall forward to the
Township Committee a report containing a list and
description of all such improvements, together with its
request that the Township Committee determine the
matters in (2) below and advise the Planning Board of the
Township Committee's decision.
2. Determination by Township Committee. Upon receipt of the
recommendations and report of the Planning Board, the
Township Committee shall, within 30 days from the receipt
thereof, determine and advise the Board whether:
(a) The recommended off-tract improvement should be
undertaken in the manner recommended by the Board or
whether the Township Committee is of the opinion that an
alternative improvement should be considered by the
Board.
(b) The improvement is to be constructed or installed by the
Township as a general improvement or as a local
improvement.
(c) The improvement is to be constructed or installed by the
developer under a formula providing for partial
reimbursement by the Township or otherwise for benefits
to properties other than the development where
appropriate.
3. Amount of Contribution. Once the Township Committee has
made the determinations in (2) above, the developer may be
required to provide, as a condition for final approval of the
development, a combination of performance and maintenance
guarantees, cash contributions, developer's agreements and/or
other forms of surety permitted by law to insure payment to
the Township of one of the following amounts:
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-410
AO:467
(a) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as
a local improvement, the developer's proportionate share
of the total cost of the improvement.
(b) If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer,
the total cost of the off-tract improvement less an offset for
the value of any special benefit to properties other than
the developer's.
(c) If the improvement provides no special benefits to
properties other than the property which is the subject of
the Planning Board application, the off-tract improvement
shall be constructed by the developer in accordance with
the Township rules and regulations relating to the
construction of on-tract improvements.
4. Pro Rata Formula for Determining Developer's Share of Off-
Tract Improvements. Where an off-tract improvement is
required, and it is the determination of the Planning Board and
Township Committee that the developer is responsible for only
a proportionate share of the costs of such improvement, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the
proportionate share of the cost of such improvements which
shall be paid by the developer:
(a) Roadways. For street widening, alignment, channelization
of intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved
traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility
improvements not covered elsewhere, the construction or
reconstruction of new or existing streets and other
associated street or traffic improvements, the developer's
proportionate costs shall be determined by the Township
as follows:
Future Peak-Hour Traffic
Generated by the Development
divided by (÷) Future Peak Hour
Traffic
x
Total Cost of the Roadway
Improvement and/or Extension
= Developer's Cost
(b) Drainage Improvements. For stormwater and drainage
improvements, including installation, relocation or
replacement of transmission lines, culverts, catch basins
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
appurtenances associated therewith, the developer's
proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
Development Cubic Feet Per Second
(cfs) divided by (÷) Total Increase in
Tributary cfs
x
Total Enlargement of
Improvement Cost
= Developer's Cost
Developer's cost cannot be less than $0.
§ DRZ-410 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:468
(c) Sanitary Sewers. For distribution facilities including the
installation, relocation or replacement of collector, trunk
and interceptor sewers and the installation, relocation or
replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith,
the developer's proportionate share shall be computed as
follows:
i) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
for the total developed drainage basin, the pro-rated
enlargement of improvement share shall be computed
as follows:
Development Gallons Per day ("gpd")
divided by (÷) Total Increase in
Tributary gpd
x
Total Enlargement of
Improvement Cost
= Developer's Cost
ii) If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to
develop the subdivision, the prorated enlargement
share to the developer shall be computed as follows:
Development Tributary gpd divided by
(÷) Total Tributary gpd to a New
System
x Total Project Cost = Developer's Cost
(d) Water. For water distribution facilities including the
installation of new water mains, the extension of existing
water mains, the relocation of such facilities and the
installation of other appurtenances associated therewith,
the developer's proportionate share shall be computed as
follows:
Use of Water (gpd) by the Developer
divided by (÷) Total Increase in Use
of Water (gpd) of Area Served by the
Improvement
x
Total Enlargement or
Improvement Cost
= Developer's Cost
(e) Adjustments to formulas. It is recognized that the
foregoing formulas may require adjustment because of
peculiar or exceptional circumstances or may require the
application of alternative criteria in order to arrive at a fair
and equitable distribution of cost. For example, in the case
of linear improvements, such as streets, water and sewer
lines and storm drains, length of property frontage may be
a more appropriate determining factor. In such instances,
the Board may modify or adjust the formulas.
5. Cash Contributions, Methods of Payment.
(a) The estimated developer's cost plus a reasonable inflation
cost for the off-tract improvement allocated to the
developer, if deposited in cash, shall be paid by the
developer to the Township Finance Department with a
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-410
AO:469
copy of the developer's transmittal letter forwarded to
the Township Committee, the Township Engineer and the
Board. Any and all monies received by the Finance
Department shall be deposited in a separate interestbearing
account to the credit of the Township, and such
funds shall be used only for the improvements for which
they are deposited or improvements serving the same
purpose. If such improvements are not initiated by the
developer or the Township within a period of 10 years from
the date of payment or other mutually agreeable period
of time, then the funds so deposited shall be returned
to the developer, together with accumulated interest less
10% of accumulated interest for administration costs. If,
after diligent inquiry, the Township is unable to locate
the developer or its successor in order to return said
funds, then the funds so deposited shall be placed in the
Township's general capital improvement fund and shall not
be returnable to the developer thereafter.
(b) In the event the payment by the developer to the Township
Finance Department provided for herein is less than its
share of the actual cost of the off-tract improvements, then
it shall be required to pay its additional share of the cost
thereof.
6. Assessment of Properties. The Township may adopt a local
improvement assessment ordinance for the purpose of
construction and installation of the off-tract improvements,
based upon the cost for the project, including administration
and finance charges. Any portion of the cost of the
improvements not defrayed by a developer may be assessed by
the Township against benefiting property owners according to
their pro-rata share. Any such assessments for benefits made
against the developer or its successors in interest shall be first
offset by a pro-rata share credit of the allocated costs
previously deposited with the Township Finance Department
pertaining thereto. The developer or its successors in interest
shall not be liable for any part of an assessment for such
improvements unless the assessment exceeds its pro-rata
share credit for its deposit, and then only to the extent of the
deficiency.
7. Design Standards. Should the developer and the Township
enter into a contract for the construction and installation of the
off-tract improvements to be done by the developer, the
developer shall observe all requirements and principles of this
ordinance and other ordinances in the design of such
improvements.
8. Condition of Approval. The terms set forth herein shall be a
condition of either preliminary approval or final approval of a
§ DRZ-410 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-410
AO:470
§ DRZ-411. Installation of Improvements; Required Guarantees.
[Ord. No. 2500-18]
The following payments, contributions, and requirements shall be
applicable to all site plans and subdivisions in addition to other applicable
ordinances for any such development as follows:
subdivision or site plan. If not imposed as condition of
preliminary approval, such off-tract improvements and the
apportionment of the cost thereof shall be considered
improvements under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which may be
imposed at the time of final approval.
9. Notice and Appeal. Before apportioning the cost of off-tract
improvements to a developer, the Planning Board shall notify
and afford the developer an opportunity to be heard thereon at
a public meeting. The developer may appeal from the Township
Council's decision to the Superior Court within 45 days from
the date of the Council's decision.
b. Omissions. Omissions from the bond of any improvement will in no
way be construed as to relieve the developer from his legal
obligation to conform to the required improvements as provided in
this ordinance.
c. Certification. Prior to the final acceptance of any of the required
improvements by the Township the subdivision owner or owners
shall have submitted satisfactory affidavits certifying that no
unpaid bills, liabilities or liens against such improvements and
installations are outstanding.
410.11. Agreement Between Developer and the Township — Fees, Charges
and Obligations. Within 90 days of the adoption of a Resolution granting
a land development approval requiring as a condition, the execution of
a Developer Agreement, there shall be executed and delivered to the
Township an Agreement between the Developer and the Township
incorporating the terms and conditions of approval and provisions
including, but not limited to, bonds, performance guarantees, letters of
credit, escrow deposits, conveyances to the Township, remediation of
environmental conditions including those discovered during
development, insurance requirements, time for completion of
improvements, and payment of municipal charges, water and sewer
connection fees, road opening and other application fees. The
Agreement shall be prepared by the Township and shall be executed by
the Owner and Developer of the land development project. [Ord. No.
2467-16]
a. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to subsection d of section 52
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-65) the Township will require and shall
§ DRZ-410 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-411
AO:471
accept in accordance with the standards adopted by ordinance and
regulations adopted pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (C.
40:55D-53a) for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of certain on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a
performance guarantee, and provision for a maintenance guarantee in
accordance with paragraphs a1 and 2 of this section. In accordance
with the Township ordinance requiring a successor developer to furnish
a replacement performance guarantee, as a condition to the approval
of a permit update under the State Uniform Construction Code, for the
purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of property on
a construction permit, the Governing Body may require and shall accept
in accordance with the standards adopted by ordinance and regulations
adopted pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (C. 40:55D-53a) for
the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain ontract
improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee, in accordance with paragraphs
a1 and 2 of this section.
1. (a) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor
of the Township in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to
be dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer, according to the method of calculation set forth in
section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (C. 40:55D-53.4), for the
following improvements as shown on the approved plans or
plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, water mains,
sanitary sewers, drainage structures, public improvements of
open space, any grading necessitated by the preceding
improvements.
The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate
of the improvements covered by the performance guarantee,
which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each
performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(b) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development
privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by
ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval.
At the developer's option, a separate performance guarantee
may be posted for the privately-owned perimeter buffer
landscaping.
(c) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building,
or phase of development, as a condition of the issuance
thereof, the developer shall furnish a separate guarantee,
§ DRZ-411 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-411
AO:472
referred to herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee" in favor of the Township in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of installation of only those improvements
or items which remain to be completed or installed under the
terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which are
required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent
to the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for
the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development
and which are not covered by an existing performance
guarantee. Upon posting of a "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee", all sums remaining under a
performance guarantee, required pursuant to subparagraph
(a) of this paragraph, which relate to the development, unit,
lot, building, or phase of development for which the temporary
certificate of occupancy is sought, shall be released. The scope
and amount of the "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee" shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
At no time will the Township hold more than one guarantee
or bond of any type with respect to the same line item. The
temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be released
by the Township Engineer upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit,
lot, building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
(d) In addition to a performance guarantee required by the
Township ordinance, a developer shall furnish to the
municipality a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a
"safety and stabilization guarantee", in favor of the
municipality, to be available to the municipality solely for the
purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a safe
and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition, only in the circumstance that:
(1) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work
on the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for
reasons other than force majeure, and
(2) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the
provision of written notice by the Township to the
developer of the Township's intent to claim payment under
the guarantee. The Township shall not provide notice of its
intent to claim payment under a "safety and stabilization
guarantee" until a period of at least 60 days has elapsed
during which all work on the development has ceased for
reasons other than force majeure. The Township shall
provide written notice to a developer by certified mail or
other form of delivery providing evidence of receipt.
§ DRZ-411 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-411
AO:473
The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for
a development with bonded improvements exceeding
$100,000 shall be calculated as a percentage of the
bonded improvement costs of the development or phase of
development as follows:
• $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs, plus
• Two and 1/2% of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$100,000 up to $1,000,000, plus
• One % of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
2. (a) The developer shall post with the Township, prior to the
release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
subparagraph (a), subparagraph (b), or both subparagraph (a)
and subparagraph (b) of paragraph a1 of this section, a
maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the installation of the improvements which are being
released.
(b) The developer shall post with the Township, upon the
inspection and issuance of final approval of the following
private site improvements by the Township Engineer, a
maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the installation of the following private site
improvements: stormwater management basins, in-flow and
water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if
any, which cost shall be determined according to the method of
calculation set forth in section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (C.
40:55D-53.4).
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
(d) The Township shall not require that a maintenance guarantee
required pursuant to this ordinance be in cash or that more
than 10% of a performance guarantee pursuant to the
ordinance be in cash. A developer may, however, provide at his
option some or all of the maintenance guarantee in cash, or
more than 10% of a performance guarantee in cash. (C.
40:55D-53.3).
§ DRZ-411 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-412
AO:474
§ DRZ-412. Previous Zoning Ordinances repealed. [Ord. No. 9-87]
Upon adoption of this ordinance, the previously adopted Zoning Ordinance
and its amendments are repealed.
§ DRZ-413. Interpretation.
§ DRZ-414. Planning Board. [Ord. No. 20-95]
A Planning Board is hereby established consisting of nine members and
two alternate members who shall serve for a term pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23. The members of the Planning Board holding office on the date of
adoption of this ordinance shall continue therein until present terms expire.
The Class I and Class II members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
Class III member shall be a member of the Governing Body and appointed
by it. The Class IV members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The terms of
all Class IV members first appointed under this section shall be determined
so that to the greatest practical extent the expiration of such terms shall
be distributed evenly over the first four years after their appointment. The
term of each Class IV member shall not exceed four years. The Mayor may
appoint a Class I designee to serve in the absence of the Mayor and at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure.
§ DRZ-415. Site plan approval required.
A site plan approval is required for all developments which do not meet the
definition of "Site Plan, Exempt." The procedures for filing an application
for site plan approval shall be adopted by the Planning Board and Board
of Adjustment. Except for variance applications under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d,
which shall be acted upon by the Board of Adjustment, the Planning Board
shall be the approving authority for site plans.
§ DRZ-416. Subdivision approval required.
Approval is required for all subdivisions by the approving authority
following the rules and regulations for preliminary and final plat approval
adopted by the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment.
§ DRZ-417. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2262-05]
413.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements. Where this ordinance establishes minimum and
maximum standards, all standards shall be met. Where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision(s) are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
413.2. See also Article 6, Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.
§ DRZ-412 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-418
AO:475
§ DRZ-418. Validity.
If any section, paragraph, clause, or other provision of this ordinance shall
be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply only
to such section, paragraph, clause, or provision, and the remainder of this
ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ DRZ-419. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 22-95, 2269-06 § 1]
419.a1.. When any building or structure is erected, altered, converted, or
maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation
of this ordinance or in violation of any condition of a variance or
other development approval issued by a Township Agency, the
Township or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may
institute appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection,
alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use; to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building,
structure, or land; and to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business,
or use in or about such premises.
b. Penalty for Violations.
1. For the violation of any provision of this ordinance, or any
other ordinance of the Township of Millburn unless a specific
penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the provision
violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation
shall be one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding
$2,000; imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days; or to a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5).
2. Prior to imposing a fine in an amount greater than $1,250 upon
an owner for violations of the Housing or Zoning Code
provisions of these Revised General Ordinances the owner
shall be allowed a thirty-day period to cure or abate the
condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a
hearing before a Court of competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning the violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period a fine
greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a Court has not
determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property it
is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed.
3. Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated
limits the authority of the Township to punish the violation of
any particular provision of this ordinance, rule, regulation or
order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount
than that provided in this section or imprisonment for a shorter
term than that provided in this section, then the violation of
§ DRZ-418 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-419
AO:476
§ DRZ-420. Zoning permits. [Ord. No. 9-87, 2191-01]
Zoning permits shall be secured from the Zoning Officer at the time of the
issuance of a building permit for the construction, erection, or alteration
of any structure or a demolition permit for the demolition of a principal
building on a lot. For single-family and two-family dwellings, the building
permit shall be considered to be the zoning permit. For cases involving
a change in occupant or use of an existing structure, no certificate of
occupancy for the new user shall be issued until a zoning permit has been
issued. Prior to issuing a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall ascertain
that all conditions and prerequisites of this ordinance have been met.
Zoning permits shall expire one year after the date of issuance if the use or
substantial construction has not been commenced.
such particular provision of this ordinance, rule, regulation or
order shall be punished by the imposition of not more than the
maximum fine or imprisonment so authorized or by both such
fine or imprisonment.
4. Whenever any fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine
and any costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in
an action of debt or such other manner as may be provided by
law.
419.2. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person as
owner or agent transfers or sells, or agrees to transfer or sell, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
municipal approval is required, such persons shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made shall be
deemed a separate violation.
419.3. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain
a civil action:
a. For injunctive relief; and
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
419.4. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser, or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense, and title expense, if any. Any such action must be brought
within two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of
transfer, sale, or conveyance of said land, or within six years, if
unrecorded.
§ DRZ-419 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-421
AO:477
§ DRZ-421. Payment of taxes. [Ord. No. 29-92]
Every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application.
§ DRZ-422. Expiration of variances. [Ord. No. 2175-00, 2241-04]
Any approval permitting the construction or alteration of any structure or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire 365 days after the
date of publication of the final decision unless a building permit has been
applied for or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced
or the Board which granted the approval has extended the time upon
the application and for good cause shown, provided that such period of
limitation shall be toiled as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-21 or in the event of
an appeal of the variance until the final determination of the appeal.
§ DRZ-423. Withholding of demolition permit. [Ord. No. 2435-14]
The Township Construction Official shall not issue a demolition permit for
the principal building on a lot until:
§ DRZ-424. Notice. [Ord. No. 2333-09]
Notice shall be given in the manner provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 for all
applications requiring site plan approval and minor subdivisions as well as
all others requiring notice pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law and
shall also be required for appeals from determinations of administrative
officers pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a), requests to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for interpretation of the zoning map or ordinance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b) and applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 for the issuance of a certificate certifying
that a use or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which
rendered the use or structure nonconforming.
a. A tree removal permit has been issued under Chapter 11 of the
Township's Ordinance Code for such lot unless the Township Forester
has advised the Township Construction Official in writing that a tree
removal permit is not required to be issued under said Chapter 11; and
b. A zoning permit for any proposed new construction or use is issued
under Section 420 of this ordinance; and [Ord. No. 2191-01]
c. Existing topographic information has been submitted identifying all
steep slope areas as defined in Section 608. Topographic information
shall be plotted at two-foot contour intervals and may only be supplied
by a licensed land surveyor registered in the State of New Jersey.
§ DRZ-421 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-425
AO:478
§ DRZ-425. Checklists. [Ord. No. 2467-16]
The following checklists are hereby adopted for inclusion in the Township of
Millburn Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance and shall appear
in the attachments to this chapter:
425.1. Checklist A - Planning Board - Checklist. See Schedule F. [Ord. No.
2467-16]
425.2. Checklist B - Zoning Board Checklist. See Schedule G. [Ord. No.
2467-16]
425.3. Checklist C - Historic Preservation Checklist. See Schedule H. [Ord.
No. 2467-16]
§ DRZ-425 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-425
AO:479

ARTICLE 5
Design and Performance Standards
§ DRZ-501. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2416-13; deleted by Ord. No.
2471-16]
§ DRZ-502. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-503. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-504. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-505. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-506. Curbs.
Granite block or other approved curb shall be installed along every street
within any development and at intersections with Township and County
streets and State highways. The specifications and standards set forth in
"The Township of Millburn in the County of Essex, Standard Specifications,"
shall be met in the construction of curbs.
§ DRZ-507. Drainage. [Ord. No. 9-87; deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16;
reinstated and restored by Ord. No. 2480-17]
All streets shall be designed to accommodate storm drainage along streets,
including the installation of catch basins and pipes where they may be
necessary for proper surface drainage. The requirements of this section
shall not be satisfied by the construction of dry wells. The system shall
be adequate to carry off or store the storm water and natural drainage
water which originates within the development boundaries and that which
originates beyond the development boundaries and passes through the
development calculated on the basis of maximum potential developed as
permitted under this ordinance. No storm water run-off or natural drainage
water shall be so diverted as to change the drainage characteristics of
abutting property, overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or
the need for additional drainage structures on other lands without proper
and approved provisions being made for taking care of these conditions,
including off-tract improvements. Drainage systems shall be designed and
constructed to meet the criteria set forth in Section 525, Stormwater Runoff
of this ordinance.
507.1. A 100-year storm curve shall be used in computing storm water
runoff from the drainage basin to determine the impact on the drainage
system under consideration based on the duration time(s) which will
give the maximum instantaneous discharges in each reach of the
proposed system. [Ord. No. 9-87; Ord. No. 2480-17]
507.2. The pipe size determined to be adequate for the runoff computed
shall be increased by at least one standard pipe size for the type of pipe
§ DRZ-501 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-507
AO:481
§ DRZ-508. Easements.
being used in order to provide adequate allowance for the normal
accumulation of sediment and debris in the storm drainage system. In
no case shall the pipe size in a surface water drainage system be less
than 15 inches in diameter. [Ord. No. 2480-17]
507.3. Catch basins shall be located at all intersections with inlets on both
sides of the street at intervals of not more than 250 feet or such shorter
distances as required to prevent the flow of surface water from
exceeding six cubic feet per second at the catch basin inlet. Access
manholes shall be placed at maximum 250-foot intervals throughout the
system and at pipe junctions where there are no catch basins. [Ord.
No. 2480-17]
507.4. Storm drain pipes running longitudinally along streets shall not be
located under curbing. [Ord. No. 2480-17]
507.5. Specifications for manholes, inlets and storm drains shall follow the
1961 New Jersey State Highway specifications, as amended. [Ord. No.
2480-17]
507.6. For both major and minor developments, blocks and lots shall be
graded to secure proper drainage away from all buildings and to
prevent the collection of stormwater in pools and to avoid the
concentration of stormwater from any lot to adjacent lots. [Ord. No.
2480-17]
507.7. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, surface or
underground drainage way, drainage system, channel, or stream, a
drainage right-of-way easement shall be provided and dedicated to the
Township conforming substantially with lines of such watercourse with
such further width sufficient to accommodate expected stormwater
runoff in the future based upon reasonable growth potential in the
Township. A minimum of 15 feet beyond the bank top on at least one
side shall be provided for access to the drainage right-of-way. The
easement shall meet the minimum widths and locations shown on any
adopted official map or Master Plan or as required under Section 508,
Easements. [Ord. No. 2480-17]
507.8. When the drainage system includes underdrain and/or stone pockets,
the course aggregate shall be separated from the surrounding soil by
geotextile fabrics to be approved by the Engineer. [Ord. No. 9-87;
Ord. No. 2480-17]
508.1. Easements for utility installation may be required and shall be at
least 15 feet wide, and, if possible, be centered on, or adjacent to, rear
or side lot lines.
508.2. The removal of trees and ground cover shall be prohibited in a
conservation easement or flood plain except:
§ DRZ-507 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-508
AO:482
§ DRZ-509. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).
The purpose of the EIS is to compile information that will enable the
developer to minimize adverse effects on the environment. A statement
shall be required for all major subdivisions and major site plans, shall
provide the information needed to evaluate the effects of a proposed
development upon the environment, and shall include data, be distributed,
reviewed and passed in accordance with the Design and Performance
Standards of this ordinance. The applicant may request a preliminary
determination from the approving authority on the environmental concerns
to be addressed in the EIS, including items which may be omitted or waived
as permitted in Section 509.7 of this section. The EIS shall include:
a. Felling dead or diseased trees;
b. Thinning to encourage desirable growth;
c. Tree removal for structures to impound water or, in areas to be
flooded, to create ponds or lakes.
508.3. The boundary line of any easement shall be monumented at its
intersection with all existing or proposed street lines.
509.1. A description of the development specifying what is to be done during
construction and operation, as well as how it is to be done and alternate
plans to achieve the objective(s);
509.2. An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and an
assessment of the probable impact of the development upon them:
water supply; hydrology; geology; soils and their properties, including
capabilities and limitations; sewerage; aquifers; storm water runoff;
flooding; topography; slope; vegetation; wildlife habitat; aquatic
organisms; noise characteristics and levels; land use; vehicular and
pedestrian traffic; aesthetics, including the visual relationship to
existing adjoining buildings; history and archaeology. Air and water
quality shall be described with reference to standards promulgated by
the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey
and soils shall be described with reference to Soil Conservation Service
categories and characteristics. Special attention shall be paid to critical
environmental areas, including but not limited to: waterways and flood
plains; aquifer recharge areas; high-water table; steep slopes; highly
erodible soil; mature stands of native vegetation; and extraordinary
wildlife nesting, feeding, or breeding grounds;
509.3. A listing of the licenses, permits, and approvals needed to be
furnished by Federal, State, or County law, the status of these permits
and approvals, and the conclusions and comments of the governmental
agencies;
509.4. An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided. Particular emphasis shall be placed on air or water pollution;
increase in noise, storm drainage, sedimentation, and siltation; effect
§ DRZ-508 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-509
AO:483
§ DRZ-510. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2151A-99; Ord. No. 2155-99; Ord.
No. 2241-04; deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-511. Fire protection.
Wherever a central water supply system exists, provision shall be made for
fire hydrants along streets and/or on the walls of nonresidential structures
as approved by the Township Fire Department and in accordance with fire
insurance rating organization standards.
§ DRZ-512. Lighting. [Ord. No. 9-87; Ord. No. 15-95; amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2539-19]
The purpose of this section is to set forth criteria to provide outdoor
lighting to protect public health, security, and welfare; to protect drivers
and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light sources that shine into
their eyes and thereby impair safe traverse; to protect neighbors and the
night sky from nuisance glare and light trespass from poorly aimed, placed,
applied or shielded light sources; and to promote conservation through
efficient lighting design and reduction in energy consumption.
§ DRZ-512.1. Zones R-8, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR-1, OR-2, OR-3, CMO,
CD, R-O, and C-E.
upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic; increase in Township services,
and consequences to the Township tax structure; and damage to flora
and fauna;
509.5. A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation, including
maps, schedules, and other explanatory data which clarify and explain
these steps;
509.6. The background and qualifications of those involved in its
preparation;
509.7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive
the requirement for all or part of an EIS if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support a conclusion that the proposed development will
have slight or negligible environmental impact, or upon finding that the
complete statement need not be prepared in order to evaluate the
environmental impact of the development.
If the Planning Board finds that on the basis of the Natural Resources
Inventory, an Environmental Impact Statement, or other evidence, the
proposed development may cause an adverse environmental impact,
the Planning Board may require the developer to pay, in addition to
regular fees, additional amounts to cover the reasonable costs of
reports by experts selected by the Planning Board regarding the
environmental impact of the proposed development.
§ DRZ-509 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-512.1
AO:484
a. All area lighting for parking lots and security shall provide translucent
fixtures with shields around the light source. The light intensity
provided at ground level shall average between 0.5 and 1.0 footcandle
over the entire area, with a maximum of 10 footcandles at any point.
The uniformity ratios shall be as follows: average-to-minimum
uniformity ratio < 4; maximum-to-minimum uniformity ratio < 10.
Outdoor lighting for all purposes, except the lighting of one- and twofamily
dwellings, shall be shown on the site plan and shall be subject to
site plan approval by the approving authority. A site lighting and
illumination plan shall be submitted in sufficient detail to evaluate its
conformance with the requirements of this section and shall include the
following:
1. A scalable drawing of the site with all outdoor light fixtures clearly
depicted and accurately located.
2. Specifications for all light fixtures for each fixture type, including
manufacturer, model, shape, dimensions, color, lamp type, wattage,
rated initial light output in lumens, reflector and lens type,
shielding, etc.
3. Mounting pole shape, material, color, and foundation details.
4. Mounting heights, details, shielding, tilt angles, and orientations.
5. A photometric plan providing illumination levels in footcandles,
upon the points of a 10 foot by 10 foot calculation grid,
superimposed upon pavement areas and pedestrian walkways, as
well as site boundaries.
6. Tabulations demonstrating compliance with required uniformity
ratios. Site plans with physically disjointed areas shall require a
separate tabulation for each area.
7. The approving authority shall make exception, where required, to
permit increased average light intensity at ATM locations, as per
N.J.S.A. 17:16K-10.
b. No lighting source shall shine directly into or reflect onto windows of
nearby residential properties. No lighting source shall shine directly or
reflect onto streets and driveways in a manner which will induce glare
or interfere with driver vision. All lighting shall be a warm or neutral
white in color and shall be incandescent, light-emitting diode (LED), or
high-intensity discharge (HID) lighting such as metal halide, highpressure
sodium, and mercury vapor. No lighting shall be of a rotating,
pulsating, flashing, or other intermittent frequency. Signs constructed
in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 609.10, Street
Graphics, shall not be illuminated.
§ DRZ-512.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-512.2
AO:485
§ DRZ-512.2. Zones R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and R-7.
Lighting on one- and two-family residential properties, including accessory
buildings or structures, shall be warm or neutral white in color and, further,
shall be limited to incandescent or LED lighting, which is shielded to
prevent glare onto streets and nearby properties and to prevent light
trespass across property boundaries. No aboveground lighting of
recreational facilities on one- and two-family residential properties shall be
permitted, except as provided in Section 609.11 regarding swimming pools.
§ DRZ-513. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-514. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 of
the Map Filing Law, as amended, and shall be placed in accordance with
said statute and indicated on the final plat.
§ DRZ-515. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-516. Off-street parking and loading. [Ord. No. 9-87]
The standards set forth in this section apply only to uses requiring site plan
approval, unless otherwise stated.
516.1. Access to Parking Lots. There shall be a maximum of two access
drives to any street with their center lines spaced at least 56 feet apart,
with no more than two lanes of traffic each, and with their center lines
at least 30 feet from any property line. When the property along a street
exceeds 500 feet in length, one access drive may be permitted for every
250 feet of frontage. Driveways with widths exceeding 24 feet shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board with consideration to the width,
curbing, traffic flow, radii of curves, and traffic lane divider.
516.2. Access to Loading and Parking Spaces. Individual spaces shall be
served by interior driveways designed for vehicle access without the
need for moving any other vehicle. Spaces shall not have direct access
from public streets, major interior drives, or private roads. Dead-end
aisles shall be avoided wherever possible.
516.3. Buffers. All loading areas and parking lots shall be buffered from
adjoining streets, existing residential use, and residential zoning
districts in accordance with Section 609.3, Buffers.
516.4. Curbing. All parking lots and loading areas shall have granite-block
curbing around the perimeter of the parking and loading areas if
needed in conjunction with an overall drainage plan. Curbing shall be
either depressed at the driveway or have the curbing rounded at the
corners with the access drive connected to the street in the same
manner as a street. Curbing between vehicular and pedestrian ways
shall be designed with ramps from the street or parking grade to the
§ DRZ-512.2 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-516
AO:486
sidewalk which shall be no less frequent than one every 65 feet and
located in accordance with a pedestrian circulation plan.
516.5. Dimensions.
a. Off-street parking spaces shall be nine feet by 19 feet in accordance
with the following schedule except that handicapped accessible
parking spaces shall be in accordance with Section 516.5c. [Ord.
No. 9-87]
Angle of Parking
Space One-Way Aisle Two-Way Aisle
1. 90° 23 feet 23 feet
2. 60° 20 feet 22 feet
3. 45° 18 feet 20 feet
4. 30° 15 feet 18 feet
5. Parallel 12 feet 18 feet
b. Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance
and be designed in accordance with the following schedule:
Loading Space
Length Width
Apron
90° 60°
1. 60 feet 10 feet 72 feet 66 feet
2. 60 feet 12 feet 63 feet 57 feet
3. 60 feet 14 feet 60 feet 54 feet
c. In all instances where parking lots are provided for buildings, 12
feet by 20 feet handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be
located in one area, designated as parking for the handicapped and
located so that access does not require passing behind parked cars.
Handicapped parking requirements are contained in the following
table:
Total Parking in Lot
Required # of Accessible
Spaces
1 to 50 1
51 to 200 2
Over 200 1% of total spaces in lot
rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
516.6. Drainage. All parking and loading areas shall provide storm drainage
in accordance with Section 507, Drainage.
§ DRZ-516 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-516
AO:487
§ DRZ-517. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2480-17]
§ DRZ-518. Public utilities.
All public services shall be connected to approved public utilities systems
where they exist.
516.7. Surfacing. Surfacing shall meet the specifications and standards set
forth in "The Township of Millburn in the County of Essex, Standard
Specifications."
516.8. Landscaping. Landscaping in and around parking lots and loading
areas shall be shown on a landscaping plan. Trees shall be spaced so
that they do not interfere with driver vision at intersections of
driveways, streets, and the ends of parking rows; at least one tree for
every 10 parking spaces shall be provided. All areas between the
parking area, the building, and all pedestrian walkways shall be
landscaped. All landscaped areas within the parking lot or loading area
shall be elevated and protected by granite block curbing. Plantings
which do not survive shall be replaced within one year or one growing
season. A majority of the parking area shall be obscured from public
streets and adjoining residential properties by buildings, landscaped
berms, natural ground elevations, low evergreens or plantings,
singularly or in combination. Shrubbery and tree species selected shall
be resistant to pollutants typically found in parking areas.
516.9. See Section 607.1 for Minimum Loading Requirements. [Deleted by
Ord. No. 2307]
516.10. See Section 607.2 for Minimum Parking Requirements. [Deleted by
Ord. No. 2302-07]
516.11. See Section 607.3 for Location of Parking and Loading Areas.
[Deleted by Ord. No. 2302-07]
516.12. [Repealed by Ord. No. 9-87]
518.1. The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utility's distribution supply lines and
service connections.
518.2. Lots which abut existing streets where overhead utility lines and
service connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied
with service from those overhead lines, but the service connections
from the overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the case of
existing overhead utilities, should a roadway widening, or an extension
of service, or other such condition occur as a result of the development
and necessitate the replacement, relocation or extension of such
utilities, such replacement, relocation, or extension shall be
underground.
§ DRZ-516 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-518
AO:488
§ DRZ-519. Recycling for multifamily housing developments.
518.3. The approving authority shall consider the appearance of any utility
apparatus and determine whether screening is desirable or practical,
and may impose such screening requirements on the developer.
518.4. If the developer of a lot considers it a hardship to comply with the
provisions of this Section because of soil conditions, rock formations,
wooded areas, or other special conditions of the land, the developer
may apply to the approving authority for an exception from the terms of
this Section in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the alignments
and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along
horizons, avoid the clearing of swaths through treed areas by selective
cutting and a staggered alignment, by planting trees in open areas at
key locations to minimize the views of the poles and alignments, by
following rear lot lines and interior locations, and similar design and
location considerations to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines.
518.5. Any installation under this Section to be performed by a servicing
utility shall be exempt from performance guarantees, but shall be
subject to inspection by the Municipal Engineer if installed in a street
right-of-way. [Ord. No. 9-87]
519.1. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for collection and storage of residentially-generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number, and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or
containers shall be determined in consultation with the Township
Recycling Coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district
recycling plan adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13 and any
applicable requirements of the Township Master Plan adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
519.2. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
519.3. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
519.4. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
§ DRZ-518 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-519
AO:489
§ DRZ-520. Sanitary sewers.
§ DRZ-521. Shade trees.
All shade trees required under this ordinance shall have a minimum
diameter of 2.5 inches measured three feet above the ground and be of
a species acceptable to the approving authority. Trees shall be planted a
maximum of 60 feet apart measured along the street line. Existing trees
are to be preserved wherever possible by proper site planning, tree wells,
retaining walls, or porous-fill techniques. They shall be planted between the
building and the street line and shall be balled, burlapped, nursery grown,
free from insects and disease, and true to species and variety. Uprooting
or filling around trees on a lot shall not be permitted unless necessary to
meet grading requirements. In any case, lots shall be replanted with trees
to reestablish the landscape of the area and to conform with adjacent lots.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the developer during the next
recommended planting season. This provision shall apply to all site plans
and major subdivisions. Parking lots shall be planted as required in Section
516, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
§ DRZ-522. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required at the approving authority's discretion
depending on the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the street
classification, school bus stops, the development's location in relation to
other populated areas, and the general type of improvement intended.
Where required, sidewalks shall conform to the specifications and standards
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area,
shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
519.5. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the
recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with
signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
519.6. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner. [Ord. No. 19-94]
520.1. The developer shall construct sewerage facilities to transport all
sewage to a central sanitary sewage treatment and collection system.
Individual or private septic systems are not permitted.
520.2. Any sanitary sewage collection system shall be adequate to handle all
present and probable future development. Alignments outside streets
shall require easements or rights-of-way in accordance with Section
508, Easements.
§ DRZ-519 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-522
AO:490
set forth in "The Township of Millburn in the County of Essex, Standard
Specifications."
§ DRZ-523. Sight triangles.
§ DRZ-524. Soil erosion and sediment control.
All site plans and major subdivisions shall incorporate soil erosion and
sediment control plans developed in accordance with the requirements of
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act (C. 251, P.L. 1975).
§ DRZ-525. Stormwater runoff.
The provisions of this section apply to all major subdivisions and site plans.
523.1. Sight triangles shall be provided at street intersections. The area
within sight triangles shall be either dedicated as part of the street
right-of-way or set aside on a subdivision or site plan as a sight triangle
easement. Within a sight triangle and its extension into the street rightof-
way, no obstruction to vision shall be permitted between 2.5 feet and
eight feet above the center line elevation of either intersecting street.
523.2. The sight triangle is that area bounded by the intersecting street
pavement edge lines and a straight line which connects "sight points"
located on each of the two intersecting street pavement edge lines 50
feet from the intersection. Any proposed development requiring site
plan approval shall provide sight triangle easements at each driveway.
A sight triangle easement dedication shall be shown on the plan as
follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, planting, and
construction restrictions as specified in the Millburn Township
Development Regulations Ordinance." Portions of a lot set aside for the
sight triangle may be calculated in determining the lot area and may be
included in establishing the minimum setbacks required by the zoning
provisions. [Ord. No. 9-87]
523.3. In areas not controlled by sight triangle easements, no obstruction to
vision shall be permitted between 2.5 feet and eight feet above the
center line elevation of either intersecting street within the area
described in Section 523.2 above for sight triangle easements.
525.1. No land area shall be developed by any person such that:
a. The rate of stormwater runoff occurring at the area is increased
over what occurs under existing conditions;
b. The drainage of adjacent areas is adversely affected;
c. Soil erosion during and after development is increased over what
naturally occurs;
d. Soil absorption and ground water recharge capacity is adversely
affected by the proposed development;
§ DRZ-522 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:491
e. The natural drainage pattern is significantly altered.
525.1.1. Coverage of Dumpsters and Other Refuse Containers. [Added by
Ord. No. 2394-2012]
a. Purpose. An ordinance requiring dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be
covered at all times and prohibiting the spilling, dumping, leaking,
or otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the
containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Millburn and/or the waters of the
State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its
most reasonable application. For the purposes of this ordinance,
the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Township of Millburn or other public body and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s
do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to
the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:492
c. Prohibited Conduct. Any person who controls, whether owned,
leased, or operated, a refuse container or dumpster, must ensure
that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall
prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container
or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does
not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Millburn.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
2. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk
containers)
3. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
4. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge
stormwater under a valid NJPDES permit.
5. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding,
white goods placed curbside for pickup).
e. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Engineer of
the Township of Millburn.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the penalties stated
in Section 419, Violations and Penalties.
525.1.2. Retrofitting of Existing Private Storm Drain Inlets. [Added by Ord.
No. 2395-12]
a. Purpose. An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as
plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Millburn so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its
most reasonable application. For the purposes of this ordinance,
the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:493
include the future, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Township of Millburn or other public body and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s
do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate
inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
c. Prohibited Conduct. No person in control of private property
(except a residential lot with one single-family house) shall
authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of
individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with
an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in paragraph d
below prior to the completion of the project.
d. Design Standard. Storm drain inlets identified in paragraph c
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see paragraph d3
below.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:494
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of
pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to
prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through one of the following:
(1) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:495
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
e. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Engineer of
the Township of Millburn.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the penalties stated
in Section 419, Violations and Penalties, for each storm drain inlet
that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
525.2. On-Site Stormwater Detention and/or Ground Absorption Systems. In
order to duplicate as nearly as possible natural drainage conditions,
regulation and control of stormwater runoff and erosion for any land
area to be developed shall be through on-site stormwater detention
and/or ground absorption systems which include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a. Detention areas, which may be excavated basins, basins created
through use of curbs, stabilized earthen berms or dikes, or any
other form of grading which serves to temporarily impound and
store water;
b. Rooftop storage through temporary impoundment and storage of
stormwater on flat or slightly pitched building rooftops by use of
drain outlets which restrict the stormwater runoff from the roof
surface;
c. Drywells or leeching basins which control stormwater runoff
through ground absorption and temporary storage;
d. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 9-87]
e. Any system of porous media, such as gravel trenches drained by
porous wall or perforated pipe, which temporarily stores and
dissipates stormwater through ground absorption;
f. Any combination of the above-mentioned techniques which limits
stormwater runoff from a given site to what presently occurs there.
525.3. Stormwater Control. [Established by Ord. No. 2274-06]
a. Scope and Purpose. Stormwater management measures for "major
development," as defined in Section 525.3b, shall be established to
meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quantity and stormwater quality standards, in accordance
with the Municipal Stormwater Regulation Program, established by
the State of New Jersey and in this Section.
1. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural best
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:496
management practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management
strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural
strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design
and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed
on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity
or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity,
and groundwater recharge.
Note: Municipalities are encouraged to participate in the
development of regional stormwater management plans, and
to adopt and implement ordinances for specific drainage area
performance standards that address local stormwater
management and environmental characteristics.
2. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 525.3, Stormwater
Control, to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for "major development," as defined
in Section 525.3b.
3. Applicability.
(a) This Section 525.3 shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that
require preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(1) Nonresidential major developments; and
(2) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This Section 525.3 shall also be applicable to all major
developments undertaken by the Township of Millburn,
except those specifically exempted under Section 525.3d.
4. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this Section are to be considered an integral part
of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan
review process and do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or
ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Section shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare. This Section is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation,
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:497
statute, or other provision of law except that, where any
provision of this Section imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
b. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this Section shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this Section its
most reasonable application. The definitions below are the same as
or based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA
Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing
and access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County
Review Agency may either be:
A County Planning Agency; or
A County Water Resource Association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority
to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:498
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure,
any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use
of land, by any person, for which permission is required under
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case
of development of agricultural lands, development means: any
activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by
the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et
seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving
water body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated
by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not
limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat
of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous
open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection
and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or
threatened species are identified using the Department's
Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered
and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for
the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or
exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen
or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development
of organisms.
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:499
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, the Township of Millburn, or other political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical
wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.),
thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or
runoff, or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the
land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site
of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur
or has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated
on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning
Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the State's
future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide
policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or
other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater
runoff. A stormwater management basin may either be normally
dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water
in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with
wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:500
other method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and
associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or
groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal
non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to State
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions
of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores
or Nodes;
1.
2. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
3. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
4.
c. General Standards.
1. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater
Management Measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major
development shall be developed to meet the erosion
control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:501
Section 525.3d. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If
these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated
into the design.
(b) The standards in this Section apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater
recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or Water Quality
Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
Note: Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major
development projects as would be provided under the standards in
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
d. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development.
1. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development in accordance with Section
525.3j.
2. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse
impacts of concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and
endangered species as documented in the Department'
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established
under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly
Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergi
(bog turtle).
3. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Sections 525.3d6
and 7.
(a) The construction of an underground utility line provided
that the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided
that the existing conditions are maintained to the
maximum extent practicable; and
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:502
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet,
provided that the access is made of permeable material.
4. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality requirements of Sections 525.3d6 and 7 may be
obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or
railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public
pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for
the project that cannot be accomplished by any other
means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives
analysis, that through the use of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management strategies and
measures, the option selected complies with the
requirements of Sections 525.3d6 and 7 to the maximum
extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Sections 525.3d6 and 7, existing
structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings,
would need to be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have
other rights to areas, including the potential to obtain
through condemnation lands not falling under Section
525.3d4(c) above within the upstream drainage area of the
receiving stream, that would provide additional
opportunities to mitigate the requirements of Sections
525.3d6 and 7 that were not achievable on-site.
5. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Sections 525.3d6 and 7 shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set
forth at Section 525.3d5 into the design. The applicant
shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends
that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in
Paragraph (b) below into the design of a particular project,
the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:503
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
(1) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or
areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment
loss:
(2) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or
disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious
surfaces;
(3) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features
and vegetation;
(4) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration"
from preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff
to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of
the watershed to the point of interest within a
watershed;
(5) Minimize land disturbance including cleaning and
grading;
(6) Minimize soil compaction;
(7) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that
encourages retention and planting of native
vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers
and pesticides;
(8) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(9) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize
the use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order
to prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants
into stormwater runoff. Such source controls include,
but are not limited to:
(i) Site design features that help to prevent
accumulation of trash and debris in drainage
systems, including features that satisfy Section
525.3d5(c) below;
(ii) Site design features that help to prevent
discharge of trash and debris from drainage
systems;
(iii) Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:504
(iv) When establishing vegetation after land
disturbance, applying fertilizer in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Section
525.3d5(b)(9)(ii) above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Section 525.3d5(c)(iii) below.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(i) The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(ii) A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion
(non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets,
grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include
surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet,
the clear space in that curb opening (or each
individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or
more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than
7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:505
(i) Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be
overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(ii) Where flows from the water quality design storm
as specified in Section 525.3d7(a) are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum,
to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and A
1/2 inches wide (this option does not apply for
outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5
inches.
(iii) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack
that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing
between the bars, to the elevation of the water
quality design storm as specified in Section
525.3d7(a); or
(iv) Where the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determines, pursuant
to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards
in Sections 525.3d6 and 7 shall be dedicated to a
government agency, subjected to a conservation
restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office,
or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure approved by the reviewing agency
is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Section 525.3g, or
found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:506
6. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and
performance standards to control erosion, encourage and
control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
(1) The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules.
(2) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(i) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge calculations at Section
525.3e, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis that the site and its
stormwater management measures maintain
100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis that the increase of
stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
(ii) This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the "urban redevelopment
area," or to projects subject to paragraph (iii)
below.
(iii) The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant
loading. High pollutant loading areas are
areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where
hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:507
CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with Department approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure
plan and areas with high risks for spills of
toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to “source
material.” “Source material” means any
material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater
discharge to groundwater. Source materials
include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste
materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
(iv) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic
impact on the groundwater table and design the
site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but
are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or
seasonally high water table so as to cause surface
ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other subsurface structures
in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
(3) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts, the design engineer shall, using the
assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff
calculations at Section 525.3e, complete one of the
following:
(i) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-,
ten-, and 100-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the pre-construction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
(ii) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to
the pre-construction condition, in the peak runoff
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:508
rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-
, ten-, and 100-year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of
stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall
include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full
development under existing Zoning and Land Use
Ordinances in the drainage area;
(iii) Design stormwater management measures so that
the post-construction peak runoff rates for the
two-, ten- and 100-year storm events are 50%,
75% and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction
peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to
the post-construction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied
to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal
flood hazard areas if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages
below the point of discharge; or
(iv) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff
quantity analysis in accordance with (i), (ii) and
(iii) above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that
meets the definition of major development at Section
525.3b shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the
purposes of this section, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production
of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not
include the development of land for the processing or sale
of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related
products.
7. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load
from the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:509
for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of
impervious surface is being proposed on a development
site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the
New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge
specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches
of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water
quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The
calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account
the implementation of non-structural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Section
525.3g, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 525.3g.
TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:510
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following
address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application
of both BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice
TSS % Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention Systems 90%
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90%
Extended Detention Basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration Structure 80%
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 525.3f3
Sand Filter 80%
Vegetative Filter Strip 60% to 80%
Wet Pond 50% to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80%
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the sub-areas converge on site in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:511
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed
to reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the
developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the
water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of
nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the
site shall include nonstructural strategies and structural
measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 525.3d6
and 7.
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in Section 525.3g.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.4, stormwater management measures shall be
designed to prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to
waters classified as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be
established along all waters designated Category One at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that
drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as
shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County
Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of
water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological
significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(1) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special
water resource protection area in accordance with
one of the following:
(i) A 300-foot special water resource protection area
shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the
top of the bank outwards or from the center line of
the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation
allowed to follow natural succession is provided.
(ii) Encroachment within the designated special
water resource protection area under Subsection
(i) above shall only be allowed where previous
development or disturbance has occurred (for
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:512
example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall
only be allowed where applicant demonstrates
that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable.
In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than
150 feet as measured perpendicular to the top
of bank of the waterway or center line of the
waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and
approval by the Department.
(2) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area
and shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(3) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing
through the special water resource protection area
cannot comply with the Standard For Off-Site Stability
in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be
placed within the special water resource protection
area, provided that:
(i) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within
150 feet of the Category One waterway;
(ii) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed
by this section shall achieve a 95% TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
(iii) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no
impact on the receiving waterway;
(iv) The encroachment shall only be allowed where
the applicant demonstrates that the functional
value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable;
(v) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held
with the appropriate Department staff and Soil
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:513
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
(vi) All encroachments proposed under this section
shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(4) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed
by a regional stormwater management planning
committee as an element of a regional stormwater
management plan, or by a municipality through an
adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If a
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway
subject to Section 525.3d7(h) has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special
water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Section 525.3d7(h) shall maintain
or enhance the current functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in 525.3d7(h)(1) above. In no case
shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection
Area to less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular
to the waterway subject to this subsection.
(5) Paragraph 525.3d7(h) does not apply to the
construction of one individual single family dwelling
that is not part of a larger development on a lot
receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on
or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
e. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge.
1. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(1) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff
Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as
described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(2) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:514
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology
at Section 525.3e1(a)(1) and the Rational and Modified
Rational Methods at Section 525.3e1(a)(2). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the
site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic
condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at
least five years without interruption prior to the time of
application. If more than one land cover have existed on
the site during the five years immediately prior to the time
of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic
condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if
the land use type is cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall account for all significant land
features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, or culverts that may reduce
preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms,
the design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater
runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious
surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and
volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate
runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban
impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design
flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design
engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in
the design of structural stormwater management
measures.
2. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with
the following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in
New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:515
and supplemented. Information regarding the
methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
f. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
1. Standards for structural stormwater management measures
are as follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal
high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of
solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance
and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks
shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as
appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one inch
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water
quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of
the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one inch and a
maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition,
the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Section 525.3h2.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed and installed to be strong, durable,
and corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with
the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of
2.5 inches in diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet
the minimum safety standards for stormwater
management basins at Section 525.3h.
2. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:516
Manual. Other stormwater management measures may be
utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the
proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required
water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality
design and performance standards established by Section
525.3d of this ordinance.
3. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Section 525.3d of this ordinance, provided the
pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey
Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
g. Sources for Technical Guidance.
1. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can
be found in the documents listed at (a) and (b) below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box
420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information
is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands,
dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious
paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual,
as amended.
2. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of
these standards may be obtained by contacting the State
Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil
Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service,
732-932-9306; and
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:517
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C.
2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number
of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
h. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
1. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
Note: The provisions of this section are not intended to
preempt more stringent municipal or county safety
requirements for new or existing stormwater management
basins. Municipal and County stormwater management plans
and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require
existing stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to
meet one or more of the safety standards in Sections
525.3h2(a), (b) and (c) for trash racks, overflow grates, and
escape provisions at outlet structures.
2. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape
Provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris
and prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks
shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the
stormwater management basin to ensure proper
functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the
following:
(1) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no
greater than six inch spacing between the bars.
(2) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
(3) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash
rack is not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be
computed on the basis of the net area of opening
through the rack.
(4) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of
300 lbs./ft. sq.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:518
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow
grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet
structure but removable for emergencies and
maintenance.
(2) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed
to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall
be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading
of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph (c), escape provisions
means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs,
or other features that provide easily accessible means of
egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as
follows:
(1) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in
or on the structure. With the prior approval of the
reviewing agency identified in paragraph h3 of this
section a free-standing outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(2) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all
new stormwater management basins having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2.5 feet. Such
safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each
step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2.5 feet below the permanent
water surface, and the second step shall be located
one to 1.5 feet above the permanent water surface.
See paragraph h4 of this Section for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(3) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.
3. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon
a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:519
(Municipality, County or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
4. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater
Management Basin.
i. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the Checklist for
the Site Development Stormwater Plan at Section 525.3i3
below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
(c) The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials
listed in the checklist for site development stormwater
plans in accordance with Section 525.3i3 of this ordinance.
2. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's
Site Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board
or official from whom municipal approval is sought. That
municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained
by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this ordinance.
3. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be
required:
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:520
(a) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information
as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base
map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of
200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at
a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing twofoot
contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with
their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic
description of the natural and man-made features of the
site and its environs. This description should include a
discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways
and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be
given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities
or constraints for development.
(c) Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at
the scale of the topographical base map indicating the
location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
ground water elevations. A written description of the site
plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan
shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and
standards of Sections 525.3c through f are being met. The
focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:521
(1) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control
and dispose of stormwater.
(2) Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at
different levels of detention and emergency spillway
provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
(f) Calculations.
(1) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms
specified in Section 525.3d of this ordinance.
(2) When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall
be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the
location of the control measure.
(g) Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of
the stormwater management facility shall meet the
maintenance requirements of Section 525.3j.
(h) Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal
official or board reviewing an application under this
ordinance may, in consultation with the Municipal
Engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in
Sections 525.3i3(a) through i3(f) of this ordinance when it
can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
j. Maintenance and Repair.
1. Applicability.
(a) Projects subject to review as in Section 525.3a3 of this
ordinance shall comply with the requirements of Sections
525.3j2 and j3.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:522
2. General Maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for
the stormwater management measures incorporated into
the design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates,
including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash
removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement).
Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example,
a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual
property in a residential development or project, unless
such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Section 525.3j2(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Section 525.3j2(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed
of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be
performed to maintain the function of the stormwater
management measure, including repairs or replacement to
the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence
repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and
repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Section 525.3j2(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of
all preventative and corrective maintenance for the
structural stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of the development, including
a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-525
AO:523
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Section 525.3j2(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness
of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust
the plan and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Section 525.3j2(b) above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Sections 525.3j2(f) and j2(g) above.
(i) The requirements of Sections 525.3j2(c) and 2(d) do not
apply to stormwater management facilities that are
dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another
governmental agency.
Note: It may be appropriate to delete requirements in
the maintenance and repair plan that are not applicable if
the ordinance requires the facility to be dedicated to the
municipality. If the municipality does not want to take this
responsibility, the ordinance should require the posting
of a two year maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. Guidelines for developing a
maintenance and inspection program are provided in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County Demonstration
Study, Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual, dated June 1989 available from the NJDEP,
Watershed Management Program.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility
becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or if it
is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality shall
so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of
that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to
affect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner
that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or his
designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend
the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the
cost thereof to the responsible person.
3. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which
the major development is located from requiring the posting of
a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ DRZ-525 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-525
AO:524
§ DRZ-526. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 9-87; Ord. No. 12-93; Ord. No.
15-95; Ord. No. 20-95; Ord. No. 2170-00; Ord. No. 2305-07; deleted
by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-527. Street lighting.
Street lighting shall be reviewed by the approving authority as a part of its
review of an application for development. Street lighting shall be installed
at street intersections and elsewhere as deemed necessary. The developer
shall install underground service for street lighting.
§ DRZ-528. Streets.
k. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs,
converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of Section 525.3 shall, for each and every violation thereof
and for each and every day that such violation thereof continues, be
subject to the penalties stated in Section 419, Violations and
Penalties.
l. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
the approval by the County Review Agency, or 60 days from the
receipt of the ordinance by the County Review Agency if the County
Review Agency should fail to act.
525.4. Underground storage facilities which are designed to percolate water
into the soil shall be surrounded by a blanket of crushed stone or gravel
which is to be a minimum of 24 inches thick. The stone shall be
separated from the surrounding soil by an appropriate geotextile fabric
to be approved by the Township Engineer. [Ord. No. 9-87]
528.1. All developments shall be served by paved streets. The arrangement
of streets shall provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets,
conform with the topography as far as practicable, and allow for
continued extension into adjoining undeveloped tracts.
528.2. When a development adjoins land capable of being developed or
subdivided, suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access from
the adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
528.3. Local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
528.4. When a development adjoins or includes existing Township streets
that do not conform to widths shown on the Master Plan, Official Map,
this ordinance, or other street width requirements of the Township,
additional land along both sides of said street sufficient to conform to
the right-of-way requirements shall be anticipated in the subdivision
design by creating oversized lots to accommodate future widening. The
widening may be offered to the Township for the location, installation,
repair, and maintenance of streets, drainage facilities, utilities, and
other facilities customarily located on street rights-of-way and shall be
§ DRZ-525 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-528
AO:525
expressed on the plat as follows: "Street right-of-way easement granted
to the Township of Millburn to enter upon these lands for the purposes
provided for and expressed in the Development Regulations Ordinance
of the Township of Millburn." This statement on an approved plat shall
in no way reduce the subdivider's responsibility to provide, install,
repair, or maintain any facilities installed in the area dedicated by
ordinance, or shown on the plat, or provided for by any maintenance or
performance guarantees. If the subdivision is along one side only, onehalf
of the required extra width shall be anticipated. See Section 609.7,
Lots.
528.5. Longitudinal grades on all local streets shall not exceed 10%, or 4%
on primary, secondary, and collector streets as shown on the circulation
plan of the Master Plan. No street shall have a longitudinal grade of less
than 0.5%. Maximum grades within intersections shall be 4%. The
maximum slope of the roadway from the center line to the curbline or
edge of the paving shall be 2%. Where the roadway on a primary,
secondary, or collector street is banked to facilitate a curve in the street
alignment, the slope toward the curbline or shoulder shall conform to
accepted engineering practice.
528.6. Intersecting street center lines shall be as close to right angles as
possible. The curb lines shall be parallel to the center line.
528.7. Where dead-end (cul-de-sac) streets are utilized, they shall conform
to the following standards:
a. A permanent dead-end street (where provision for the future
extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining property is
impractical or impossible) or a temporary dead-end street (where
provision is made for the future extension of the street to the
boundary line of adjoining property) shall provide a turnaround at
the end with a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet and a
roadway radius of not less than 40 feet. The center point for the
radius shall be on the center line of the associated street or, if offset,
to a point where the roadway radius also becomes a tangent to
one of the curblines of the associated street.
b. If a dead-end street is temporary, provisions shall be made for
removal of the turnaround and reversion of the excess right-of-way
to the adjoining properties as an off-tract responsibility of the
developer who extends the street.
c. A dead-end street shall serve no more than 14 lots, and shall not
exceed 500 feet in length.
528.8.No street shall have a name which will duplicate or nearly duplicate
the spelling or phonetic sound of the names of existing streets. New
street names shall be chosen to reflect the historical, topographical, or
natural features of the site.
§ DRZ-528 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-528
AO:526
§ DRZ-529. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-530. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2471-16]
§ DRZ-531. Sustainable building and design standards. [Ord. No.
2359-10]
528.9. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications set forth in the Township of Millburn in the County of
Essex, Standard Specifications.
531.1. Adoption of Codes by Reference. The "Leadership in Energy &
Environmental Design Rating System," Version 3 (LEED 2009), adopted
April 2009, which includes rating systems for LEED for New
Construction and Major Renovation promulgated by the US Green
Building Council ("USGBC") are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this chapter. [Ord. No. 2359-10]
531.2. Township Funded Building Projects.
a. The Township supports the use of green building practices and
adopts the use of USGBC's Leadership in Energy Design ("LEED")
Rating System for the design and construction of new buildings and
major renovations and additions to Township-owned buildings.
b. The Township shall incorporate life-cycle and total cost accounting
in the design, construction, and maintenance of all Township
owned and financed buildings.
c. Township funded capital improvement projects shall meet a
minimum LEED "Silver" rating.
531.3. Development Applications.
a. To encourage development projects to incorporate sustainable
building and design measures, the Township of Millburn has
established a Sustainability Checklist as part of the Millburn
submission checklist for minor site plan, subdivision/major site
plan, subdivision applications. Applicants are required to fill out
the Sustainability Checklist Form as a completeness item.
b. The Sustainability Checklist Form incorporates proposed green
energy and water conservation measures including:
1. The name of any LEED Accredited Professionals working on
the project.
2. A list of appliances, fixtures and construction techniques which
meet U.S. EPA's Energy Star and WaterSense standards.
3. A list of green and recycled building materials used in
construction, renovation, and maintenance.
§ DRZ-528 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-531
AO:527
4. A Waste Management Plan for recycling and/or reusing 60% of
all construction and demolition waste generated in projects
larger than $25,000 outlining where waste will be sent for
recycling, reuse, reprocessing, or disposal, together with a
letter from each of the recipient facilities.
5. Use of any water efficient landscaping.
6. Use of any on-site renewable energy systems such as:
(a) Solar.
(b) Wind.
(c) Geothermal.
7. Details of roofing materials designed to reduce the urban heat
island effect such as:
(a) Construction of roof top gardens to reduce solar gain in
summer and insulate in winter.
(b) Use of roofing materials that are no darker than a light
gray or demonstrate how alternate roofing materials
reduce the urban heat island effect.
8. Details of any sustainable stormwater systems employed such
as:
(a) Bioswales/raingardens.
(b) Permeable surfaces.
(c) Grey water systems.
(d) Retention and detention facilities.
(e) Continuous trenching.
9. A list of native and well adapted species used in landscaping to
eliminate the need for fertilization and pesticides.
c. For each of the sustainable building/design items listed on the
Sustainability Checklist Form applicants must indicate the extent
to which they are incorporating such a measure in the project; or,
alternatively indicate the reason(s) why the measure is not being
incorporated in the project.
§ DRZ-531 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-531
AO:528
Sustainability Checklist Form
Sustainable Building and
Design Standards Applicant
Township
OK (Date)
Name of LEED Accredited
Professional working on project
List of Energy Star and WaterSense
appliances, fixtures and
construction techniques
List of green and recycled building
materials in new construction,
renovation, and maintenance
Waste Management Plan for
recycling and/or reuse of 60% of all
construction and demolition of
waste generated in projects larger
than $25,000
Use of any water efficient
landscaping
Use of any on-site renewable
energy systems such as:
Solar
Wind
Geothermal
Details of roofing materials
designed to reduce the urban heat
island effect such as:
Construction of roof top gardens to
reduce solar gain in summer and
insulate in winter Use of roofing
materials that are no darker than a
light gray or demonstrate how
alternate roofing materials reduce
the urban heat island effect
Details of any sustainable
stormwater systems employed such
as:
Bioswales/raingardens
Permeable surfaces
Grey water systems
Retention and detention facilities
Continuous trenching
§ DRZ-531 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-531
AO:529
Sustainability Checklist Form
Sustainable Building and
Design Standards Applicant
Township
OK (Date)
A list of native and well adapted
species used in landscaping to
eliminate the need for fertilization
and pesticides
Details of energy efficient HVAC
equipment
Details of building envelope
efficiency such as insulation
beyond code requirements, air
sealing and advanced framing
techniques
Note: Please indicate for each of the sustainable building/design
items listed, the extent to which the measure is being incorporated
in the project; or, alternatively, indicate the reason(s) why it is not
being incorporated in the project.
§ DRZ-531 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-531
AO:530
ARTICLE 6
Zoning Provisions
§ DRZ-601. Zoning Districts.
For purposes of this ordinance, the Township is hereby divided into zoning
districts as enumerated in this Article and as shown on the Zoning Map.
§ DRZ-602. Zoning Map.
§ DRZ-603. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
a. Zoning Map Adopted. The boundaries of the zoning districts are
established on the Zoning Map dated September 20, 1999 which is
hereby made part of this ordinance. (The map may be found in the
attachments at the end of this chapter as Schedule D.) [Ord. No.
18-94, 7-96, 2167-99]
b. Historic District Overlay Map. The Zoning Map established and
provided for by Section 602a of the Development Regulations and
Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to add as an overlay zone the
designated historic districts established and designated in this
ordinance. (The map may be found in the attachments at the end of this
chapter as Schedule B.)53 [Ord. No. 10-87 § 2, 8-89, 10-89]
c. Amendments.
1. The Zoning Map of the Township shall be revised to place Block
2504, Lot 9 and Block 2702, Lots 15, 16 and 17 in the Conservation-
Educational/Cultural CE Zone.] [Ord. No. 2325-08]
2. Block 1904, Lots 72, 73, 74 and 75, on the Official Tax Map of the
Township of Millburn shall be removed from the B-3 Zone and shall
then be incorporated into the RMF-AH Zone. [Added 9-17-2019
by Ord. No. 2542-19]
603.1. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center
lines, streams, and lot or property lines unless otherwise indicated by
dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet,
measured horizontally from the street right-of-way line even if the
center line of that street serves as a zoning district line. The location of
any disputed zoning district line shall be determined by the Board of
Adjustment. Zoning district lines extend vertically in both directions
from ground level.
603.2. Where a street or public way serves as the zoning district line and it
is lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be considered the
zoning district line.
53.Editor's Note: See also Article 8, Historic Preservation and Schedules and Maps, included
as attachments to this chapter.
§ DRZ-601 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-604
AO:531
§ DRZ-604. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this ordinance are prohibited.
§ DRZ-605. Existing uses.
Except as otherwise specified for nonconforming uses, structures, sites, or
lots, any use, building, or structure existing at the time of the enactment
of this ordinance may be continued even though such use, building, or
structure may not conform with the provisions of this ordinance for the
district in which it is located.
§ DRZ-606. Zone requirements. [Ord. No. 2300-07 adopted on
10-23-2007 provided for the provisions of 606.12. The ordinance
was readopted by Ord. No. 2325-08 on 8-19-2008 to provide notice
as required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.1]
606.1. Conservation-Recreation C. [Ord. No. 18-94]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to restrict development on
public lands, lands which are environmentally sensitive, and lands
which are vital to the preservation of regional water supplies.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Utility facilities related to the protection, preservation, or
distribution of regional water supplies.
2. Park and recreation uses in areas meeting the definition of
"open-space" as set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5.
c. Accessory Uses. Uses customarily associated with the above uses
provided such accessory uses are subordinate to the principal use,
do not change the character of the principal use, and serve only the
principal use.
d. Area and Setback Requirements. These requirements do not apply
to wells.
1. Setback from all property lines - minimum: 100 feet.
2. Setback from nearest residence - minimum: 200 feet.
3. Maximum structure height: 32 feet.
606.2. Residential R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6.
a. Purpose. To provide a range of lot sizes for single-family dwellings.
The development of vacant lands in these predominantly built up
neighborhoods shall be compatible with existing development
patterns.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. Single family dwellings.
§ DRZ-604 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:532
c. Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, sheds, swimming pools, platform tennis
courts, tennis courts, and greenhouses for private purposes,
and other uses customarily associated with single family
dwellings provided such accessory uses are subordinate to the
principal use, and serve only the principal use. [Ord. No.
22-86; Ord. No. 2370-11]
2. Portable storage containers. The use of portable storage
containers will be allowed on a temporary basis subject to the
following conditions: [Ord. No. 2314-08]
(a) Portable storage containers shall be placed on property
within a residential zone for no more than 30 days unless
used in conjunction with a construction permit, in which
event, it shall be permitted to remain for the duration of
the construction permit, but no more than one year.
(b) A property owner may apply for an extension of the thirtyday
limitation to the Zoning Official for good cause, but in
no event for an additional 30 days.
(c) No portable storage container shall be placed in any area
on a residential property not meeting the accessory
structure setback requirements of the zone and in no event
shall a portable storage container be placed in a front
yard, the public right-of-way, or at any location which
obstructs traffic visibility. All portable storage containers
shall be placed on a driveway, where possible.
(d) There shall be a limit of one portable storage container per
property.
(e) The size of a portable storage container shall not exceed
10 feet in height and 10 feet by 20 feet in width and length.
(f) The portable storage container and the area surrounding it
shall be kept in a neat and clean condition.
(g) Persons intending to place a portable storage container on
a residential property shall first obtain a permit therefor
following completion of the relevant application form and
payment of a fee of $75.
d. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2417-13]
1. Houses of worship, subject to the following standards:
(a) The lot shall have frontage on a primary, secondary or
collector street as shown in the Circulation Element of the
Master Plan.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:533
(b) The lot shall have a minimum area of three acres.
(c) The lot shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet.
(d) The lot shall have a minimum depth of 250 feet.
(e) Vehicular access shall be from other than a local street if
the lot has frontage on more than one street.
(f) Lot coverage shall not exceed the maximum established
for the underlying Residential Zone District.
(g) The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 feet.
(h) The minimum side yard setback shall be 40 feet.
(i) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(j) The minimum buffer to a residential use or zone shall be
25 feet.
(k) The minimum parking setback shall be 20 feet.
(l) Building height shall not exceed the maximum established
for the underlying Residential Zone District.
2. Public and private schools, subject to the following standards:
(a) The lot shall have frontage on a primary, secondary or
collector street as shown in the Circulation Element of the
Master Plan.
(b) The lot shall have a minimum area of three acres.
(c) The lot shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet.
(d) The lot shall have a minimum depth of 250 feet.
(e) Vehicular access shall be from other than a local street if
the lot has frontage on more than one street.
(f) Lot coverage shall not exceed the maximum established
for the underlying Residential Zone district.
(g) The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 feet.
(h) The minimum side yard setback shall be 40 feet.
(i) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
(j) The minimum buffer to a residential use or zone shall be
25 feet.
(k) The minimum parking setback shall be 20 feet.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:534
(l) Building height shall not exceed the maximum established
for the underlying Residential Zone District.
3. Radio antennas in accordance with the provisions of section
606.2e3.
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimums R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
(a) Lot area-square feet 29,000 20,000 14,500 6,000
(b) Lot width-feet 115 100 75 60
(c) Lot depth-feet 175 150 125 90
(d) Front setback-feet* 40 40 40 40
(e) Side yard setback
standard
(1) Side yard setback standard in the R-5 and R-6
Districts:
R-5 R-6
(a) Minimum setback for building to
18 feet in height-feet
12 8
(b) Additional minimum setback,
added to paragraph e1 above, for
each foot in height of any building
segment over 18 feet in height
which lies between the setback
standard set forth in paragraph
e1 above and the setback
standard set forth in 3 below-feet
0.33 0.30
(c) Minimum setback for building
segments 32 feet in height-feet
16 12
(2) Side yard setback standard in the R-3 and R-4
Districts:
(a) In the R-3 District, the minimum side yard setback
shall be 15 feet for one-story buildings up to 18
feet in height. The minimum side yard setback for
a second story, or any building greater than 18 feet
in height shall be 25 feet.
(b) In the R-4 District, the minimum side yard setback
shall be 15 feet for one-story buildings up to 18
feet in height. The minimum side yard setback for
a second story, or any building greater than 18 feet
in height shall be 22 feet.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:535
(c) In the R-3 and R-4 Districts, where a garage
vehicular entrance faces a side property line, the
minimum side yard setback to the garage shall
be 28 feet to accommodate a minimum 23-foot
vehicle back-up distance and a minimum 5-foot
pavement setback to the side property line. [Ord.
No. 2254-05]
(f) Side setback-combined 35% of lot width
(g) Rear yard-unoccupied 25% of lot area
(h) Rear setback [Ord. No.
10-88, 17-91]
20% of lot depth
NOTES:
* Front setbacks shall also be based on the average established
setback for the dwellings located within 500 feet on the same
side of the street, or to the nearest intersecting street, end
of street or district boundary line, whichever is the lesser.
If no uniformity in established setback exists or if the area
has no development, the front setback minimum shall be as
shown above. The approving authority shall have the authority
to grant flexibility in front setbacks based on the preservation
of natural features. Adequate consideration shall be given to
impact on adjoining properties. A variance shall not be required
for existing nonconforming front yard setbacks when a roof
(and supporting columns) is added to an existing front stairs
or stoop. The roof shall not exceed four feet in depth and
extend more than six feet from the stoop on any side. [Ord. No.
2241-04]
2. Maximums R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
(a) Building coverage 13% 14% 18% 23%
(b) Lot coverage 35% 35% 35% 45%
(c) Building height-feet 32* 32* 32 32
(d) Floor area ratio 25% 26% 30% 36%
NOTES:
* In the R-3 and R-4 Districts, a maximum building height of 35
feet shall be permitted, but only in instances where the pitch
of the principal portion of the roof is provided with a minimum
slope of eight on 12 (a rise of eight inches for every 12 inches
horizontally). Such additional height shall not apply to shed
roofs, but only to hipped, gabled, or other roofs where the peak
or ridgeline is toward the center-section of the roof area. [Ord.
No. 2254-05, 2313-08]
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:536
3. Accessory Uses R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
(a) Minimum side
setback-feet
12 12 12 12
(b) Minimum rear
setback-feet
12 12 12 12
(c) Maximum structure
height-feet
18 18 18 18
(d) Attached garages shall be set back in compliance with the
minimum setback requirements of the respective zone
district. Detached garages shall be set back a minimum of
12 feet from all property lines in the R-3 and R-4 Districts
and in all other Districts the setback shall be 3 feet.
Garages facing and opening onto a public street shall be
prohibited in the R-3 and R-4 Residential Zone Districts.
Not more than 4 residential garage spaces shall be
permitted in the R-3 District, 3 spaces in the R-4 District
and not more than 2 spaces in the R-5 and R-6 Districts.
[Ord. No. 2172A-00, 2203-02, 2257-05]
(e) A structure (whether attached or detached) used as a radio
antenna (including the base, the tower boom, and the
antenna), hereafter the Radio Antenna Structure, may be
an overall maximum of 40 feet in height, provided the
height of the radio antenna structure (not including the
residence with respect to an attached structure) shall in
no event exceed 1.1 times the distance from the nearest
property line. A radio antenna structure may have an
additional 20 feet in height, up to a maximum of 60 feet
total height, upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board, provided, however, the applicant
complies with the following standards:
(1) The radio antenna structure is set back from the
nearest lot line not less than 1.1 times the height of the
antenna.
(2) The radio antenna structure is located in the rear yard.
(3) The Planning Board grants site plan approval. Among
the factors to be considered by the Planning Board as
part of site plan and conditional use approval are the
precise location of the radio antenna structure and the
adequacy of screening of the structure.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:537
(f) A structure used as a dish antenna, or satellite receiving
station, shall be no more than 10 feet in height, including
the supporting structure. It shall be located only in the rear
yard area. On corner lots, which have no defined rear yard
area, it shall be located in a side yard a minimum of 2 times
the required front setback from the street line. This type of
structure shall not be mounted on the principal building. It
shall be screened from view from adjoining properties and
streets by evergreen planting, which shall be at least as tall
as the antenna and supporting structure combined at the
time of planting. Dish antennas with diameters of 18 inches
or less shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
[Ord. No. 9-87, 5-97]
4. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2286-07; repealed by Ord. No.
2434-14]
f. Other Provisions. No commercial motor vehicle, school bus, or
school van shall be parked or stored anywhere on private property
unhoused or visible from a public street or any neighboring
property except when the vehicle is being used in the transaction of
business with the owner or occupant of the property. Commercial
motor vehicles shall include all commercially licensed vehicles, all
vehicles with business identification signs or lettering, and all
trucks or vans with a pay load or capacity in excess of 3/4 ton. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the parking and storage
of school buses and school vans on public school, private school, or
parochial school property within residential districts in the
Township.
g. Residential driveways shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
any adjoining residential property line in the R-3 and R-4
Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2172A-00]
606.3. Residential R-7. [Ord. No. 2491-17]
a. Purpose. To provide a residential area for small one- and two-family
dwellings.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Two-family dwellings.
c. Accessory Uses. Same as Section 606.2c.
d. Conditional Uses. Same as Section 606.2d.
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimums. One-Family Two-Family
(a) Lot area-square feet 4,000 5,000
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:538
(b) Lot width-feet 40 50
(c) Front setback-feet* 24 24
(d) Side setback-feet
(1) For buildings up to 18
feet in height
4 6
(2) Additional setback in feet
for each foot in height of
any building segment
over 18 feet in height
which lies between the
setback standard set
forth in paragraph (d)(1)
above and the setback
standard set forth in
paragraph (d)(3) below
0.25 0.25
(3) Setback in feet for
segments 32 feet in
height
8 10
(e) Side setback-combined 30% of lot width
(f) Rear setback-depth-feet Greater of 20 feet or 20%
of lot depth
(g) Rear yard-unoccupied 25% of total lot area
2. Maximums. [Ord. No. 2313-08] One-Family Two-Family
(a) Building coverage 25% 25%
(b) Lot coverage 45% 45%
(c) Building height-feet 32 32
(d) Floor area ratio 38% 38%
3. Accessory Uses. One-Family Two-Family
Side and rear setback 12 feet, 3 feet for detached
garages
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:539
NOTE:
* Front setbacks shall also be based on the average established
setback for the dwellings located within 500 feet on the same
side of the street, or to the nearest intersecting street, end of
street or district boundary line, whichever is the lesser. If no
established setback exists or if the area has no development,
the front setback minimum shall be as shown above. The
approving authority shall have the authority to grant flexibility
in front setbacks based on the preservation of natural features.
Adequate consideration shall be given to impact on adjoining
properties. A variance shall not be required for existing
nonconforming front yard setbacks when a roof (and supporting
columns) is added to an existing front stairs or stoop. The roof
shall not exceed four feet in depth and extend more than six feet
from the stoop on any side. [Ord. No. 2241-04]
606.4. Residential R-8.
a. Purpose. To provide for multiple dwellings in areas where they are
compatible with existing development, and to allow variety in
housing types.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Two-family dwellings.
3. Attached dwellings.
4. Apartments.
c. Accessory Uses. Same as Section 606.2c.
d. Conditional Uses. Same as Section 606.2d.
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Single-family dwellings. Same as the R-6 District.
2. Two-family dwellings. Same as the R-7 District.
3. Attached dwellings.
(a) Minimum unit width: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum side setback (end): 10 feet.
(c) Minimum front setback: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum rear setback: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet side to side;
60 feet front to front; 40 feet rear to rear.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:540
(f) Maximum density: eight units per acre.
(g) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
Note: If individual lots are not created, these standards
shall apply as though individual lots were created.
4. Apartments.
(a) Minimum side setback: 1/2 building height.
(b) Minimum side setbacks combined: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum rear setback: 20% of lot depth.
(d) Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet (20 feet on
ends).
(e) Maximum density: 14 units per acre.
(f) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
(h) Maximum building height: 32 feet; two stories.
(i) No parking between the street line and the building.
(j) Front setbacks shall be a minimum of 15 feet along
Millburn Avenue and Main Street and 30 feet on all other
streets, except that the setback shall be based on the
average setback of adjoining lots if a consistent setback is
established.
(k) At least 15% of the site shall be available for recreational
purposes, located in the rear yard.
f. Other Provisions. No basement apartments shall be permitted
except for resident staff.
606.4.1. Residential Multi-Family Affordable Housing RMF-AH. [Added
9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2542-19]
a. Purpose: to provide for multifamily inclusionary development with
a required set-aside for low- and moderate-income units together
with ground-floor medical office use.
b. Permitted principal uses:
1. Residential apartments, with optional associated amenities and
services, including, but not limited to, fitness center, screening
room, business center, balconies and terraces for individual
units, and other uses customarily associated with multifamily
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:541
dwellings, provided such accessory uses are subordinate to the
principal use and serve only the principal use.
2. Medical offices, as expressly provided herein, but not including
twenty-four-hour urgent care or emergency care services.
c. Accessory uses:
1. Off-street structured parking within the building (i.e., at grade
and below grade). Surface parking that serves existing medical
office space shall be permitted only if the required
development components are constructed in phases as
expressly provided herein; however no such surface parking
shall be permitted upon completion of all required
development components.
2. Any other use which is subordinate and customarily incidental
to one or more of the permitted principal uses, including, but
not limited to, leasing/sales/management offices associated
with residential apartments, maintenance areas, and trash
collection/recycling areas.
d. Maximum development yield.
1. The total number of multifamily residential units shall not
exceed 62.
2. The total gross floor area of medical office use shall not exceed
10,000 square feet.
e. Affordable housing requirements. A total of 12 units shall be
maintained as affordable units in compliance with applicable New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) rules and regulations
and Uniform Housing and Affordability Controls (UHAC). Such
affordable units shall include: three three-bedroom units, seven
two-bedroom units, and two one-bedroom units. Half of the 12
affordable units (i.e., six units) shall be set aside for low-income
households, and the other half (i.e., six units) shall be set aside for
moderate-income households, as defined by COAH and/or UHAC.
In addition, of the 12 affordable units, 13%, or two units, shall be
made available to very-low-income households, as defined by COAH
and/or UHAC. The affordable units shall be integrated with market
rate units throughout the development.
f. Required courtyard/plaza.
1. Location. In order to break down the mass and scale of the
building and provide an attractive amenity for building
residents as well as the general public, a courtyard or plaza is
required along Woodland Road. The courtyard/plaza shall be
centrally located and shall be at the same grade as the lowest
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:542
level of residential apartments immediately to the south along
Woodland Road.
2. Dimensions. The courtyard/plaza shall comprise at least 6,000
square feet. It shall have a minimum width, measured parallel
to Woodland Road, of 60 feet; and a minimum depth, measured
perpendicular to the building facade along Woodland Road, of
80 feet at all points.
3. Connection to public sidewalks. A portion of the courtyard/
plaza shall form a level connection to the sidewalk on
Woodland Road. Where the remainder of the plaza is below the
grade of the adjoining public sidewalk, a generously
proportioned set of steps shall be provided to step down from
the sidewalk into the plaza, so that the plaza may be entered
from any portion of the adjoining sidewalk. The stairs shall be
designed in a manner similar to shallow, wide, amphitheater
seating, rather than steep and narrow.
4. Active uses along perimeter. The courtyard/plaza shall have
active building uses on at least two sides and for at least 2/3 of
its perimeter, including residential apartment units on the
south side and residential amenity space(s) such as fitness
rooms or multipurpose rooms on the north side. Active uses for
residential amenity space shall have a high proportion of
window glazing overlooking the courtyard. These active uses
shall be located at the same finished grade as the courtyard.
g. Required development components and application for site plan
approval.
1. Along Chatham Road and along Woodland Road north of the
courtyard/plaza, the following shall be required:
(a) Three levels of parking (with two levels of parking below
the grade of Chatham Road and one level at grade);
(b) Medical office space at the grade of Chatham Road (the
first floor);
(c) Residential apartments on the second and third floors;
(d) Residential amenity space on the first floor as well as on
the floor below the first floor (garage level), which will
front onto the required courtyard/plaza.
2. Along Woodland Road south of the courtyard/plaza, the
following shall be required:
(a) A level of parking that is below the grade of the courtyard/
plaza.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:543
(b) Residential apartments on the first, second, and third
floors, with the lowest residential level being at the grade
of the required courtyard/plaza.
3. Application shall be made for preliminary site plan approval for
the entire tract. Application for final site plan approval may be
made separately for a portion of the tract or simultaneously
with the application for preliminary site plan approval.
4. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the phased
construction of the required development components as set
forth in Subsection g1 (Phase 1) and Subsection g2 (Phase 2)
above.
5. Any deviations from the design requirements set forth in
Section 606.4j through k shall be considered as exceptions
from the requirements for site plan approval in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
h. Area, bulk and setback requirements.
1. The minimum tract area shall be 1.5 acres.
2. Required minimum building setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) Along Chatham Road, the minimum setback shall be seven
feet, except for a permitted area of encroachment of up to
125 feet in length, as measured parallel to Chatham Road,
from the westernmost property line. Within this area of
encroachment, the building may be set back two feet from
the property line.
(b) Along the shared property line with Lot 76 in Block 1904,
the minimum setback shall be one foot.
(c) Along Woodland Road, the minimum setback shall be eight
feet, except for a permitted area of encroachment of up to
50 feet in length, as measured parallel to Woodland Road,
from the southernmost property line. Within this area of
encroachment, the building may be set back three feet
from the property line.
(d) Along the shared property line with Lot 107 in Block 1904,
the minimum setback shall be five feet.
(e) Along the shared property line with Lot 77 in Block 1904,
the minimum setback shall be seven feet.
3. Building height. Building height shall be measured with
respect to the adjoining finished grade at each point around
the building perimeter and shall not exceed the permitted
height at each specified location. Height shall be measured to
the deck level of the roof. For purposes of measuring height,
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:544
stairways, elevators, bulkheads and similar rooftop mechanical
appurtenances located above the deck level of the roof shall
be excluded from the building height calculation; provided,
however, that no such rooftop appurtenance shall exceed the
deck level of the roof by more than 12 feet.
(a) Along the segment of the building fronting on Chatham
Road, the maximum height shall be 38 feet.
(b) Along the segment of the building fronting on Woodland
Road north of the required courtyard/plaza, the maximum
height shall be 40 feet.
(c) Along the segment of the building fronting on Woodland
Road south of the courtyard/plaza, the maximum height
shall be 44 feet.
(d) For all other segments of the building where there are
three levels of parking, the maximum height shall be 50
feet. In addition, in no event shall there be three full levels
of parking exposed along any such segment of the
building. Further, where more than two levels of parking
are exposed, the developer shall employ landscape berms
and/or planting materials to provide the appearance that
only two parking levels are exposed.
(e) For all other segments of the building where there is one
level of parking, the maximum building height shall be 45
feet.
4. Required building stepbacks along Woodland Road.
(a) North of the courtyard/plaza, a stepback is required at the
top floor at the corner of the courtyard/plaza and
Woodland Road. Specifically, on the top floor a stepback
from the courtyard/plaza shall be provided with a
minimum ten-foot depth (i.e., as measured perpendicular
to the facade facing the courtyard/plaza) and minimum
thirty-foot length (i.e., as measured parallel to the
courtyard/plaza and extending at a minimum along the
length of a full unit and the common hallway).
(b) South of the courtyard/plaza, a stepback is required at the
top floor at the southerly corner of the building along
Woodland Road facing Lot 107 in Block 1904. Specifically,
on the top floor a stepback shall be provided with a
minimum ten-foot depth (i.e., as measured perpendicular
to the facade facing Lot 107 in Block 1904) and minimum
thirty-foot length (i.e., as measured parallel to this same
facade).
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:545
(c) At the southerly end of the building, a stepback is required
at the top floor. Specifically, on the top floor a stepback
shall be provided with a minimum ten-foot depth (i.e., as
measured perpendicular to the facade facing Lot 107) and
minimum thirty-foot length (i.e., as measured parallel to
this same facade).
Stepback areas shall be designed as terraces for one or more
adjoining residential units, with sliding patio or French doors from
the units, decorative flooring or paving, and a railing at the outer
edge for safety.
i. Circulation and parking.
1. Vehicular entry points. Two vehicular garage entries are
permitted from Chatham Road into the building. Both entry
driveways shall be located at the western end of the building,
away from the corner of Woodland Road. One vehicular garage
entry from Woodland Road is permitted, south of the required
courtyard/plaza.
2. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along Chatham and
Woodland Roads.
3. Parking requirements. The required parking shall be as
follows:
(a) Residential: compliant with RSIS.
(b) Medical office: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
4. Parking garage. Each of the three permitted parking garage
entries shall not exceed 25 feet in width as measured at the
garage door opening.
j. Building design. The building should have a traditional appearance,
including a stone or masonry base, brick facades with white
accents, flat roof, a division into pedestrian-scaled bays, and
generous detailing at the roofline.
1. Vertical articulation: bays.
(a) Along all facades, the building shall be divided into series
of alternating major and minor bays.
(1) A major bay is distinguished by having a significant
change in plane with respect to the adjoining minor
bays, equivalent to an outward projection at least two
feet deep so as to create a significant break in the
mass. Major bays shall include flat roofs and parapets
that make them appear taller than adjoining minor
bays. Along the building segments fronting on
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:546
Chatham Road and Woodland Road north of the
courtyard/plaza, each major bay shall range from 15
feet to 30 feet wide. Along the building segment
fronting on Woodland Road south of the courtyard/
plaza, a wider variation in major bay size is permitted,
with each between 10 feet and 35 feet wide.
(2) Minor bays, which alternate with major bays along the
facade, shall not exceed 50 feet in width. Minor bays
shall have the same level of detailing and
transparency as major bays.
(3) Where a major or minor bay is equal to or more than
20 feet wide, it shall be visually divided into two to
three smaller vertical components, each averaging 10
feet to 15 feet wide, by means of common window
patterns, projecting bay or box windows, recessed or
projecting balconies, dormer windows on the top floor,
or other features.
2. Horizontal articulation: base, middle, top.
(a) The building shall be divided into a base, middle, and top.
(1) Base facade detailing. The base of the building should
be highlighted across the entire first level. While the
primary material on facades should be brick, a
significant portion of the ground-floor facade of the
building (and principally on major bays) shall be stone,
simulated stone, or masonry in order to visually
ground the building. Along the segments of the
building fronting on Chatham Road and Woodland
Road north of the courtyard/plaza, the ground-floor
facades of major bays shall be capped by a generously
proportioned projecting belt cornice. The office and
residential entries shall be recessed from the primary
facade plane and accented with stone or masonry
detailing. Facade-mounted lighting shall be included
on both sides of entry doors.
(2) Middle detailing. The middle of the building shall
include variations in plane by means of the major and
minor bays, as well as further architectural
components such as bay windows and Juliet balconies,
to help create variety and visual interest.
(3) Roofline detailing. Within each bay, the top of the
building shall be highlighted as the entire top floor or
just at the roofline. For major bays along the segments
of the building fronting on Chatham Road and
Woodland Road north of the courtyard/plaza, the roof
shape of major bays shall be flat, and the roofline shall
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:547
include a tall, decorative parapet. For major bays
along the segment of the building fronting on
Woodland Road south of the Courtyard/Plaza, a
cornice or a parapet shall be used to emphasize the
top of major bays. For minor bays, a simpler and
visually receding roofline shall be used on the top
floor. For the segments of the building fronting on
Chatham Road and Woodland Road north of the
courtyard/plaza, a mansard or faux-mansard roof
shape shall be used on minor bays, with a shingled
or metal-clad facing on the steeply pitched slope of
the mansard roof. For the segment of the building
fronting on Woodland Road south of the courtyard/
plaza, a visually lighter-weight material or design is
encouraged on minor bays, such as wood or fibercement
cladding or metal paneling, and/or a higher
proportion of window openings. Alternately, a simple
cornice, coping, or parapet may be used.
3. Transparency. The window and door openings on each floor
shall together occupy between 25% and 50% of the facade
area. Doors and windows facing onto the courtyard/plaza shall
have the same design and level of detail as those on the streetfacing
facades.
(a) Ground-floor entries along public streets. Pedestrian
building entries are required in the locations set forth
below. All such required entries shall comprise fully glazed
double doors; side-lite glazing is encouraged to further
increase transparency at entries. One prominent entry into
the medical office space shall be provided from Chatham
Road. The main pedestrian entry and lobby to the
residential apartments north of the courtyard/plaza shall
be located along Woodland Road adjacent to the
courtyard/plaza and at the same finished floor level as the
medical office entryway. This apartment entry shall be
accessed via stairs from Woodland Road connecting to a
generous-width stoop or porch. A projecting flat canopy
shall be included to create shelter and frame the doorway.
South of the courtyard/plaza, at least one individual unit
entry, with stoop or porch facing and connecting to
Woodland Road, shall be provided for residential unit(s)
near the corner of the courtyard/plaza and Woodland Road
at the same finished floor level as the courtyard.
(b) Ground-floor entries along the courtyard/plaza. To keep
the required courtyard/plaza occupied with human
activity, entries to and windows on adjoining uses are
required. Along the north side, at least one shared-use
resident entry shall be provided, leading into the fitness
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:548
center or other common residential amenity space, or to
a common hallway. Along the west side (back of the
courtyard/plaza), a common-use residential corridor or
hallway shall be provided, with a generous proportion of
window glazing affording views onto the courtyard. Along
the south side, a common entry door shall be provided for
the apartments; it is encouraged that this door be sited
together with a lobby to serve as the main pedestrian
entryway for this side of the building. The door and any
associated lobby space shall be fully glazed in order to
strengthen the connection between interior space and the
courtyard. In addition, individual entries to residential
units at this level are encouraged along the courtyard, to
help further activate the space.
(c) Windows.
(1) Windows shall align vertically from floor to floor, and
the window widths and proportions should be the
same at each level within each bay. Windows shall
have dimensional trim on all sides, or at a minimum
deep lintels and sills. All windows at all levels shall be
vertically proportioned. Two to three vertically
proportioned window units may be grouped together,
separated by vertical mullions, to create larger
expanses of glazing. All windows at all levels shall
have a double-hung appearance and have divided
lites, with each sash of the window having a pattern of
three wide by two tall, or similar.
(2) Juliet balconies are encouraged on some bays as a
further means to create visual interest at windows and
soften views into interiors.
(d) Blank walls. Along facades facing public streets, the
required courtyard/plaza, and Lot 107 in Block 1904, no
area of blank, windowless wall shall exceed 10 feet in
width at any level.
4. Materials. Primary permitted facade materials are brick,
cultivated stone or other masonry facing, fiber-cement siding,
and metal. Stucco is discouraged. EIFS is prohibited. The
ground floor of buildings should be brick or heavier-weight
stone or masonry. White fiber-cement clapboard or paneling
shall be used as an accent material, particularly on upper
floors. Slate or simulated slate shingles or standing-seam metal
roofing should be used on mansard roof portions. Rubber roofs
are permitted for flat roofs. No more than three different
materials should be employed as primary materials on each
bay's building facade. Within the chosen primary materials,
variation in color, texture, and/or pattern may be employed to
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:549
create further distinctions. The level of materials, detailing and
articulation should be consistent along all facades, not just
street-facing facades. Materials should be extended around
corners and extensions to a logical break in plane, in order to
avoid a "pasted on" appearance.
5. Service areas.
(a) Mechanical rooms. Where possible, mechanical, storage,
and other utilitarian rooms should be located at the
interior or rear of the building, rather than facing streets,
sidewalks, the courtyard, or other pedestrian areas. Where
they must be located along an exterior, street-facing or
courtyard-facing wall of the building, they shall maintain
the overall pattern, proportion, and design of windows in
adjacent and upper facades, including divided lites; no
large expanses of blank walls are permitted.
(b) Trash and refuse. Building trash and recycling collection
areas shall be fully contained within the garage. They are
prohibited immediately adjacent to an outer wall adjoining
a public street. They are prohibited immediately adjacent
to the courtyard/plaza unless they are separated by an
active residential hallway.
(c) Rooftop mechanical equipment. All major mechanical
equipment located on the roof shall be screened from view
of all street-level sidewalk vantage points along Chatham
and Woodland Roads, using a material harmonious to that
used in the facade of the building.
6. Parking garage entry design and screening.
(a) Facade-mounted lighting shall be installed on either side
of each garage entry. A lintel shall be provided across each
garage opening to frame the opening and create the
appearance of a logical structural support.
(b) Parking garage window openings. Garage window
openings are required along the entire street-facing
facade along Woodland Road south of the courtyard/plaza.
Garage window openings shall have a similar size and
spacing as the windows in the building mass above the
parking level. Each garage window opening shall include a
high-quality metal mesh panel or grille with a decorative
pattern or texture in a dull or black metal finish.
(c) Parking garage planting bed. To soften the ground-level
facades where the garage is exposed to Woodland Road, a
raised planter bed shall be required along the entire
perimeter of the building south of the courtyard/plaza. The
only permitted breaks in the planter shall be for a
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:550
vehicular garage entry, a stoop to an individual apartment,
a pedestrian entry, or an emergency exit.
k. Open space and landscaping.
1. Courtyard design and landscaping. The required courtyard/
plaza along Woodland Road shall be surfaced with a mix of
decorative hardscape paving and landscaped vegetated areas.
Lush landscaping with a mix of low plantings, turf lawn areas,
and shade trees is required. Seating areas in sun and shade
shall be provided, with a mix of fixed benches and movable
chairs and tables. Trash receptacles shall be provided. Water
features and shade structures are encouraged.
2. Landscaping along street-facing frontages. Along all street
frontages, the required front setback area shall include inground
or raised planter beds, landscaped with a variety of
grasses, flowers, low bushes, and small ornamental trees,
having a mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings for yearround
visual interest. The planting bed shall be a minimum of
three feet wide, measured horizontally and perpendicular to
the building facade, and shall include drip irrigation. Low
planters incorporating a seating wall are encouraged. Street
trees shall be provided within the public sidewalk right-of-way,
spaced at regular intervals of not more than 50 feet on center,
in generously dimensioned tree pits. A grass or landscaped
planting strip, designed to permit stormwater infiltration, is
encouraged as part of the tree planting area in the public
sidewalk.
3. Parking garage planter bed landscaping. Vegetation for the
required raised planter bed along the exposed garage frontage
south of the courtyard/plaza should be planted so as not to
obstruct garage window openings.
l. Building signage.
1. Medical office facade sign. One facade sign is permitted for the
medical office use along the Chatham Road frontage.
2. Residential facade sign. One facade sign identifying the name
of the residential apartment building is permitted along the
Woodland Road frontage.
3. Facade sign placement, size, and design. Facade signs should
not obscure architectural features of the building. They should
be located within the first-floor facade and not extend into the
facade of upper floors. The area of each permitted facade sign
shall not exceed 30 square feet. Recommended facade signage
types include letters painted on or affixed to a signage board;
channel-cut, pin-mounted individual letters; and box signs with
light-colored lettering against a dark, opaque background.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:551
Dimensional signs (such as carved relief or individually pinmounted
lettering) are encouraged.
4. Signage lighting. All facade signs shall be externally lit by wallmounted,
focused, directional lights such as goose-neck lights
or sconces. The lighting source should be shielded and the bulb
exposure limited to that sufficient to illuminate the sign
content.
5. Directional and wayfinding signs.
(a) Directional signs shall not exceed six square feet and shall
be permitted at each driveway access point.
(b) Wayfinding signs shall not exceed three square feet and
shall be permitted as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board to direct residents to the various building
components.
606.5. Regional Business B-1.
a. Purpose. To provide an area for regional shopping facilities.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Retail sales.
2. Offices and financial institutions.
3. Restaurants.
4. Fast food restaurants.
5. Retail food establishments.
6. Eating and drinking places. [Ord. No. 9-93, 11-93]
c. Accessory Uses. Parking and loading areas.
d. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 15 acres.
2. Minimum side and rear setbacks: one feet for every foot in
building height.
3. Minimum front setback: 100 feet from Morris and Essex
Turnpike and John F. Kennedy Parkway; two feet for every foot
in building height for all other frontages.
4. Maximum building coverage: 50%.
5. Maximum gross leasable area (GLA): 1,400,000 square feet.
[Ord. No. 2259-05]
6. Maximum lot coverage: 90%.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:552
7. Maximum building height: 60 feet.
8. No surface parking area shall be closer than five feet to a
street line.
9. Structured parking shall be permitted, however, each portion
of the parking structure shall be set back from the property
line 2.0 feet for every one foot in height by which the elevation
of that portion is located above the elevation at such property
line. [Ord. No. 10-91]
e. Other Requirements. Any setback encroachment lawfully existing
on May 1, 1991 shall be deemed permitted and to the extent then
existing shall be exempt from the setback requirements of this
Section 606.5. [Ord. No. 10-91]
f. Permanent Vendor Displays. [Ord. No. 2510-18]
1. Permanent vendor displays consisting of fixed, unmovable
installations used for the sale of goods or services, including
specialty foods and beverages, and attended to by an on-site
sales person(s), shall be permitted within the common area of a
regional shopping facility provided, however, that any
equipment proposed to be used for cooking or warming of food
in ovens other than a microwave shall be in compliance with
applicable health and safety codes and shall be subject to the
approval of the Township's Construction Official.
2. The total number of permanent vendor displays shall not
exceed five and no individual permanent vendor display shall
exceed 300 square feet in area.
3. Permanent vendor display installations shall be located
adjacent to escalator stairs, ramps or other locations that shall
not impede or restrict safe pedestrian passage through the
common area of a regional shopping facility. The installation of
any permanent vendor display shall require a subcode UCC
permit as well as any other permit required to comply with
applicable health and safety codes and shall be subject to the
approval of the Township's Construction Official.
4. Temporary and/or non-permanent vendor displays consisting of
non-fixed, movable installations used for the sale of goods and
services, including freestanding kiosks, carts or retail mobile
units with or without wheels, and attended to by an on-site
sales person(s), shall be prohibited.
5. Planning Board approval shall not be required in connection
with the installation of any permanent vendor display provided
it is in compliance with all of the standards established herein.
g. Outdoor Display of For Sale Merchandise. [Ord. No. 2510-18]
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:553
1. Outdoor display of for sale merchandise shall be restricted to a
patio area connected to a home furnishing establishment
having a minimum of 30,000 square feet of gross leasable area
(GLA).
2. No storage of merchandise or inventory shall be permitted
within the outdoor display patio and only merchandise
intended for outdoor use shall be displayed. The display of
merchandise within the outdoor patio area during nonoperating
hours when the home furnishing establishment is
closed for business shall not be deemed as storage.
3. The outdoor display patio shall be limited to no more than 700
square feet in size.
4. Access to the outdoor display patio shall be from the interior of
the home furnishing establishment only.
5. The outdoor display patio shall not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular access to or from a regional shopping facility and
shall not be located adjacent to any building entrance that is
directly accessed from a parking structure.
6. Planning Board approval shall not be required in connection
with any outdoor display patio provided it is in compliance with
all of the standards established herein.
606.6. Highway Business B-2.
a. Purpose. To provide for the continuation of established business as
well as promoting investment in new commercial activity to serve
community needs.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 2185-01;
10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
1. Retail sales and retail services.
2. Office and financial institutions.
3. Medical offices.
4. Health and fitness facilities.
5. Showrooms.
6. Pet care and grooming.
7. Indoor commercial recreation.
8. Educational play centers.
9. Instructional schools and studios.
10. Art studios and galleries.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:554
c. Accessory Uses. Parking and loading areas.
d. Conditional Uses. Restaurants, fast food restaurants, retail food
establishments, and eating and drinking places provided the
closest part of the structure so used, exclusive of parking and
loading areas, is not less than 125 feet from the nearest lot line of a
single-family dwelling in a Residential District. Drive-up windows
shall not be permitted. This Section 606.6d shall apply only to lots
abutting on primary and secondary roadways as shown in the
Traffic Circulation Plan Element of the Township's current Master
Plan. [Ord. No. 11-93, 16-93B]
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimums.
(a) Lot width-feet: 150.
(b) Front setback-feet: 50.
(c) Side setback-feet: eight.*
* The setback shall be based on one foot for every two
feet in building height, but not less than eight feet on a
side.
(d) Rear setback-feet: 50.
2. Maximums.
(a) Building coverage: 30%.
(b) Floor area ratio: 0.50.
(c) Lot coverage: 0.65.
(d) Building height-feet: 40. [Ord. No. 6-96]
606.6.1. Neighborhood Business B-3.
a. Purpose. To provide for small scale commercial activities serving
the needs of residents of the surrounding area.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2543-19]
1. Retail sales and retail services with food stores limited in size
to 15,000 square feet and all other retail activities limited in
size to 5,000 square feet.
2. Offices and financial institutions.
3. Residential, but not on the ground floor.
4. Showrooms.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:555
5. Educational play centers.
6. Instructional schools and studios.
7. Art studios and galleries.
c. Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory structure or use customarily subordinate and
incidental to a permitted principal or conditional use.
2. Parking, parking lots, parking facilities, loading areas, and
access drives shall be permitted accessory uses, but only for a
principal or conditional use which lies entirely within the
Township of Millburn.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Restaurants, fast food restaurants, retail food establishments,
and eating and drinking places provided the closest part of the
structure so used, exclusive of parking and loading areas, is
not less than 125 feet from the nearest lot line of a singlefamily
dwelling in a Residential District. Drive-up windows
shall not be permitted. This Section 606.6.1d shall apply only
to lots abutting on primary and secondary roadways as shown
in the Traffic Circulation Plan Element of the Township's
current Master Plan. [Ord. No. 11-93, 16-93B]
2. An access point or access drive to or from a nonresidential use,
or to a customer parking area, parking facility or loading area
which is required to provide a minimum of 100 parking spaces,
and which nonresidential use is located outside the boundaries
of the Township of Millburn, shall be permitted as a conditional
use only when all of the following conditions are met and
satisfied:
(a) That alternative driveway access outside the Township of
Millburn to fully serve the nonresidential use is not
possible within the same municipality in which the
majority of parking or loading spaces is located.
(b) That the anticipated vehicular trip generation for the
weekday A.M. Peak Street Hour of adjacent street traffic,
Saturday peak hour of generator and twenty-four-hour
total daily traffic flow for either weekday or weekend day
shall not exceed the estimated vehicular movements
during these time frames for the previous user of the site
by more than 10%. In this regard, the "Trip Generation
Manual" 5th Edition, as it may hereafter be supplemented
by current statistics and editions, prepared by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers, Washington, D.C. shall be
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:556
utilized and accepted to calculate and estimate all such
movements.
(c) That for any hour total vehicular movements shall not
exceed 500 driveway access point movements, and total
daily access drive movements shall not exceed 2,500
during any business day. [Ord. No. 2377-11, § 1; Ord.
No. 2382-11, § 1]
(d) That levels of service along the adjacent streets and at all
impacted intersections are not diminished or impacted by
the proposed nonresidential use so as to reduce peak hour
traffic movements to a condition worse than an "E" level of
service or to increase existing delay for any peak hour by
greater than 10 seconds within level of service "E" or level
of service "F." Levels of service shall be calculated in
accordance with the latest methodology accepted by the
Transportation Research Board as published in the
"Highway Capacity Manual" and any updates of the
"Highway Capacity Manual."
(e) In the event truck access is not possible outside the
Township of Millburn, all commercial vehicle access drives
or access points shall be designed to accommodate the
movement and circulation requirements of tractor trailers
having the longest wheel base permitted by the State of
New Jersey. All commercial vehicle access maneuvers
using said access drive or access point shall be achieved in
single maneuver designs without violation of any roadway
center line pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey,
without crossing a driveway center line, and which
represent good, safe and efficient vehicular circulation and
design. [Ord. No. 2377-11, § 2; Ord. No. 2382-11, § 2]
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimums.
(a) Lot width-feet: 40.
(b) Front setback-feet: 10*
* The setback shall be based on the average established
setback along the street frontage within 200 feet of the
property, except that buildings in excess of 32 feet in
height shall be set back a minimum of one additional
foot for every foot in building height over 32 feet. If no
setback is established, it shall be shown above.
(c) Side setback-feet: None.
(d) Rear setback-feet: 25.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:557
2. Maximums. [Ord. No. 2338-09]
(a) Building coverage: 50%*.
(b) Floor area ratio: 0.75*.
(c) Lot coverage: 0.75*.
(d) Building height-feet: 32.
(e) Building height-stories: two.
Note:
* In the area located on the south side of Millburn
Avenue, between the Township of Springfield boundary
and Short Hills Avenue and the maximum building
coverage shall be 80%, the maximum floor area ratio
shall be 1.60, and the maximum lot coverage shall be
100%.
f. Other Requirements.
1. As required elsewhere in this ordinance, access drives and
access points located within the Township of Millburn in order
to gain access to and from an existing or proposed
nonresidential use located outside and beyond the borders and
boundaries of the Township of Millburn shall require site plan
review and approval consistent with the terms and standards
of this ordinance and under certain conditions may require
conditional use approval as well.
2. All parking areas must be set back from the street line at least
30 feet.
3. All loading areas shall be situated to the rear of the building,
away from the public street, and shall not be located in a side
or front yard. Where such loading areas may be visible from a
public street or from an adjoining or nearby residential area,
the buffer provisions of this ordinance shall apply, as set forth
in Section 609.3 herein.
4. Any development requiring access across and through
property located within the Township of Millburn and relating
to the use or development of property located outside the
boundaries of the Township of Millburn for nonresidential
purposes shall require site plan approval by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, in
order to properly evaluate, regulate and plan for the possible
impact of vehicular traffic and the impact of the operation of
said nonresidential use on streets, driveways, intersections
and other lands located within the Township of Millburn. [Ord.
No. 6-96]
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:558
606.7. Central Business B-4.
a. Purpose. To provide an area for pedestrian shopping.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 11-93;Ord. No.
15-95; Ord. No. 16-97; Ord. No. 2149-98; Ord. No. 2471-16;
10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
1. Retail sales and retail services.
2. Financial institutions.
3. Residential, but not on the ground floor.
4. Offices, but not on the street-floor level. For the purposes of
this restriction, travel agencies, opticians, local newspaper
offices substantially servicing Township residents, and real
estate sales offices shall not be considered offices and are
permitted to locate on the street-level floor.
5. Showrooms.
6. Educational play centers.
7. Instructional schools and studios.
8. Art studios and galleries.
c. Accessory Uses. Parking and loading areas.
d. Conditional Uses. Restaurants, fast food restaurants, retail food
establishments, and eating and drinking places provided the
closest part of the structure so used, exclusive of parking and
loading areas, is not less than 125 feet from the nearest lot line of a
single-family dwelling in a Residential District. Drive-up windows
shall not be permitted. [Ord. No. 15-95]
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimum side setback: none, or 10 feet to district line.
2. Maximum building coverage: 100%.
3. Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
4. Maximum building height: 40 feet, three stories. [Amended
10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
f. Other Provisions.
1. If an existing dwelling unit is replaced by a nonresidential use,
on-site parking shall be provided in accordance with the
standards for off-street parking set forth in this ordinance for
the nonresidential use. [Ord. No. 19-86]
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:559
2. Central Business: Training facilities shall not be permitted in
the B-4 Zone. A training facility is a premises which is used (as
a primary use or an accessory use) to train or educate
employees of a business in the service which the business
provides. Excluded from the definition of a training facility is a
training facility which trains full-time employees assigned
permanently to the premises. [Ord. No. 9-87]
606.8. Office research OR-1, OR-2, OR-3. [Ord. No. 2437-15]
a. Purpose. To provide administrative, research or engineering
facilities related to scientific research, product development or
related activities; office uses; hotel; service facilities; and where
permitted herein, Mixed-Use Development.
b. Permitted Principal uses.
1. Offices, including medical offices in the OR-2 Zone, and
financial institutions. [Amended 3-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2528-19]
2. Retail services, such as beauty salons and barber shops.
3. In addition in the OR-1 Zone, office-hotel complex.
4. In addition in the OR-3 Zone, Mixed-Use Development subject
to the standards contained herein.
c. Accessory Uses. Parking and loading areas.
d. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimums OR-1 OR-2 OR-3
(a) Lot area — acres 5 10
(b) Lot area — square feet 10,000
(c) Lot width — feet 400 100 400
(d) Lot depth — feet 400 100 400
(e) Front setback 75* 15 75*
(f) Side setback 50 7 50
(g) Rear setback 25 20 50
Note:
* Front setbacks for accessory uses shall be 25 feet or equal to
the height of the accessory structure, whichever is greater.
2. Maximums OR-1 OR-2 OR-3
(a) Building coverage 25% 20% 15%
(b) Floor area ratio 0.50 0.40 0.40
(c) Lot coverage 65% 65% 55%
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:560
(d) Building height — feet 100 32 60
e. Other Provisions. In the OR-2 District, off-street parking shall be
located in the side and rear yard areas whenever possible.
f. Provisions for Mixed-Use Development. In the OR-3 District, Mixed-
Use Development shall be permitted subject to the standards set
forth below.
1. Tract Area. The land area required for Mixed-Use Development
shall be a minimum of 14 acres.
2. Required Components. A Mixed-Use Development shall
contain the following:
(a) A residential component consisting of one or more multifamily
residential buildings with apartment units and
associated amenities and services, including but not
limited to a pool, fitness center, screening room, golf
simulator, business center and concierge.
(b) An office component consisting of one or more office
buildings with executive, professional and/or business
offices.
(c) A hotel component consisting of a single building offering
transient lodging accommodations to the general public
and which may contain associated facilities, including but
not limited to restaurants/bars, health/fitness rooms,
ballrooms and meeting/conference rooms.
3. Maximum Development Yield.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein,
the total number of multi-family residential units within a
Mixed-Use Development shall not exceed 200.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein,
the total gross floor area of office use within a Mixed-Use
Development shall not exceed 260,000 square feet.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein,
the total number of hotel rooms within a Mixed-Use
Development shall not exceed 250.
4. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses shall
be permitted in a Mixed-Use Development:
(a) Off-street parking, including in a separate structure or
within a building (i.e., above and below grade) as
permitted herein.
(b) Off-street loading.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:561
(c) Any other accessory uses expressly permitted herein.
(d) Any other use which is subordinate and customarily
incidental to one or more of the component uses of the
Mixed-Use Development, including but not limited to,
leasing/sales/management offices, maintenance and trash
collection/recycling buildings and recreational amenities
associated with residential development.
5. Locational Requirements.
(a) No multi-family residential building shall be located within
250 feet of the John F. Kennedy Parkway right-of-way, nor
shall any such building be located greater than 600 feet
from the westerly perimeter boundary of the OR-3 Zone.
(b) No hotel building shall be located within 150 feet of the
Canoe Brook Road right-of-way, nor shall such building be
located greater than 500 feet from the westerly perimeter
boundary of the OR-3 Zone.
6. Development Standards.
(a) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
(b) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 45%.
(d) Minimum hotel building setback to John F. Kennedy
Parkway right-of-way: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum hotel building setback to the westerly perimeter
boundary of the OR-3 Zone: 20 feet.
(f) Minimum multi-family residential building setback to
Canoe Brook Road right-of-way: 10 feet.
(g) Minimum multi-family residential building setback to the
westerly perimeter boundary of the OR-3 Zone: 20 feet.
(h) Minimum office building setback to John F. Kennedy
Parkway right-of-way: 100 feet.
(i) Minimum office building setback to Canoe Brook Road
right-of-way: 50 feet.
(j) No surface parking area shall be located closer than 10
feet to the perimeter boundary of the OR-3 Zone, except
that in the case of the easterly perimeter boundary, no
surface parking area shall be located within 100 feet of
same.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:562
(k) No freestanding parking structure shall exceed two levels
in height, nor shall such structure be located within 50 feet
of the John F. Kennedy Parkway right-of-way; within 20 feet
of the Canoe Brook Road right-of-way; or within 100 feet of
the easterly perimeter boundary of the OR-3 Zone.
(l) All areas not devoted to buildings or paved surfaces shall
be landscaped as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board. An overall landscaping plan shall be submitted
indicating the type, size and spacing of all grasses, plants,
shrubs, evergreen and deciduous trees and shall include
landscaping site details for any other decorative features.
(m) Parking for multi-family residential use shall comply with
the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS); including those provisions
under N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14(e) regarding shared parking
standards for mixed-use developments.
(n) The parking requirement for office use shall be 3.6 spaces
for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. The parking
requirement for hotel use shall be in accordance with
subsection 607.2.
(o) Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with
Section 607.1.
(p) Multi-family residential development shall provide an onsite
set-aside of low- and moderate-income units equal to
20% of the total number of units if such housing is offered
for sale, and a set-aside equal to 15% of the total number
of units if such housing is rental. Such units shall be
integrated throughout the multi-family building(s). The
provision of low- and moderate-income housing shall be
subject to the then applicable regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls.
(q) No development, except for maintenance and
improvements to the existing stormwater detention basin,
shall occur within 100 feet of the easterly perimeter
boundary of the OR-3 Zone.
(r) Except for low- and moderate-income units, all multifamily
residential units shall be limited to either one or two
bedrooms.
7. Dimensional, Bulk and Internal Setback Requirements.
Recognizing that an existing office building and ancillary
parking areas may be reused and that additional buildings are
contemplated as part of the overall Mixed-Use Development,
the intent of these regulations is to encourage creative and
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:563
innovative design and provide flexibility in terms of how
existing and proposed new buildings shall visually relate to
each other as well as the general landscape. As such, multiple
buildings on a lot are permitted and there shall be no minimum
lot area, depth, width or floor area ratio requirements
governing development other than as established herein.
There shall be no setback requirements to interior lot lines
that may be created as part of any future subdivision within
the Mixed Use Development tract. There shall be no minimum
distances between buildings except as required by applicable
building and fire safety codes. Residential and non-residential
uses may share the same internal roadways.
8. Building Articulation and Massing.
(a) Multi-family building facade bulk should be broken down
vertically into a series of bays and/or through vertical
changes in the facade plane. Individual facades should be
defined by a change in material, color, pattern and/or
texture; use of columns, pilasters, gutters or expansion
joints massing; and/or size and rhythm of fenestration.
Facade definition should extend upward through all levels
of the building.
(b) Multi-family buildings should be differentiated horizontally
into a base, middle and top, as follows:
(1) The base should be highlighted architecturally to
visually ground the building. Detailing at the base
should be richer than on upper floors. For example,
horizontal banding, belt course and/or larger window
openings, as well as signage, lighting and awnings or
canopies will help highlight the base.
(2) The middle should be distinguished from the base and
top by horizontal belt courses or cornices, and/or
changes in material, texture and fenestration pattern.
(3) The top floor and/or the roof line should be
distinguished from the base and middle with a coping,
parapet wall, balustrade and/or cornice, change in
material, texture and/or fenestration pattern.
(c) Roof shape and mass should relate to the multi-family
building massing on the lower levels. Flat and peaked roof
shapes are permitted, but mansard roofs are prohibited.
Flat roofs should incorporate green design features to the
extent practical.
9. Building Facade Detailing.
(a) Windows shall occupy at least 25% of the facade area.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:564
(b) A change in plane and variation in materials and/or
detailing should be provided for any windowless wall area
in excess of 20 feet in length.
(c) Any parking within a building that is above grade shall be
architecturally screened and detailed to create an
attractive and harmonious facade, as follows:
(1) The parking facade should be designed with a similar
level of detail, materials and fenestration pattern as is
used on the upper-floor facades.
(2) Window openings should be provided in the parking
facade, with a similar size, spacing, quantity and
enframement as in the building mass above the
parking area.
(3) Window openings should be fully glazed with
translucent glass, allowing shadows and silhouettes
behind the glass to be visible. Alternately, window
openings may be open, free of glazing, but shall be
covered by decorative metal grilles or grates.
(4) Window sizing, placement, glazing and grilles/grates
should be designed to minimize headlight glare.
(5) A low planting area should be provided along the
parking facade. Plantings should be varied in height
and color or texture, and should provide greenery in
winter months as well.
(d) Preferred materials for facades are brick, cultivated stone
or other masonry facing; fiber cement siding or backboard;
metal panels; metal, and glass. No more than three
different materials should be employed as primary
materials on a building facade. Within the chosen primary
materials, variation in color, texture and/or pattern may be
employed to create further distinctions. The level of
materials, detailing and articulation should be consistent
along all facades. Materials should be extended around
corners and extensions in order to avoid a "pasted on"
appearance.
(e) All major mechanical equipment located on any roof of a
building should be screened from view from all vantage
points with a material harmonious to that used in the
facade of the structure.
10. Site Plan and Subdivision Applications. Application shall be
made initially for preliminary site plan approval for the entire
Mixed Use Development tract, or simultaneously, for
preliminary site plan approval for the entire Mixed Use
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:565
Development tract and final site plan approval for a portion or
portions of the tract. Nothing contained herein shall preclude
the developer of the Mixed-Use Development tract from
seeking subdivision approval of the tract pursuant to the terms
hereof. At the time of applying for preliminary and/or final
site plan approval or subsequent to obtaining preliminary site
plan approval, an application may be made for subdivision
approval for purposes of creating up to three separate lots,
allowing for the separate ownership of individual components
of the Mixed Use Development tract. The provisions of this
ordinance regarding lot size and bulk standards for the Mixed
Use Development tract shall not apply to lots that may be
created for individual components of the Mixed Use
Development. At the time of the filing of the subdivision plats,
a cross-easement agreement, in a form reasonably acceptable
to the Planning Board attorney, shall be recorded against the
Mixed-Use Development tract providing for the construction,
maintenance, access and use of all shared facilities by the
owners of each of the subdivided lots, as appropriate.
606.9. Commercial/Medical Office CMO.
a. Purpose. To provide an area for office buildings, medical offices,
sports and physical fitness facilities, light manufacturing and
research uses, houses of worship and private schools.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2543-19]
1. Offices.
2. Wholesale business, light assembly and manufacturing,
scientific and other research facilities, warehouses, and offices
operated in connection with the foregoing uses.
3. Medical offices.
4. Ambulatory surgical facilities.
5. Health and fitness facilities.
6. Showrooms.
7. Pet care and grooming.
8. Indoor commercial recreation.
9. Educational play centers.
10. Instructional schools and studios.
c. Accessory Uses. Parking and loading areas.
d. Conditional Uses.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:566
1. Houses of Worship. Houses of worship shall be subject to the
following conditional use standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(d) Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
property line.
(e) Steeples, spires, belfries, minarets and other similar
building ornamentation shall be exempt from the
maximum building height requirement for the CMO Zone;
provided, however, that the height of such appurtenances
shall not exceed 50 feet.
2. Private Schools. Private schools shall be subject to the
following conditional use standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(d) Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
property line.
3. Commercial Off-Premises Outdoor Advertising Signs.
Commercial off-premises outdoor advertising signs (i.e.
billboards) shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions designed to minimize the aesthetic impacts of such
signs on the Township's residential zone districts. [Ord. No.
2410-13]
(a) No more than one commercial off-premises outdoor
advertising sign (double-sided) shall be permitted on any
lot, either as a single principal use or as a second principal
use.
(b) No part of any commercial off-premises outdoor
advertising sign shall be located within 750 feet of a
residential zone district, nor within 1,000 feet of another
commercial off-premises outdoor advertising sign.
(c) No part of any commercial off-premises outdoor
advertising sign shall be located more than 100 feet from
the right-of-way of Interstate 78.
(d) No part of any commercial off-premises outdoor
advertising sign shall exceed 50 feet in height as measured
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:567
from the existing ground elevation around the sign support
structure.
(e) The sign area shall not exceed 672 square feet, per sign
face, nor shall any sign face exceed a vertical dimension of
14 feet, nor a horizontal dimension of 48 feet.
(f) Commercial off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall
comply with the setback requirements of paragraph e
below.
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
4. Minimum front setback: 24 feet.
5. Minimum side and rear setback: 12 feet, except when abutting
a residential district, in which case the setback shall be a
minimum of twice the building height.
6. Maximum floor area ratio: 50%.
7. Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
8. Maximum building height: 30 feet.
f. Other Provisions. Off-street parking requirements shall not be
provided within the front yard area. Off-street parking
requirements may not be met in a parking structure, or under the
building. Ground floor parking areas within building shall be
screened from view from the street and from adjacent residential
properties. Screening may be provided through the use of
landscaping, fences, building walls, decorative grills and/or other
measures. [Ord. No. 2305-07, 2311-08, 2326-08]
606.10. Cultural CD.
a. Purpose. To provide an area devoted to cultural activities intended
to enhance the quality of life in the region.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. Theaters, museums and similar cultural
centers.
c. Accessory Uses. Those customarily incidental to permitted uses.
d. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Buildings shall be set back a minimum of two times building
height from all property lines.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:568
2. Maximum building coverage: 30%.
3. Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
4. Maximum building height: 40 feet.
606.11. Residential-Office R-O.
a. Purpose. To provide an area for medical-professional uses and
single family dwellings compatible with adjoining single family
dwellings.
b. Permitted Principal uses.
1. Single family dwellings.
2. Medical-professional offices provided they do not exceed 50%
of the floor area of the building in which they are located and
provided there is no more than one licensed medical
professional.
3. Single dwelling unit apartments located in the same structures
as medical-professional offices provided there shall be no more
than one dwelling unit per structure and the dwelling unit
occupies a minimum of 50% of the floor area of the building.
c. Accessory Uses. Private garages and off-street parking.
d. Area and Setback Requirements. In order to limit the number of
access points to Millburn Avenue and to reflect the small lot pattern
of the district, no subdivision of existing lots shall be permitted.
1. Minimum front setback: Based on the average established
setback along the street within 200 feet of the property.
2. Minimum side setback: eight feet.
3. Minimum side setback-combined: 25% of lot width.
4. Minimum rear setback: 20% of lot depth.
5. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40.
6. Maximum building height: 32 feet.
7. Accessory uses shall meet the setback requirements of the R-6
district.
e. Other Provisions.
1. Off-street parking shall be limited to side and rear yard areas
only.
2. Off-street parking areas shall meet the buffer requirements of
the ordinance.
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:569
3. Professionals or employees in the medical-professional offices
are not required to reside on-site.
606.12. Conservation-Educational/Cultural CE.
a. Purposes. To preserve the character of historic estate landscapes
by promoting compatible uses of property within the district for
public benefit, public visitation and long-term environmental
sustainability; to promote an understanding of the Township's
natural and historic architectural landscape through the values and
application of conservation and stewardship; to support and
encourage the continued use of the property within the district for
educational and cultural activities, open space, historic
preservation and environmental conservation; and to provide for
the continued financial viability of the stated purposes by allowing
related revenue-generating activities, including visitor services,
amenities and facilities, all in keeping with the intent, scale and
character of the district.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Public gardens.
2. Horticulture and arboriculture.
3. Interpretive and cultural centers for the study of nature,
architecture, gardens, history and art, and similar museum/
educational facilities.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Those customarily incidental to
permitted uses, including, but not limited to:
1. Visitor orientation.
2. Public tours.
3. Educational programs, including classes, conferences,
seminars and symposia.
4. Public awareness/support events.
5. Concerts.
6. Weddings and other similar special occasion events.
7. Fundraising events, including corporate and event rental.
8. Retail sales/gift shop.
9. Retail food sales, including refreshment carts and cafes.
10. Administrative and staff offices.
11. Common support facilities, such as parking and rest rooms.
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-606
AO:570
12. Operational support facilities, such as greenhouses, storage,
garages and prep and catering kitchens.
13. Still photography shoots.
14. Animal husbandry.
15. Permanent housing for full-time staff.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. Overnight and extended accommodations for artists, interns,
scholars, lecturers, seminar/retreat participants and
consultants, subject to compliance with the following
conditional use standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 20 acres, which may be provided on
contiguous lots in common ownership or leasehold.
(b) Maximum number of usable bedrooms: 0.75 per acre.
2. One residential lot. The existing residence and other
improvements located on Block 2702, Lot 16 according to the
official tax maps of the Township of Millburn may continue to
be utilized as a private residence in accordance with the
requirements of the R-4 District. Parking that serves other uses
permitted in the CE District may be provided on this lot.
e. Area and Setback Requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 15 acres, which may be provided on
contiguous lots in common ownership or leasehold.
2. Buildings shall be set back a minimum of three times the
building height from all property lines. Buildings and
structures that existed on July 1, 2007 that are located within
required setback areas may continue to be utilized, but shall
not be expanded to further encroach into required setbacks.
3. Maximum building coverage, including all accessory
structures: 2.7%.
4. Maximum lot coverage: 18%.
5. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
f. Other Requirements.
1. Adequate parking shall be provided for visitors' and
employees' vehicles. A minimum of 86 automobile parking
spaces shall be provided. A minimum of two bus parking
spaces shall be provided.
2. A buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided
along all property lines, except for those that adjoin public
§ DRZ-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-606
AO:571
§ DRZ-607. Off-street parking and loading. [Added by Ord. No.
2302-07]
parkland. Driveways and sidewalks shall be permitted to cross
buffer areas to provide access to streets and adjacent
properties. Buildings and structures that existed on July 1,
2007 that are located within required buffer areas may
continue to be utilized, but shall not be expanded to further
encroach into buffer areas.
3. The playing of music in outdoor areas and/or at special events
shall conclude by 11:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2325-08]
607.1. Minimum Loading Requirements. Adequate off-street loading and
maneuvering space shall be provided for every use based on the
following schedule. Those uses not listed shall provide sufficient spaces
as determined under site plan review.
Minimum Loading Requirements
Gross floor
area at which
first loading
space is
required
Gross floor
area at which
second loading
space is
required
No. additional
square feet for
each
additional
loading space
Assembly
operations
* 40,000 30,000
Auto sales * 40,000 40,000
Cemetery None required
Church None required
Community
Center
None required
Dwelling Unit None required
Financial
institutions
10,000 100,000 100,000
Finishing
operations
* 40,000 30,000
Hospital * 100,000 100,000
Hotel * 100,000 100,000
Industrial * 40,000 30,000
Library None required
Manufacturing * 40,000 30,000
Offices * 100,000 100,000
Receiving * 40,000 30,000
§ DRZ-606 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-607
AO:572
Minimum Loading Requirements
Gross floor
area at which
first loading
space is
required
Gross floor
area at which
second loading
space is
required
No. additional
square feet for
each
additional
loading space
Research * 40,000 40,000
Restaurant * 25,000 20,000
Retail Store * 20,000 20,000
Shipping * 40,000 30,000
Storage area * 40,000 30,000
Utilities 10,000 100,000 100,000
Veterinarian
hospital
* 100,000 100,000
Warehouse * 40,000 30,000
NOTE:
* Minimum of one space required. [Ord. No. 9-87]
(a) When more than one use is located in a building or where multiple
uses are designed as part of a shopping center, industrial complex,
or similar self-contained complex, the number of loading spaces
shall be based on the cumulative number of square feet within the
building or complex, shall be dispersed throughout the site to best
serve the individual uses, and be part of site plan approval.
(b) There shall be a minimum of one trash/garbage pick-up location
located either within or outside a building in steel-like, totally
enclosed container(s), located and screened to be obscured from
view from parking areas, street, and residences. If located within a
commercial or industrial building, the doorway(s) may serve both
the loading and trash/garbage collection functions. If located
outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the
loading area(s) provided the container(s) in no way interfere with
or restrict the required loading functions.
(c) If a tract of at least 25 acres has no portion of a loading area,
including maneuvering areas, closer than 200 feet to any property
line and where the length of the driveway connecting the loading
area to the street is at least 300 feet long, the number of off-street
loading spaces may be less than the number required by the
schedule provided the applicant shall document on the site plan
how the number of spaces to be provided will be adequate to meet
the needs of the specific use.
§ DRZ-607 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-607
AO:573
607.2. Minimum Parking Requirements. The number of parking spaces for
each use shall be determined by the number of dwelling units, the
amount of gross floor area as defined in this ordinance, or such other
measure as noted. Where a particular function contains more than one
use, the minimum parking requirements shall be the sum of the
component parts. Where an expansion of an existing use takes place,
the parking requirements for the entire use shall be met. [Ord. No.
2471-16]
(a) Ambulatory surgery facility: one space per 100 square feet gross
floor area. [Ord. No. 20-95]
(b) Assembly operations: one space per 800 square feet gross floor
area.
(c) Auto sales: one space per 300 square feet show room area & sales
office.
(d) House of Worship: one space per three seats within the sanctuary
or worship hall or five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater. [Ord. No. 2417-13]
(e) Residential: in accordance with New Jersey State Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS). [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2543-19]
(f) Office and financial institutions: one space per 250 square feet
gross floor area, but no less than 0.8 of a parking space for each
employee or independent contractor on site at any one time. [Ord.
No. 12-87]
(g) Finishing operations: one space per 800 square feet gross floor
area.
(h) Hospital: 1.5 spaces per bed.
(i) Hotel: 1.6 spaces per guest room (this requirement also satisfies
the parking needs for all accessory uses and employees.)
(j) Industrial: one space per 800 square feet gross floor area.
(k) Manufacturing: one space per 800 square feet gross floor area.
(l) Medical-professional: one space per 150 square feet gross floor
area.
(m) Offices: Same as Subsection 607.2f.
(n) Receiving: one space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area.
(o) Research: one space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area.
(p) Restaurant: one space per three seats.
§ DRZ-607 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-607
AO:574
(q) Retail Stores and Shopping Centers. The following minimum
parking requirements are not to be applied incrementally, but shall
be met as to each applicable classification based upon the
following:
1. Up to 25,000 square feet gross floor area: one space per 200
square feet gross floor area.
2. 25,000 to 399,999 square feet gross leasable area:
4.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA up to a maximum 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants;
4.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA with more than 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants.
3. 400,000 to 599,999 square feet gross leasable area:
4.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA up to a maximum 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants;
4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA with more than 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants. [Ord. No.
7-91]
4. 600,000 to 1,349,999 square feet gross leasable area: [Ord.
No. 2510-18]
4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA up to a maximum 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants;
4.75 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA with more than 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants.
5. 1,350,000 or more square feet gross leasable area:
[Ord. No. 2510-18]
4.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA up to a maximum 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants;
4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet GLA with more than 10%
GLA in restaurants and/or fast-food restaurants. [Ord. No.
2358-10]
(r) Shipping: one space per 5,000 square feet gross floor area.
(s) Storage areas: one space per 5,000 square feet gross floor area.
(t) Theater: one space per three seats.
(u) Utilities: one space.
(v) Veterinarian hospital: six spaces per exam room or doctor,
whichever is greater.
§ DRZ-607 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-607
AO:575
(w) Warehouse: one space per 5,000 square feet gross floor area.
(x) Restaurant, fast-food: one space per 35 square feet gross floor
area. [Ord. No. 9-87]
(y) Supermarket, convenience store: six spaces per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area. [Ord. No. 6-96; Ord. No. 2302-07]
(z) Public and private schools: two spaces per classroom for grades K-8
and three spaces per classroom for grades 9-12. [Ord. No.
2417-13]
(aa) Places of assembly: one space per three seats or five spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. [Ord.
No. 2417-13]
(bb) Art studios and galleries: one space per 800 square feet of gross
floor area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(cc) Educational play centers: one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(dd) Health and fitness facilities: one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(ee) Indoor commercial recreation: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(ff) Instructional schools and studios: one space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(gg) Pet care and grooming: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(hh) Retail sales/services: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
(ii) Showrooms: one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
[Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2543-19]
607.3. Location of Parking and Loading Areas. [Ord. No. 2302-07]
(a) No off street loading and maneuvering areas shall be located in any
front yard or any street.
(b) All parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use being served.
(c) No loading or parking spaces shall be located in any required
buffer area.
(d) All required parking spaces for multi-family dwellings, and
commercial/industrial uses shall be within 150 feet and 300 feet
respectively, of an entrance of the building. [Ord. No. 9-87]
§ DRZ-607 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-607
AO:576
§ DRZ-608. Protection of steep slope areas.
(e) Parking spaces for residential units may be located in any side or
rear yard. Parking shall be permitted on a driveway in the front
yard, but prohibited elsewhere in the front yard, except for
temporary construction purposes. Single-family and two-family
dwellings shall have no more than 30% of the front yard area in
paved and/or impervious surfaces and shall provide a minimum of
one parking space in a garage for each dwelling unit. [Ord. No.
2194-01; Ord. No. 2410-13]
607.4.Waiver of Parking Requirements in the B-4 District. In the B-4
district, there shall be no requirement to provide off-street parking
spaces for any use of land or building legally existing on the date of
adoption of this amendment or for a changed use which would not
result in any increased off-street parking requirement in accordance
with the standards set forth above; provided, however, that existing
parking spaces on such premises are maintained or alternate parking
spaces are established to replace them subject to Planning board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment approval. Any existing requirements for
the provision of off-street parking spaces, including requirements to
purchase municipal parking permits, which may have been previously
approved by the Board having jurisdiction, shall continue in full force
and effect unless modified by the parties thereto. For the purpose of this
requirement, any existing floor space which may be vacant on the date
of the adoption of this amendment shall be considered to have been in
use for the purpose for which it had last been used prior to its becoming
vacant. If the use of any existing premises is changed in such a way as
to increase the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the standards as set forth herein, the applicant shall
be required to purchase municipal parking permits for such increased
number of required off-street parking spaces. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
607.5. Masking of Below Building/Ground Level Parking. Below building/
ground level parking shall be completely hidden from view of public
streets. Such parking shall either be located behind active uses or shall
be screened by architectural detailing. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
608.1. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide
development controls for lands located within the Township that have
present within their boundaries topographical conditions hereinafter
described as "steep slopes."
These controls are provided to minimize the potentially adverse
impacts associated with disturbance of steeply sloped areas. Such
regulation promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the
Township by limiting disturbance to soil and vegetation and controlling
erosion in steeply sloped areas.
The requirements, guidelines and controls promulgated under this
Section shall be applicable to all properties within all zone districts
§ DRZ-607 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-608
AO:577
situated in the Township in their existing physical state or condition as
of the date of the passage of this Section. [Ord. No. 2351-10; Ord.
No. 2434-14]
608.2. Background. Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated
erosion processes from stormwater runoff and the subsequent
sedimentation of water bodies with the associated degradation of water
quality and loss of aquatic life support. Related effects include soil loss,
changes in natural topography and drainage patterns, increased
flooding potential, further fragmentation of forest and habitat areas,
and compromised aesthetic values. It has become widely recognized
that disturbance of steep slopes should be restricted or prevented
based on the impact disturbance of steep slopes can have on water
quality and quantity, and the environmental integrity of the landscapes.
[Ord. No. 2351-10; Ord. No. 2434-14]
608.3. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this Section.
[Ord. No. 2351-10; Ord. No. 2434-14]
DISTURBANCE/DISTURB — The placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing cutting or
removal of vegetation over an aggregate area of more than 1,000
square feet.
GRADE — The percent of rise or descent of a sloping surface. For
example, a grade of 20% corresponds to a two-foot vertical change in
elevation for every 10 feet of horizontal distance.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios,
elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces or
improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements
on areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed and erected between
lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent
erosion.
STEEP SLOPE AREA — A slope with a grade of 20% or more, which
extends for a horizontal distance of 10 feet or more.
608.4. Designation of Areas. Steep slope areas shall be established by
measurement of change in elevation along a line which is perpendicular
to the topographical contour lines of the slope. Topographic information
shall be plotted at two-foot contour intervals and may only be supplied
by a licensed land surveyor registered in the State of New Jersey.
608.5. Regulations for Development in Steep Slope Areas. [Ord. No.
2351-10; Ord. No. 2434-14]
§ DRZ-608 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-608
AO:578
a. Prohibition on Disturbance. There shall be no disturbance of steep
slope areas, except for redevelopment.
b. Limit of Disturbance. The limit of disturbance shall be established
to preserve existing vegetation on each lot and shall be marked by
a temporary fence to be maintained throughout construction.
608.6. Steep slope identification. All applications for minor and major
subdivision or site plan approval, or for a permit for construction,
grading or clearing of any lot, except as otherwise provided in the
definition of "disturbance" herein or exempted in this chapter, shall be
evaluated to determine the presence of steep slope areas. [Ord. No.
2351-10; Ord. No. 2434-14]
a. Slope Analysis. Steep slope areas shall be identified on the site plan
drawn at a scale as required by the Township's site plan or
subdivision submission requirements. The site plan shall show the
existing and proposed topographic contours as required herein and
shall provide the following additional information:
1. Delineation and quantification of those steep slope areas
proposed for disturbance. The applicant shall provide a table
showing the calculation of disturbed steep slope area in square
feet and as a percent of the lot area, for each lot.
2. If the site plan includes steep slope areas, identification of soil
types present on the property with specific reference to highly
erodible soils as identified by the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
3. Details on how the proposed construction will minimize
adverse impacts upon the existing natural features of the lot
shall be provided.
4. Plans and specifications for any retaining walls, steps, fences
or other protective structures shall be provided.
608.7. Lot Grading/Driveway/Drainage Plans. For all lots with proposed
disturbance of a steep slope area, a lot grading/driveway/drainage plan
shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a
building permit or demolition permit. Said plans shall include, but not
be limited to, existing and proposed topographical contours as required
herein, limits of disturbance, construction details, soil erosion,
sedimentation control measures and drainage calculations and, where
required by the Township Engineer, stormwater control measures. Prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, for any lot where a steep
slope area has been disturbed, an as-built survey prepared by a licensed
land surveyor registered in the State of New Jersey shall be filed with
the Township Engineer who shall review same to assure compliance
with the approved lot grading/driveway/drainage plan. In addition to
such other fees as may be required by the Township, a separate fee of
$200 shall be payable to the Township for review of the lot grading/
§ DRZ-608 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-608
AO:579
driveway/drainage plan in connection with a proposed disturbance of
steep slope areas. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17 of
the Millburn Township Ordinance Code, the design standards for lot
grading/driveway/drainage plans for lots with a proposed disturbance
of steep slope areas shall include at minimum the following: [Ord. No.
2434-14]
a. No soil shall be excavated, removed, deposited or disturbed except
as a result of and in accordance with a lot grading plan approved
under the terms of this chapter.
b. Proposed disturbance of the soil shall be executed in a manner that
will not cause erosion or other unstable conditions.
c. Provision shall be made for the proper disposition of surface water
runoff so that it will not increase unstable conditions. Appropriate
storm drainage facilities shall be provided for downstream
properties.
d. Provision shall be made for any structure or protection measures
that may be required for the protection of the public safety,
including but not limited to retaining walls, guide rails, headwalls,
drainage systems and fences.
e. Provision shall be made for a safe water supply and for the disposal
of sanitary sewage as approved by the Board of Health.
f. Any proposed building or structure or attendant protective
measures shall not impede the flow of surface water through any
watercourse. Only a nominal increase in water surface elevation
and velocities will be allowed due to construction.
g. Any proposed vehicular facilities including roads, drives or parking
areas, shall be so designed that any land disturbances shall not
cause excessive erosion. Both the vertical and horizontal alignment
of vehicular facilities shall be so designed that hazardous
circulation conditions will not be created.
h. Final grades of the proposed driveway shall be in conformance with
the Millburn Township ordinance related to streets and sidewalks.
i. Any fill placed on the lots shall be properly stabilized and, when
found necessary depending upon existing slopes and soil types,
supported by retaining walls or other appropriate structures as
approved by the Township Engineer.
j. All cuts shall be supported by retaining walls or other appropriate
retaining structures when, depending upon the nature of the soil
characteristics, such structures are found necessary by the
Township Engineer in order to prevent erosion.
k. There shall be no alteration of site elevations in excess of one foot
within five feet of an adjoining property.
§ DRZ-608 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-608
AO:580
§ DRZ-609. Supplementary regulations. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
l. No retaining wall on a residential site shall exceed six feet in
height, and there shall be a minimum distance between stepped
retaining walls equal to the height of the highest wall. All retaining
walls greater than four feet in height shall be designed by a
professional engineer, and it shall be certified by a professional
engineer that the wall was constructed in accordance with
approved plans.
609.1. Accessory Uses in Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. Accessory uses permitted in residential districts are set forth in
Article 6, Zoning Provisions.
b. All accessory uses shall be constructed only within rear yards,
except as modified in Section 609.5 for corner lots. Driveways shall
be permitted in any yard subject to the coverage limitations set
forth in this ordinance.
c. All accessory uses shall occupy an area no greater than 20% of the
rear yard area and the unoccupied part of such rear yard shall
include an area of at least 25% of the total lot area. This provision
shall not apply to corner lots, where accessory uses shall occupy no
more than 7% of the total lot area.
d. Air-conditioning units may be placed only in rear and side yards. If
placed in a side yard, it shall be (a) screened from view from the
street and adjoining properties by fencing or evergreen planting
and (b) located a minimum of two times the required side yard
setback from the nearest off-site principal building. If placed in a
side or rear yard, it shall be located no more than five feet from the
building being served. [Ord. No. 12-95]
e. All supportive mechanical equipment for an accessory use shall
have a minimum setback equal to three times the accessory use
setback or shall be within five feet of the principal structure and
located within the rear yard only. See Section 606, Zone
Requirements.
f. Emergency Generators. Emergency generators, which are
intended to be permanently installed, shall be a permitted
accessory use subject to the following: [Ord. No. 2416-13]
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, an emergency generator
shall be permitted only within a side or rear yard.
2. An emergency generator shall comply with the side and rear
yard setback requirements for accessory uses in the zone.
3. On corner lots, an emergency generator shall be permitted
within a front yard provided that the setback to the
§ DRZ-608 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:581
corresponding front lot line shall be no less than a distance
equal to 75% of the minimum front yard setback requirement
for a principal building in the zone.
4. If the area covered by an emergency generator pad is less than
or equal to 50 square feet, such coverage shall not count
towards maximum permitted lot coverage. If the area of
coverage exceeds 50 square feet, the entire area of the
emergency generator pad shall be counted toward maximum
permitted lot coverage.
5. An emergency generator shall be screened by fencing
compliant with municipal ordinances or vegetation of a type,
height and density that provides for year-round screening so
that it will not be visible from adjacent properties or a public
street. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition at
all times.
6. Approval for the installation of an emergency generator may be
granted by the Building Department provided that the location
and dimensions of the generator/pad are drawn to scale on a
survey of the subject property which is accompanied by a
certification by the homeowner that the survey is accurate as
drawn and that there have been no material changes since the
survey was prepared, and provided further that compliance
with all of the requirements of this section is accurately
depicted on the survey.
7. The testing of an emergency generator shall be permitted only
between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
609.2. Amusement Devices. The operation of amusement and recreational
devices as the principal use of any premises in the Township is
prohibited. The operation of amusement and recreational devices as an
accessory use is permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 Districts. [Ord.
No. 2471-16]
609.3. Buffers. Within any nonresidential zone (CD, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR-1,
OR-2, OR-3, or CMO), in which an application for development abuts a
residential zone, a buffer shall be provided. No development is
permitted in the buffer area. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. When the property of a nonresidential use abuts a residential use
or zone on the side or rear, a strip of land 20% of the average width
or depth of the property shall be designated as a buffer area and so
indicated on the plat. Buffer areas shall be contiguous with
residential property lines and shall be of uniform width. In no case
shall the width of the buffer area be required to exceed 50 feet, and
if the buffer area is less than 20 feet wide, the applicant shall erect
a six-foot-high stockade or other wood fence, or equivalent dense
evergreen planting a minimum of six feet in height with the buffer
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:582
area and at a point parallel to the lot line of the abutting residential
lot and at a distance appropriate for the landscaping treatment in
the buffer area.
b. In the buffer area, a solid and continuous landscape screen shall be
planted and properly maintained to conceal the parking area,
eliminate the glare of automobile lights throughout the year, and
screen the building from the abutting residential areas. The
landscape screen shall consist of evergreen trees, such as hemlock,
Douglas fir, Norway spruce, etc. Trees shall be planted in an area
five feet to 20 feet from the residential line in a zigzag pattern and
not more than six feet apart, except where otherwise authorized by
the approving authority. Evergreen trees shall not be less than five
feet high when planted and the lowest branches shall not be more
than one foot above the ground.
c. The approving authority may consider the effectiveness of existing
vegetation in providing the desired screening, and may consider
other factors which may alter the design of the buffer.
d. All loading areas and parking lots shall be buffered from adjoining
streets, existing residential uses and residential zoning districts in
accordance with this section.
609.4. Community Residences for Developmentally Disabled and Shelters
for Victims of Domestic Violence. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1,
Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled and
Community Shelters for Victims of Domestic Violence, which terms
shall have the meanings set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, shall be a
permitted use in residential districts R-3 through R-8. If such a
residence or shelter houses more than six persons, excluding residence
staff, it may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
by the Planning Board, provided that: [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. No more than 15 persons, excluding resident staff, shall be housed
in such a residence or shelter;
b. No permit will be issued to a proposed residence or shelter located
within 1,500 feet of an existing such residence or shelter;
c. Such a residence or shelter be located only abutting an arterial or
collector street;
d. A permit shall be denied if the number of persons, excluding
resident staff, resident at such existing residences or community
shelters in the Township exceeds 50 persons or 0.5% of the
population of the Township, whichever is greater;
e. If a residence houses mentally ill persons, such residence must
have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an
affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures established by
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:583
regulation of the New Jersey Division of Mental Health and
Hospitals of the Department of Human Services.
f. All such residences or shelters shall comply with all applicable
standards of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the
Fire Prevention Code then in effect in the Township.
g. All such community residences and shelters shall comply with the
zoning requirements in the district in which they are located and
for the type of housing that it is (single-family detached or singlefamily
attached). Existing housing which does not conform to this
ordinance shall not be used for community residences or shelters.
h. Such residences or shelters shall give preference to persons
residing in the Township.
i. One on-site parking space shall be provided for each two beds, plus
one space for each staff member, whether or not a resident. One of
the non-staff spaces shall be 12 feet by 19 feet to conform to the
requirements of this ordinance for handicapped parking.
j. The exterior design of the facility shall conform to the general
character of the area.
609.5. Corner Lots. Any principal building located on a corner lot shall meet
the minimum front setback from both street lines. The building setback
from the remaining property lines shall be considered the side setback.
For the purpose of locating accessory uses on residential properties,
they shall be no closer to any street line than two times the required
front setback and shall not be located in the front yard. See Section
609.1 Accessory Uses in Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
609.6. Fences and Walls. [Ord. No. 2471-16; Ord. No. 2517-18]
a. Fences and walls shall not be located in any sight triangles (as sight
triangle is defined in this ordinance). Fences and walls or any
combination thereof in side and rear yards shall not exceed
(separately or combined) six feet in height. Walls, berms or solid
mass in front yards shall not exceed two feet in height. Fences in
front yards are prohibited, except for (a) fences surrounding or
outlining landscaping which are 18 inches or less in height, (b)
temporary fences which protect landscaping from winter damage,
(c) decorative fences within a front yard not to exceed four feet in
height, provided that the lot in question fronts a County roadway
and the fence is landscaped in order to maintain a natural quality;
and provided further that no chain link fence or board on board
fence shall be permitted within a front yard, except that for a lot
fronting on South Orange Avenue a board on board fence shall be
permitted, and (d) temporary fencing during construction activity,
as required by subsection 3-8.6(c) of Chapter 3 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Millburn. A repair or
replacement to a front yard fence is permitted when the
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:584
replacement fence is four feet or less in height. A repair or
replacement to a front yard wall is permitted provided that no
additional length or height is added to the original. [Ord. No.
2155-99; Ord. No. 2241-04; Ord. No. 2517-18]
b. Any combination of a retaining wall and fence shall have the
maximum height of six feet; if the combined retaining wall and
fence would exceed six feet in height, the fence must set back at
least three feet from the wall and the area of the set back must be
appropriately landscaped to prevent the appearance of a visual
mass from off the property. The height of a retaining wall shall be
measured from the lowest point of the grade at the base of the
proposed wall prior to the construction of the wall. The height of a
fence shall be measured from the ground after construction of the
fence without regard to topography. [Ord. No. 2155-99]
c. Any retaining wall over four feet in height constructed to correct a
ground condition shall be designed to address all drainage issues
and must be approved by the Township Engineer. [Ord. No.
2151A-99]
d. Fences with only one finished side shall be erected so that the
finished side is visible from off the property on which it is to be
installed. Fences which have two finished sides shall be erected so
that both sides are substantially the same in appearance. [Ord. No.
2151A-99]
609.7. Lots. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or
radial to street lines.
b. Each lot must front on an approved, paved street with a right-ofway
of at least 50 feet.
c. Where extra width for street widening in accordance with the
Master Plan, Official Map or this ordinance is called for, the land
shall either be dedicated or, if not dedicated, shall be anticipated by
increasing the lot size. The zoning considerations shall begin at
such new or anticipated street line and all areas, dimensions, and
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
d. Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the Township by
the owner of a lot in order to meet the minimum street width
requirements or to implement the Official Map or Master Plan, and
which lot existed at the effective date of this ordinance, the
building inspector shall not withhold a building and/or occupancy
permit when the lot depth and/or area was rendered substandard
due to such dedication and where the owner has no adjacent lands
to meet the minimum requirements.
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:585
e. Through lots with frontage on two streets will be permitted only
where the lot cannot be divided into two or more conforming lots.
f. Natural features such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops, and views
shall be preserved wherever possible. On individual lots, care shall
be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and the
landscape of the area.
609.8. Nonconforming Lots and Structures. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. Any existing structure on a nonconforming lot, or any existing
structure on a conforming lot which violates any yard
requirements, may have additions to the principal building or
construct an accessory building without an appeal for a variance,
provided the accessory building or the addition to the principal
building does not violate any requirements of this ordinance, and
does not extend or increase any existing nonconformity. [Ord. No.
15-95; Ord. No. 2344-09]
b. When the owner of a lot, at the time of adoption of this ordinance,
does not own any adjoining vacant land, and when the owner can
utilize the lot for the uses permitted and comply with all zone
requirements other than area and frontage, he may utilize the lot
without obtaining a variance, otherwise a variance must be
obtained for all requirements that cannot be met.
609.9. Principal Use. There shall not be allowed or maintained on any lot
more than one permitted principal use; provided, however, no more
than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot except that
a shopping center, multi-family housing project, industrial complex,
office complex, or office-hotel complex, all receiving site plan approval,
may be permitted to have more than one building on a lot in accordance
with the standards of the zoning district in which it is located. [Ord.
No. 2471-16]
609.10. Street Graphics. The purpose of this section is to create the legal
framework for a system of street graphics. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. Table of Design Elements. A Table of Design Elements for street
graphics is included herewith. Except in Areas of Special Control,
as set forth in Section 609.10h, no street graphic shall be erected,
displayed, substantially altered, or reconstructed except in
conformance with the Table of Design Elements, hereinafter
referred to as "the Table." [Ord. No. 12-93; Ord. No. 15-95;
amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2541-19]
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:586
Table of Design Elements
Key: Y = Yes; N = No; W = White
Zoning Districts
R-3 thru
R-8, R-O B-1, B-2 B-3, B-4
OR-1 thru
OR-3,
CMO, CD,
C
Basic elements
Wall graphic -
area
2 square
feet
20% 20% 10% (Note
A)
Wall graphic -
height
1 foot 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet
(Note A)
Ground graphic
- area
2 square
feet
(Note B) 20 square
feet
20 square
feet
Ground graphic
- height
5 feet 15 feet 10 feet 5 feet
Projecting signs
(see Section
609.10e)
N N Y N
Auxiliary
elements
Awnings (Note
E)
N Y Y N
Sidewalk/
sandwich
board signs
(see Section
609.10f)
N N Y N
Canopies N Y Y N
Marquees N N Y N
Time &
temperature
N Y Y N
Window/glass
storefront
N (Notes C & D) N
Surface color W + 1 All All W+2
Notes:
Note A: In the OR-3 District, buildings which are two or more
stories in height and have a front setback of at least 100 feet may
have wall graphics displayed on each street frontage, provided:
1. Graphics are not over seven feet in height;
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:587
2. Graphics are at least 20 feet above any area used by the public;
3. Graphic area does not exceed 150 square feet;
4. Graphic area does not exceed 5% of the wall area to which
attached;
5. Graphic does not project above roof line.
Note B: One ground graphic identifying the activities on the
property may be displayed along each street or road which abuts
the property, provided there exists at least 200 feet of unbroken
frontage and a vehicular access. Ground graphics for individual
businesses are not permitted. Area of graphic shall not exceed 50
square feet, and height shall not exceed 15 feet above grade at
street line. Setback shall be at least 20 feet from the street and all
property lines.
Note C: Temporary window graphics must be removed within five
days after close of the sale or special event and in no event may
be displayed more than 40 days. Graphics must be attached flat
against the window glass and not occupy more than 25% of the
total area of the window in which displayed.
Note D: Permanent window graphics may not occupy more than
25% of the total area of the window in which displayed. Any
lettering in the window which is less than three inches in height
shall not be considered in this calculation.
Note E: Awnings shall be permitted on any retail use in any zoning
district under any of the following conditions:
1. The use is specifically permitted in the zoning district; or
2. The use is permitted through the granting of a use variance; or
3. The use is a valid pre-existing nonconforming use.
Note F: In the R-3 through R-8 and R-O Districts, wall and ground
graphics shall not be illuminated, except for those Areas of Special
Control as set forth in Section 609.10h(1) and (2).
b. Items of Information Allowed.
1. Each land use is entitled to display street graphics containing
up to 10 items of information on each street to which it has
access. The name of the proprietor or the name of the business
occupying the building and its premises shall count as only one
item of information. The name may be displayed on each street
frontage, even if the items of information use up the permitted
10 items.
2. An "item of information" means any of the following: a syllable
of a word; an abbreviation; a number (whether one digit or
more); a symbol; or a geometric shape. In addition, graphics
combining several shapes are to be assessed one additional
item for each noncontinuous plane.
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:588
3. Lettering less than three inches in height, if contained in a wall
graphic, is not included.
c. Ground Graphics.
1. Any land use may display one or more ground graphics,
provided:
(a) The face of the building or structure is set back at least 35
feet from the street line;
(b) The ground graphic shall not exceed eight feet in height,
measured from the grade at the street line;
(c) A ground graphic which is six square feet or more in area
may be displayed only on a frontage of 100 feet or more;
(d) The ground graphic shall be set back from each property
line and the street line a minimum of 10 feet, or 1.5 times
the height of the graphic, whichever is greater.
d. Wall Graphics.
1. The area permitted for wall graphics is shown in the Table of
Design Elements.
2. "Signable area" of the building means an area of the facade of
the building which is free of windows, doors, and major
architectural detail. The percentage figures shown in the Table
are based on the signable area. The following provisions apply
in calculating the graphic area:
(a) If the graphic is enclosed by a box or outline, the total area
of the graphic, including the background, is counted as
part of the graphic area;
(b) If the graphic consists of individual letters, only the area of
the letters is counted as part of the signable area.
3. A graphic may not cover or interrupt major architectural
features, such as a frieze, string courses, or other decorative
facade details.
4. Wall graphics height limitations:
(a) Wall graphics placed in the space between windows may
not exceed in height more than 2/3 of the distance
between the top of a window and the sill of the window
above, or major architectural details related thereto;
(b) Wall graphics may not extend above the second floor line,
nor above the roof line of the building to which attached.
[Ord. No. 9-87]
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:589
e. Projecting signs or blade signs are allowed per the Table of Design
Elements. Each tenant or business is entitled to one projecting or
blade sign, provided they can conform to the requirements listed
below: [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2541-19]
1. The bottom of any projecting sign must be at least eight feet
zero inches above sidewalk level or elevated entry platform;
the top of the projecting sign may not extend higher than
whichever of the following may be the lowest: 15 feet zero
inches above sidewalk level or elevated entry platform, or six
inches below the windowsill of a second-floor window.
2. Must be securely attached to the building facade by a
structural supporting bracket extending no farther than 40
inches from the building facade. Decorative support brackets
may extend 12 inches above the top of the sign.
3. Signage shall not extend or project more than 40 inches from
the building facade.
4. Signage shall not exceed three square feet in total area.
5. Signage may be illuminated by decorative, internal lighting, or
indirect light sources. Signage illuminated by bare bulbs and
floodlights is not permitted.
f. Sidewalk signs/sandwich board signs, where permitted per the
Table of Design Elements: [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2541-1954]
1. Each street-level tenant/storefront is entitled to one sidewalk
sign in front of their establishment. Signs may be double-sided.
2. Maximum size shall be 24 inches wide by 48 inches high.
3. Frames shall be wood or metal.
4. Placement of signs must allow for five feet of clearance
between the sign and the curb, or any utility pole, street
furniture, or other permanent sidewalk structure.
g. Special Situations.
1. Street graphics may be displayed on the side or rear of a
building adjacent to an off-street parking area if the off-street
parking area is 40 feet or more in width. However, the side or
rear of the building may not be included when calculating the
signable area.
2. If a building has frontage on two or more streets, each side of
the building is to be separately considered.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of the remainder of this
section.
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:590
h. Areas of Special Control.
1. A church, school or other quasi-public land use in an R-3
through R-8, or R-O District may display one ground graphic
not larger than 15 square feet in area. Golf courses and private
clubs may display one ground graphic not to exceed 10 square
feet in area and five feet in height for each vehicular entrance
from a public street.
2. Apartments in the R-8 District may have one ground graphic
not larger than 12 square feet in area and five feet in height for
each 200 feet of street frontage.
3. Automobile service stations may have one pole mounted
ground graphic not larger than 15 square feet in area, nor
more than 20 feet in height, in addition to the provisions of the
Table of Design Elements.
4. The following graphics are prohibited:
(a) Billboards; except as a conditional use in the Commercial/
Medical Offices District (CMO), subject to the conditions
set forth under Section 606.9d.55 [Ord. No. 2305-07]
(b) Portable graphics (except sidewalk signs/sandwich board
signs per Section 609.10(f) and the Table of Design
Elements). [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2541-19]
(c) Graphics with motion or which give the illusion of motion.
(d) Flashing or intermittent light for graphics.
(e) Temporary signs identifying architects, engineers,
contractors, builders, painters, gardeners and any other
tradesman or service providers engaged in construction,
improvement, repair, refurbishing, landscaping or any
other commercial activity relating to structures in
residential zones. [Ord. No. 2170-00]
(f) Internally lit box signs. Existing internally lit box signs can
remain in use but cannot be replaced. [Added 10-2-2019
by Ord. No. 2541-19]
5. The following temporary graphics are permitted and do not
require a permit:
(a) Graphics identifying the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises on which located, subject to a maximum graphic
area of four square feet in the R-3 through R-8 and R-O
Districts, and nine square feet in all other districts; ground
graphic provisions shall apply; graphics shall be removed
55.Editor's Note: Codified per ordinance. Billboard provisions removed by Ord. No. 2326-08.
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:591
no more than seven days after the date when the contract
or lease is signed or the reason for the graphic has ceased;
open house graphics shall be allowed only during the day
when the open house is being conducted. [Ord. No.
20-95; Ord. No. 2170-00]
(b) Developments with three or more lots for sale shall be
permitted one ground graphic not larger than 12 square
feet in area or five feet in height.
(c) Temporary window graphics.
(d) Graphics on the grounds of churches, schools, or other
quasi-public land uses provided they do not exceed 15
square feet and are not displayed for more than 14 days.
(e) Temporary real estate directional signs. [Added
3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2527-19; amended 10-2-2019
by Ord. No. 2541-19]
(1) "Temporary real estate directional signs" shall be
defined as removable freestanding signs, to be in or on
the ground, not to exceed 18 inches in height, 24
inches in width and no higher than 30 inches above
existing grade, that are used to direct potential home
buyers to an active open house.
(2) Signs may be placed in the public right-of-way;
however, no sign shall create a sight triangle
obstruction for motorists or an obstruction to
pedestrians. No sign shall be placed on private
property without the written permission of the
property owner.
(3) A temporary real estate directional sign may only be
installed during the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
on the day of the open house. Signs must be removed
by 6:00 p.m. on the same day of the open house.
(4) No more than four temporary real estate directional
signs shall be placed for a single open house. These
signs must identify the broker sponsoring the open
house and a phone number.
(5) A temporary real estate directional sign, as defined
herein, shall not include any illumination, nor shall
there be affixed thereon any balloons, streamers or
other decorative accessory.
6. Signs indicating the presence of a security device or system
are permitted. Security device or system shall have the same
meaning as a "local alarm" or a "private alarm system" as
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:592
defined in Chapter 4, Subsection 4-1.4 of the Revised General
Ordinance of the Township of Millburn (1994). [Ord. No.
2170-00]
i. Permits.
1. No street graphic other than temporary graphics as set forth in
Section 609.10h5, sidewalk/sandwich board signs, or those
operations set forth in Paragraph 3 below, shall be erected,
altered, or relocated without a permit issued by the Zoning
Officer. [Amended 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2541-19]
2. Applications for permits shall include a drawing showing the
design, location, pertinent details, and the name and address
of the owner and applicant.
3. The following operations shall not require a permit:
(a) Changing copy on a theater marquee;
(b) Renovating an existing graphic where no change in copy is
made.
j. Auxiliary Elements. See Table.
1. Awnings and canopies are permitted in the B-1 through B-4
Districts, and as otherwise permitted in accordance with Note
E in the Table of Design Elements. Letters over three inches in
height which are displayed are debited against the allowable
graphic area.
2. Temporary window graphics are not debited against the
allowable graphic area.
3. Indirect illumination, i.e. a light source not seen directly, is
permitted.
4. Floodlight illumination is permitted, provided none of the light
shines onto an adjoining property or in the eyes of motorists or
pedestrians.
5. Bare bulb illumination is not permitted.
k. Graphics and signage for businesses no longer in operation.
[Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 2541-1956]
1. Businesses no longer in operation shall have all of their
signage related to the business removed within 30 days of
closing or ceasing operation.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection k, Advisory
Board.
§ DRZ-609 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-609
AO:593
2. Removal of such signage shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
3. Signage to be removed shall include:
(a) Building signage at the exterior facades.
(b) Graphics in or attached to windows, doors, facade glass, or
storefronts.
(c) Awnings with graphics shall be removed along with their
frames unless graphics are covered with simple plain
canvas whose color shall match the awning.
l. Any violations of this section shall be enforced as described in
Section 419, Violations and Penalties, of the Development
Regulations and Zoning Ordinance. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 2541-19]
609.11. Swimming Pools. [Ord. No. 2471-16]
a. No private residential pool shall be installed on any lot unless it
contains a residence and said pool shall be accessory to the
residence. The pool shall meet the setback and other requirements
for accessory uses set forth in Sections 606 and 609.1 of this
ordinance. Swimming pool areas shall be permitted to have general
above-ground lighting up to 30 inches in height.
b. Pools shall be installed, operated, and used in accordance with
other health and safety ordinances regarding water filtration,
circulation, and treatment; fencing; noise; and lighting.
609.12. Trailers, Campers and Boats. No trailer, camper or boat shall be
used for dwelling purposes or as sleeping quarters, nor shall any such
equipment be used for storage or space for the permanent conduct of
any business, profession, occupation or trade, except that such facilities
may be used temporarily when a building has been damaged, or for
temporary use as a construction office located on a site during
construction provided a temporary permit has been issued for its use by
the construction official. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
the parking or storage of such equipment on private premises, except
that the parking or storage shall be in rear yard areas only. [Ord. No.
2471-16]
§ DRZ-609 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-609
AO:594
ARTICLE 7
Flood Damage Prevention
[Ord. No. 2197-02; amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2287-07]
§ DRZ-701. Statutory authorization.
701.1. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey
has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
Township Committee of the Township of Millburn, State of New Jersey
does ordain as follows. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
701.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. The flood hazard areas of Millburn are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
701.3. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
§ DRZ-701 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-701
AO:595
§ DRZ-702. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
g. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
701.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its
purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for: [Ord.
No. 2287-07]
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel flood waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ DRZ-701 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-702
AO:596
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ DRZ-702 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-702
AO:597
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ DRZ-702 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-702
AO:598
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis;
(ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
§ DRZ-702 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-702
AO:599
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
ordinance.
§ DRZ-703. General provisions.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
703.1. Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to
all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Township
of Millburn, Essex County, New Jersey. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
703.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard for the Township of Millburn, Community No.
340187, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: [Ord. No.
2287-07]
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Essex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 4, 2007.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Essex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0088, 0089,
0093, 0126, 0127, 0129, 0131, 0133; whose effective date is June 4,
2007.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file
at 375 Millburn Ave., Millburn, NJ 07041-1379.
703.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than
30 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Township of Millburn from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
703.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and other ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. No.
2287-07]
§ DRZ-702 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-703
AO:600
§ DRZ-704. Development permit.
703.5. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
ordinance, all provisions shall be: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
703.6.Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township
of Millburn, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
[Ord. No. 2287-07]
704.1. Establishment of Development Permit. A Development Permit shall
be obtained before construction or development begins within any area
of special flood hazard established in Section 703.2. Application for a
Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Construction Code Official and may include, but not be limited to; plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in Section 705.2.2; and,
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ DRZ-703 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-704
AO:601
704.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. The Township Engineer is
hereby appointed to administer and implement this ordinance by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance
with its provisions. [Ord. No. 2287-07; Ord. No. 2415-13]
704.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the
Township Engineer shall include, but not be limited to: [Ord. No.
2415-13]
704.3.1. Permit Review. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of Section 705.3a are met.
704.3.2. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood
elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with
Section 703.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard,
the Township Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer Sections 705.2.1, Specific
Standards, Residential Construction, and 705.2.2, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction. [Ord. No. 2287-07; Ord. No. 2415-13]
704.3.3. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
704.1c.
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
704.3.4. Alteration of Watercourses. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
§ DRZ-704 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-704
AO:602
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
704.3.5. Interpretation of DFIRM/FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 704.4.
[Ord. No. 2287-07]
704.4. Variance Procedure.
704.4.1. Appeal Board.
a. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, as established by the Township of
Millburn, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this ordinance.
b. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Engineer in the enforcement
or administration of this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2415-13]
c. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of
New Jersey, as provided by law.
d. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
§ DRZ-704 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-704
AO:603
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
e. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 704.4.1d and the
purposes of this ordinance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
f. The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
704.4.2. Conditions for Variances. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
1 to 11 in Section 704.4.1d have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ DRZ-704 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-704
AO:604
§ DRZ-705. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Section 704.4.1d,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
705.1. General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following
standards are required: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
705.1.1. Anchoring. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
b. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
705.1.2. Construction materials and methods. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
705.1.3. Utilities. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
§ DRZ-704 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-705
AO:605
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
d. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
705.1.4. Subdivision Proposals. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
705.1.5. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. [Ord. No.
2287-07]
705.2. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Section 703.2,
Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in Section
704.3.2, Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data, the following
standards are required: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
705.2.1. Residential Construction. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
§ DRZ-705 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-705
AO:606
b. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified). And, require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
705.2.2. Nonresidential Construction. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, shall:
b. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
And, require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
c. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
d. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
e. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in Section 704.3.3b.
705.2.3. Manufactured Homes. [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section
705.1.1b.
b. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
705.3. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established
in Section 703.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
§ DRZ-705 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-705
AO:607
§ DRZ-706. Riparian Zone.
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply: [Ord. No. 2287-07]
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
b. If Section 705.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 705 Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
706.1. Intent and Purpose. The Township Committee of the Township of
Millburn finds that riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes, or other
surface water bodies that are adequately vegetated provide an
important environmental protection and water resource management
benefit. It is necessary to protect and maintain the beneficial character
of riparian areas by implementing specifications for the establishment,
protection, and maintenance of vegetation along the surface water
bodies within the jurisdiction of the Township of Millburn, consistent
with the interest of landowners in making reasonable economic use of
parcels of land that include such designated areas. The purpose of this
ordinance is to designate riparian zones, and to provide for land use
regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other
surface water bodies of the Township of Millburn; to protect the water
quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other significant water
resources within the Township of Millburn; to protect the riparian and
aquatic ecosystems of the Township of Millburn; to provide for the
environmentally sound use of the land resources of the Township of
Millburn, and to complement existing state, regional, county, and
municipal stream corridor protection and management regulations and
initiatives.
The specific purposes and intent of this ordinance are to: [Ord. No.
2374-11, 706.2]
a. Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the water resources of the Township of Millburn;
§ DRZ-705 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:608
b. Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as well
as biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption,
adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification,
which occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed through
vegetated buffers as stable, distributed flow prior to reaching
receiving waters;
c. Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
d. Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves and
twigs) and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that provide food
and habitat for aquatic organisms (insects, amphibians,
crustaceans, and small fish), which are essential to maintain the
food chain;
e. Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms;
f. Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
g. Control downstream flooding; and
h. Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources, e.g., headwater areas, ground water recharge zones,
floodways, floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands, and
prime wildlife habitats.
706.2. Statutory Authority. The Township of Millburn is empowered to
regulate land uses under the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which authorizes each
municipality to plan and regulate land use in order to protect public
health, safety and welfare by protecting and maintaining native
vegetation in riparian areas. The Township of Millburn is also
empowered to adopt and implement this ordinance under provisions
provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of New
Jersey: [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.3]
a. Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
b. Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq. and rules set
forth at N.J.A.C. 7:15 et seq.
c. Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23 et seq.
d. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24 et seq.
e. Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq. and rules
set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq.
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:609
f. Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8 et seq.
706.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.4]
ACID PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or
lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of
3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of acid producing soils
in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil Conservation District
offices.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or Construction Office with all of the powers delegated,
assigned, or assumed by them according to statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal
entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated
by the provisions of this ordinance, and that would be located in whole
or in part within a regulated Riparian Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS OR C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set
forth in those standards, for protection from measurable changes in
water quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic
setting, and other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, or exceptional fisheries
resources.
CATEGORY TWO WATERS OR C2 WATERS — Those waters not
designated as Outstanding Natural Resource waters or Category One
waters in the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B, for
purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards.
FLOODWAY — Shall have the meaning ascribed to this term by the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and
regulations promulgated thereunder published at N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq.,
and Section 702.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed
and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:610
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that
is an impoundment, whether naturally occurring or created in whole
or in part by the building of structures for the retention of surface
water. This excludes sedimentation control and stormwater retention/
detention basins and ponds designed for treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the
USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and
including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's GIS
hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water Resource
Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is no riparian zone
along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon or oceanfront
barrier island, spit or peninsula.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan approved by the
Engineer of the Township of Millburn. The plan shall be prepared
by a landscape architect, professional engineer or other qualified
professional, and shall evaluate the effects of any proposed activity/
uses on any Riparian Zone. The plan shall identify existing conditions,
all proposed activities, and all proposed management techniques,
including any measures necessary to offset disturbances to any affected
riparian zone.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA OR SWRPA — A
300-foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys
within the associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any
regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or State open waters identified in a Letter of
Interpretation issued under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New Jersey Department of
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:611
Environmental Protection Division of Land Use Regulation shall also be
considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1,
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as
trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
706.4. Establishment of Riparian Zones. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.5]
a. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be
protected from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as
follows:
1. The Riparian Zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of
any Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream
tributaries situated within the same HUC 14 watershed. This
includes Special Water Resource Protection Areas or SWRPAs
as defined herein and shown on the USGS quadrangle map or
in the County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC 14
drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
2. The Riparian Zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of
the following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the surface water body;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal, which is critically
dependent on the surface water body for survival, and all
upstream waters (including tributaries) within one linear
mile as measured along the length of the surface water
body; and
(d) Any segment of a surface water body flowing through an
area that contains acid producing soils.
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:612
3. For all other surface water bodies, a Riparian Zone of 50 feet
wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
b. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible
bank is not present along a surface water body, the portion of the
riparian zone outside the surface water body is measured landward
as follows:
1. Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale,
the Riparian Zone is measured landward of the feature's center
line;
2. Along a non-linear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
Riparian Zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
3. Along a non-linear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the
Riparian Zone is measured landward of the mean high water
line; and
4. Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland
complex, through which water flows but which lacks a
definable channel, the Riparian Zone is measured landward of
the feature's center line.
Where slopes (in excess of 15%) are located within the
designated widths, the Riparian Zone shall be extended to
include the entire distance of this sloped area to a maximum of
300 feet.
For areas adjacent to surface water bodies for which the
floodway has been delineated per the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-3 or the State's adopted
floodway delineations, the Riparian Zone shall cover the entire
floodway area, or the area described above, whichever area
has the greatest extent. Requests for alterations to the adopted
delineations can be provided to the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection for consideration if site specific
information is available.
c. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning districts. The
provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full force
except where the provisions of the Riparian Zone differ from the
provisions of the underlying district, in which case the provision
that is more restrictive shall apply. These provisions apply to land
disturbances resulting from or related to any activity or use
requiring application for any of the following permits or approvals:
• Building permit
• Zoning variance
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:613
• Special exception
• Conditional use
• Subdivision/land development approval
d. A map of the riparian zones of the entire municipality of the
Township of Millburn, including all land and water areas within its
boundaries, which designates surface water bodies, is included as
part of this ordinance, and is appended as Figure 1.57
Maps of the municipality on which these designations have been
overlain shall be on file and maintained by the offices of the Clerk
of the Township of Millburn. This map conforms to all applicable
laws, rules and regulations applicable to the creation, modification
and promulgation of zoning maps.
e. It shall be the duty of the Engineer of the Township of Millburn,
every second year after the adoption of this ordinance, to propose
modifications to the map delineating riparian zones required by any
naturally occurring or permitted change in the location of a
defining feature of a surface water body occurring after the initial
adoption of the Riparian Zone Map, to record all modifications to
the Riparian Zone Map required by decisions or appeals under
Section 706.10, and by changes made by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in surface water
classifications or floodway delineations.
f. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for
the initial determination of the presence of a Riparian Zone on a
site, and for identifying the area on any plan submitted to the
Township of Millburn in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the
Municipal Engineer, Board of Adjustment, or its appointed
representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
g. The municipal Master Plan provides the legal basis for zoning and
land use regulation at the local level.
h. Exemptions. Instead of the riparian zone protection requirements
above, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with one of the
following:
1. The proposed project or activity is not in the riparian zone.
2. The proposed disturbance in a Riparian Zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route. If the Riparian
57.Editor's Note: The Riparian Zone Map may be found at the end of Section 706.
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:614
Zone is associated with Category One waters, the linear
development must also meet the requirements for Special
Water Resource Protection Areas under the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h);
3. The proposed disturbance in a Riparian Zone is in accordance
with a stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization
plan or project approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection;
4. The proposed disturbance of a Riparian Zone is necessary to
provide for public pedestrian access or water dependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E;
5. The proposed disturbance of a Riparian Zone is required for
the remediation of hazardous substances performed with New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or Federal
oversight pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq. or the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of
1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.;
6. The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does not
exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
7. The proposed disturbance would prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a
minimum economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment; and/or
8. Demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not
located in areas with a 20% or greater slope, except as allowed
under h6 and h7 above.
706.5. Uses Permitted in Riparian Zones. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.6]
a. For Riparian Zones in Category One waters (C1 waters), permitted
uses are governed by the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C.
7:13, unless otherwise exempt.
b. Any other Riparian Zone area shall remain in a natural condition or,
if in a disturbed condition, including agricultural activities, at the
time of adoption of this ordinance may be restored to a natural
condition. There shall be no clearing or cutting of trees and brush,
except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning for reasons of
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:615
public safety or for the replacement of invasive species with
indigenous species. There shall be no altering of watercourses,
dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris,
regrading or construction. The following uses are permitted either
by right or after review and approval by the municipality in
Riparian Zones. No new construction, development, use, activity,
encroachment, or structure shall take place in a Riparian Zone,
except as specifically authorized in this Section. The following uses
shall be permitted within a Riparian Zone:
1. Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall
be permitted by right to extend into a Riparian Zone, provided
near stream vegetation is preserved. These uses do not require
approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or compliance
with an approved Riparian Zone Management Plan. Such uses
include wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves, fishing areas, game farms, fish hatcheries and
fishing reserves, operated for the protection and propagation
of wildlife, but excluding structures. Such uses also include
passive recreation areas of public and private parklands,
including unpaved hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, provided
that said trail have been stabilized with pervious materials.
2. Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the Construction
Code Office, to the extent required by applicable law, rule or
regulation.
3. Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational trails,
roads, railroads, stormwater lines, sanitary sewer lines, water
lines and public utility transmission lines, provided that the
land disturbance is the minimum required to accomplish the
permitted use, subject to approval by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, provided that any applicable State permits are
acquired, and provided that any disturbance is offset by buffer
improvements in compliance with an approved Riparian Zone
Management Plan and that the area of the crossing is
stabilized against significant erosion due to its use as a
crossing.
4. Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which
conform to the guidelines of an approved Riparian Zone
Management Plan, or wetlands mitigation projects that have
been approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, subject to approval by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and subject to compliance with an
approved Riparian Zone Management Plan.
706.6. Performance Standards for Riparian Zones. [Ord. No. 2374-11,
706.7]
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:616
a. All encroachments proposed into Riparian Zones in C1 waters shall
comply with the requirements of the Stormwater Management rule
at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, and shall be subject to review and approval by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, unless
exempt.
b. For all other Riparian Zones, the following conditions shall apply:
1. All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall be
designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the Riparian
Zone to accommodate primary structures, any normal
accessory uses appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned
lawn areas.
2. Portions of lots within the Riparian Zone must be permanently
restricted by deed or conservation easement held by the
Township of Millburn, its agent, or another public or private
land conservation organization which has the ability to provide
adequate protection to prevent adverse impacts within the
Riparian Zone. A complete copy of the recorded conservation
restriction that clearly identifies the deed book and pages
where it has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the
applicable county or the registrar of deeds and mortgages of
the applicable county must be submitted to the municipality.
The applicant shall not commence with the project or activity
prior to making this submittal and receiving actual approval of
the plan modification and receipt of any applicable permits
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
The recorded conservation restriction shall be in the form
approved by the municipality and shall run with the land and
be binding upon the property owner and the successors in
interest in the property or in any part thereof. The
conservation restriction may include language reserving the
right to make de minimus changes to accommodate necessary
regulatory approvals upon the written consent of the
municipality, provided such changes are otherwise consistent
with the purpose and intent of the conservation restriction. The
recorded conservation restriction shall, at a minimum, include:
(a) A written narrative of the authorized regulated activity,
date of issuance, and date of expiration, and the
conservation restriction that, in addition, includes all of
the prohibitions set forth at N.J.S.A. 13:8B-2b(1) through
(7);
(b) Survey plans for the property as a whole and, where
applicable, for any additional properties subject to the
conservation restrictions. Such survey plans shall be
submitted on the surveyor's letterhead, signed and sealed
by the surveyor, and shall include metes and bounds
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:617
descriptions of the property, the site, and the areas subject
to the conservation restriction in New Jersey State Plane
Coordinates, North American Datum 1983, and shall
depict the boundaries of the site and all areas subject to
the conservation restriction as marked with flags or stakes
on site. All such survey plans shall be submitted on paper
and in digital CAD or GIS file on a media and format
defined by the municipality. The flags or stakes shall be
numbered and identified on the survey plan; and
(c) A copy or copies of deeds for the property as a whole that
indicate the deed book and pages where it has been
recorded in the office of the clerk of the applicable county
or the registrar of deeds and mortgages of the applicable
county.
3. Any lands proposed for development which include all or a
portion of a Riparian Zone shall as a condition of any major
subdivision or major site plan approval, provide for the
vegetation or revegetation of any portions of the Riparian Zone
which are not vegetated at the time of the application or which
were disturbed by prior land uses, including for agricultural
use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize native and non-invasive
tree and plant species to the maximum extent practicable in
accordance with an approved Riparian Zone Management
Plan, described in Section 706.9.
4. For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this
ordinance (adopted May 3, 2011 by Ord. No. 2374-11), but for
which a building permit or a preliminary site plan approval has
not been obtained or is no longer valid, the required minimum
front, side, and rear setbacks may extend into the Riparian
Zone, provided that a deed restriction and/or conservation
easement is applied which prohibits clearing or construction in
the Riparian Zone.
5. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow
through a Riparian Zone and shall comply with the Standard
For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. (see
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.).
6. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a
Riparian Zone cannot comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability cited in paragraph 5, above, then the proposed
stabilization measures must meet the requirements of the
Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et
seq., and have an approved flood hazard area permit.
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:618
706.7. Nonconforming Structures and Uses in Riparian Zones.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the riparian zone are
subject to the following requirements: [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.8]
a. Legally existing but nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued.
b. Any proposed enlargement or expansion of the building footprint
within the Riparian Zone of a C1 water shall comply with the
standards in the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C.
7:13.
c. For all other Riparian Zones:
1. Encroachment within the Riparian Zone shall only be allowed
where previous development or disturbance has occurred and
shall be in conformance with the Stormwater Management
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
2. Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the
Riparian Zone as a result of encroachments where previous
development or disturbances have occurred.
3. Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time
within one year from such discontinuance but not thereafter
when showing clear indications of abandonment. No change or
resumption shall be permitted that is more detrimental to the
Riparian Zone, as measured against the intent and purpose
under Section 706.1, than the existing or former
nonconforming use. This one-year time frame shall not apply to
agricultural uses that are following prescribed Best
Management Practices for crop rotation. However, resumption
of agricultural uses must be strictly confined to the extent of
disturbance existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance
(May 3, 2011).
706.8. Uses Prohibited in Riparian Zones. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.9]
a. Any use within a Riparian Zone of a C1 water shall comply with the
standards in the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C.
7:13.
b. For other Riparian Zones, any use or activity not specifically
authorized in Section 706.5 or Section 706.7 shall be prohibited
within the Riparian Zone. By way of example, the following
activities and facilities are prohibited:
1. Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or soil
disturbance such as grading, except for selective vegetation
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:619
removal for the purpose of stream or riparian area stabilization
or restoration projects that require vegetation removal or
grading prior to implementation.
2. Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
3. Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals in excess of prescribed industry standards or the
recommendations of the Soil Conservation District.
4. Roads or driveways, except where permitted in compliance
with Section 706.5.
5. Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as
permitted by this ordinance.
6. Parking lots.
7. Any type of permanent structure, except structures needed for
a use permitted by Section 706.5.
8. New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The expansion
and replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal
system areas for existing uses is permitted.
9. Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise permitted
pursuant to this ordinance.
706.9. Activities Permitted in Riparian Zones in the Case of No Reasonable
or Prudent Alternative or Extreme Hardship. [Ord. No. 2374-11,
706.10]
a. For Riparian Zones in C1 waters, requests for exemptions must be
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, as per the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C.
7:13.
b. For other Riparian Zones, hardship variances may be granted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment in cases of a preexisting lot
(existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance) when there is
insufficient room outside the Riparian Zone for uses permitted by
the underlying zoning and there is no other reasonable or prudent
alternative to placement in the Riparian Zone, including obtaining
variances from setback or other requirements that would allow
conformance with the Riparian Zone requirements, and provided
the following demonstrations are made:
1. An applicant shall be deemed to have established the existence
of an extreme economic hardship, if the subject property is not
capable of yielding a reasonable economic return if its present
use is continued or if it is developed in accordance with
provisions of this ordinance and that this inability to yield a
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:620
reasonable economic return results from unique circumstances
peculiar to the subject property which:
(a) Do not apply to or affect other property in the immediate
vicinity;
(b) Relate to or arise out of the characteristics of the subject
property because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the property
involved, rather than the personal situations of the
applicant; and are not the result of any action or inaction
by the applicant or the owner or his predecessors in title.
(c) The necessity of acquiring additional land to locate
development outside the riparian zone shall not be
considered an economic hardship unless the applicant can
demonstrate that there is no adjacent land that is
reasonably available or could be obtained, utilized,
expanded or managed in order to fulfill the basic purpose
of the proposed activity.
2. An applicant shall be deemed to have established compelling
public need if the applicant demonstrates, based on specific
facts that one of the following applies:
(a) The proposed project will serve an essential public health
or safety need;
(b) The proposed use is required to serve an existing public
health or safety need; or
(c) There is no alternative available to meet the established
public health or safety need.
3. A variance can only be granted if it is shown that the activity is
in conformance with all applicable local, State, and Federal
regulations, including but not limited to the Stormwater
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and that the exception granted
is the minimum relief necessary to relieve the hardship.
c. If such an exception is granted, the applicant shall rehabilitate an
environmentally degraded Riparian Zone area within or adjacent to
the same site, and at least equivalent in size to the Riparian Zone
reduction permitted, or, if not possible, rehabilitate or expand a
Riparian Zone area at least equivalent in size within a nearby site
and, if available, within the same watershed. Rehabilitation shall
include reforestation, stream bank stabilization and removal of
debris, in accordance with a Riparian Zone Management Plan, as
described in Section 706.10 below. In lieu of such rehabilitation,
the Township of Millburn may accept a financial contribution in the
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:621
amount of 125% of the cost of rehabilitation, payment of which
shall be made to the Township of Millburn Open Space Fund.
706.10. Riparian Zone Management Plan. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.11]
a. Within any Riparian Zone, no construction, development, use,
activity, or encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of
such development are accompanied by preparation, approval, and
implementation of a Riparian Zone Management Plan.
b. The landowner, applicant, or developer shall submit to the Zoning
Officer, or its appointed representative, a Riparian Zone
Management Plan prepared by an environmental professional,
professional engineer or other qualified professional which fully
evaluates the effects of any proposed uses on the Riparian Zone.
The Riparian Zone Management Plan shall identify the existing
conditions including:
1. Existing vegetation;
2. Field delineated surface water bodies;
3. Field delineated wetlands;
4. The 100-year floodplain;
5. Flood Hazard Areas, including floodway and flood fringe areas,
as delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection;
6. Soil classifications as found on Soil Surveys;
7. Existing subdrainage areas of site with HUC (Hydrologic Unit
Code) 14 designations;
8. Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of
slopes less than 15%; above 15% but less than 20%; and steep
slopes greater than 20%. The proposed plan shall describe all
proposed uses/activities, and fully evaluate the effects of all
proposed uses/activities in a riparian zone, and all proposed
management techniques, including proposed vegetation and
any other measures necessary to offset disturbances to the
Riparian Zone. A discussion of activities proposed as well as
management techniques proposed to offset disturbances and/
or enhance the site to improve the Riparian Zone's ability to
function effectively as a Riparian Zone shall also be included
with the Riparian Zone Management Plan submittal to the
Township of Millburn.
c. The Plan shall be reviewed and must be approved by the Engineer
of the Township of Millburn, in consultation with the Environmental
Commission, as part of the subdivision and land development
process.
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:622
d. The Riparian Zone Management Plan must include management
provisions in narrative and/or graphic form specifying:
1. The manner in which the area within the Riparian Zone will be
owned and by whom it will be managed and maintained.
2. The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the Riparian
Zone, as applicable.
3. The professional and personnel resources that are expected to
be necessary, in order to maintain and manage the Riparian
Zone.
4. A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes: three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground
cover, understory shrubs, and trees that when fully mature,
will form an overhead canopy. Vegetation selected must be
native, non-invasive species, and consistent with the soil, slope
and moisture conditions of the site. The revegetation plan shall
be prepared by a qualified environmental professional,
landscape architect, or professional engineer, and shall be
subject to the approval of the Engineer of the Township of
Millburn, in consultation with the Environmental Commission.
Dominant vegetation in the Riparian Zone Management Plan
shall consist of plant species that are suited to the Riparian
Zone environment. The Engineer of the Township of Millburn
may require species suitability to be verified by qualified
experts from the Soil Conservation District, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, US Fish and Wildlife Service and/or
State or Federal forest agencies.
e. A Riparian Zone Management Plan is not required where the
Riparian Zone is not being disturbed and conservation easements/
deed restrictions are applied to ensure there will be no future
clearing or disturbance of the Riparian Zone.
f. Performance of the Riparian Zone Management Plan shall be
guaranteed for two years by a surety as approved by the Township
Attorney, such as a bond, cash or irrevocable letter of credit, which
shall be provided to the Township of Millburn prior to the Township
of Millburn issuing any permits or approving any uses relating to
the applicable use or activity.
706.11. Boundary Interpretation, Appeals Procedures, Inspections,
Conflicts, Severability. [Ord. No. 2374-11, 706.12]
a. When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of a
Riparian Zone, or the defined bank-full flow or level, the landowner
or applicant shall submit evidence to the Zoning Officer that
describes the Riparian Zone, presents the landowner or applicant's
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:623
proposed Riparian Zone delineation, and presents all justification
for the proposed boundary change, including but not limited to, a
verification issued under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:13-6, or an approval from the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to encroach within the Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) of a C1 water pursuant to the
Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h)1ii.
b. Within 45 days of a complete submission of Section 706.11a above,
the Engineer of the Township of Millburn, or appointed
representative, shall evaluate all material submitted and shall
make a written determination, a copy of which shall be submitted
to the Zoning Officer and the landowner or applicant. Failure to act
within the forty-five-day period shall not be interpreted to be an
approval of the proposed boundary change.
c. Any party aggrieved by any such determination or other decision or
determination under Section 706.11b may appeal to the Board of
Adjustment under the provisions of this ordinance.
The party contesting the location of the Riparian Zone boundary
shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
d. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Board
of Adjustment under this ordinance may appeal to the Superior
Court of the State of New Jersey. The party contesting the
determination or decision shall have the burden of proof in case of
any such appeal.
e. Inspections.
1. Lands within or adjacent to an identified Riparian Zone shall be
inspected by Township Engineer or his/her designee when:
(a) A subdivision or land development plan is submitted;
(b) A building permit is requested;
(c) A change or resumption of a nonconforming use is
proposed;
(d) A discontinued nonconforming use is resumed more than a
year later, as described in Section 706.8.
2. The Riparian Zone may also be inspected periodically by
representatives from the Township of Millburn if excessive or
potentially problematic erosion is present, other problems are
discovered, or at any time when the presence of an
unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the attention of
municipal officials or when the downstream surface waters are
indicating reduction in quality.
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:624
f. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance
are hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or
conflict, and the provisions of this ordinance apply.
g. Severability.
1. Interpretation: This ordinance shall be so construed as not to
conflict with any provision of New Jersey or Federal law.
2. Notwithstanding that any provision of this ordinance is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all remaining provisions of the ordinance shall
continue to be of full force and effect.
3. The provisions of this ordinance shall be cumulative with, and
not in substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and
land use regulations.
706.12. Enforcement. A prompt investigation shall be made by the
appropriate personnel of the Township of Millburn, of any person or
entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition
which is in violation of this ordinance is discovered, a civil action in the
Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the
primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the
jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of
appropriate process. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to
comply with any requirements shall upon conviction be fined not more
than $2000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein shall prevent the Township of Millburn from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude the right of the
Township of Millburn, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any Section
or Subsection of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense independent of the violation of any other Section or Subsection,
or of any order issued pursuant to this ordinance. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. [Ord. No. 2374-11,
706.13]
706.13. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage
and publication in accordance with the law. [Ord. No. 2374-11,
706.13]
§ DRZ-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-706
AO:625
Figure 1
§ DRZ-706 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-706
AO:626
ARTICLE 8
Historic Preservation
[Ord. No. 10-87; 8-89; 10-89; Ord. No. 2470-16]
§ DRZ-801. Title, purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
Article 8 has been enacted pursuant to authority granted under Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., including, but not limited to,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65(i) and 107 to 112. This Article shall be known by and may
be referred to by the short title of the "Historic Preservation Ordinance of
the Township of Millburn." This Article is specifically intended to effectuate
and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, improvements and districts within the
Township of Millburn, to implement the historic preservation element of the
Township's master plan and to advance the following public purposes:
a. To safeguard the heritage of the Township of Millburn by preserving
resources which reflect elements of its archaeological, cultural, social,
economic, architectural, and historical heritage;
b. To encourage the continued use of historic landmarks and historic
districts and to facilitate their appropriate use or reuse;
c. To maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for the
historically significant structures, sites, and districts located within the
Township;
d. To identify, designate, and regulate historic landmarks and historic
districts in order to preserve their historical significance;
e. To foster civic pride in the history and architecture of Millburn
Township;
f. To promote appreciation of historic landmarks and historic districts for
the education, pleasure and welfare of the local population;
g. To encourage beautification and private reinvestment in historic
landmarks and historic districts, and surrounding properties and
landscapes;
h. To encourage and manage appropriate alterations of historic sites and
improvements within historic districts, and to prevent new construction
which is not in keeping with the character of historic districts;
i. To discourage the unnecessary total or partial demolition, removal, or
destruction of historical resources; and
j. To recognize the importance of historic landmarks and historic districts
by assisting property owners and tenants to maintain their properties in
keeping with the requirements and standards of this Article.
§ DRZ-801 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-802
AO:627
§ DRZ-802. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 3 of this ordinance, the
following definitions apply in Article 8.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in the size, floor area or height of any
building, structure, site, object or improvement added at some time after
the completion of the original.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The construction official of the Township.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior features of any building,
structure, site, object or improvement.
APPLICATION — A request to the Commission made pursuant to this Article
for the purposes of obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness or other
action by the Commission hereunder specified.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — An application to the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of Millburn
for approval of a major or minor subdivision plat or site plan, planned
development, conditional use or zoning variance, or an application for the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining excavation
or landfill, or for any use or change in the use of any building or other
structure, or of any parcel of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
BUILDING — Any man-made structure created principally to shelter any
form of human activity as well as its functionally related appurtenances
such as a house and a barn.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (or CA) — That document issued by
the Commission which is required before any work may be commenced
on any historic landmark or any building, structure, site, object or
improvement located within an historic district.
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission established
pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The officer in charge of granting building or
construction permits in the Township.
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
improvements which are integral components of a historic district either
because they date from a time period which makes them historically
significant or because they represent an architectural type, period or
method which is historically significant.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing, dismantling or destruction,
whether entirely or in significant part, of any building, structure, site, object
or improvement. Demolition includes the removal of a building, structure,
site, object or improvement from its location or the removal or destruction
of its facade or surface.
§ DRZ-802 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-802
AO:628
DESIGNATED HISTORIC LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT — An
individual building, structure, site, object, landscape, park, viewshed,
improvement or district which has been determined to have historical
significance pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
EMERGENCY REPAIRS — Immediate repairs to preserve the continued
habitability and/or the health and safety of occupants or others, performed
in accordance with Township codes without first obtaining a Certificate of
Appropriateness. A consultation with the Commission or its staff is still
required.
EXEMPTION — When a property owner, designer or contractor (a) requests
permission to make repairs or alter building components, for reasons
sufficiently emergent that they cannot wait for the next available meeting,
or (b) requests permission to make ordinary maintenance and repairs,
construction field changes or install materials which are replacements for
materials and features already present, and are sufficiently similar or "inkind",
being "like for like", to obviate the need for a CA hearing.
FACADE — The face or front of a structure or any vertical surface thereof
adjacent to a public way.
HARMONIZING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements
in a historic district which date from a later period but possess some
architectural importance and/or visually contribute to the cohesiveness of
the district's streetscapes.
HISTORIC — Having historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological,
economic, social or other significance as defined by the provisions of this
Article.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A significant concentration, linkage or continuity of
buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements united historically by
plan or physical development which qualifies for designation under section
804 of this Article including those which were formerly known as the
Designated Historic Districts pursuant to Ordinances 10-87, 8-89 and 10-89
and are depicted and described in the attachments at the end of this chapter
as Schedules B, C and D.
HISTORIC DISTRICT RESOURCES — Those resources classified as either
key, contributing or noncontributing, which are defined as follows:
KEY — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements which,
due to their significance, would individually qualify for historic
landmark status;
a.
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
improvements on the site which are integral components either
because they date from a time period which makes them historically
significant or because they represent an architectural type, period or
method which is historically significant including those which were
formerly known as Designated Historic Sites pursuant to Section 804 in
Ordinances 10-87, 8-89 and 10-89; and
b.
§ DRZ-802 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-802
AO:629
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any building, structure, site, object or
improvement which qualifies for designation under Section 804 of this
Article.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, site, landscape, object or
improvement determined to be of historical, archeological, cultural, scenic
or architectural significance in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
HISTORICAL — Of, relating to, or having the character of history.
IMPROVEMENT — A building or other structure, or any work constituting
a man-made alteration of, or addition to, any building, structure, site or
object.
IN-KIND — Construction or construction materials that match construction
or construction materials being replaced on a designated structure or
object, thereby maintaining historic composition, design, color, texture and
other visual qualities.
INTEGRITY — The authenticity of a building, structure, site, object,
improvement or district evidenced by the survival of the physical
characteristics that existed during its historic or prehistoric period.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is affected by any action taken under this Article, or whose rights
to use, acquire or enjoy property under this Article or under any other law
of this State or of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed
by an action or a failure to act under this Article.
INTRUSIONS — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements
in a historic district which date from a later period and do not visually
contribute to the cohesiveness of the district's streetscapes.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet criteria of
significance specified herein.
KEY-CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
improvements in a historic district which, due to their extraordinary
significance, would individually qualify for historic landmark status.
LANDSCAPE — The visual character of the land, including but not limited
to architecture, building setbacks and height, fences, hedgerows, plantings,
lawns, trees as well as man-made features including, but not limited to,
sculptures, patterned walks, fountains, reflecting pools and vistas.
LOT — Any designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise, as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as
a unit.
NONCONTRIBUTING — Any building, structure, site, object or
improvement on the site which does not have significant historical
value because it neither dates from a time period nor represents an
architectural type, period or method which is historically significant.
c.
§ DRZ-802 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-802
AO:630
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan of the Township of Millburn, as amended
from time to time, compiled pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
MINOR APPLICATION — An Application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness (including documents in Section 805.5) which:
MINOR WORK REVIEW COMMITTEE (MWRC) — The members of the
Commission appointed by the Chair at the annual organizational meeting, or
from time to time as needed. The MWRC shall consist of the Chair and two
other members and shall be responsible for reviewing minor applications
and applicant exemption requests with the assistance of the Zoning Official
and the HPC Consultant.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — The Municipal Land Use Law of the State of
New Jersey, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.), as amended from
time to time.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4 et seq.
NON-CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
improvements in a historic district which do not have significant historical
value because they neither date from a period of significance nor represent
an architectural type, period or method which is historically significant,
or due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, no longer
possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time or is
incapable of yielding important information about the period.
OBJECT — Shall be used as a term to distinguish from buildings and
structures those constructions or features that are primarily artistic in
nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Examples
include, but are not limited to, fountains, sculptures, statuary and similar
items. Although it may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is
associated with a specific setting or environment.
Does not involve demolition, relocation or removal of an historic
landmark or a key or contributing resource in an historic district;
a.
Does not involve an addition to an historic landmark or a property in an
historic district or new construction in an historic district;
b.
Is a request for approval of windows, doors, roofing, fences, signs,
awnings, porches, railings, steps, materials, finishes, exterior lighting,
solar panels, communication devices, sidewalks, paving, or streetscape
work and any other work subject to public view which will not
substantially affect the architectural characteristics of the historic
landmark or the historic district; or
c.
Is a request for a construction field change for a Certificate of
Appropriateness which has already been issued and which meets the
criteria of paragraph c above.
d.
§ DRZ-802 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-802
AO:631
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — The repair of any
deterioration, wear or damage to a structure or any part thereof in order
to return the same as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the
occurrence of such deterioration, wear, or damage with in-kind material and
quality workmanship.
OWNER — The owner of record as shown on the current tax list of the
Township tax collector; the mortgage holder of record, if any, as shown in
the mortgage records of the Township; and any purchaser under a land
contract.
PERMIT — Any required approval issued by the Construction Official
pursuant to applicable building or construction codes for exterior work
to be performed on any historic landmark or on any building, structure,
object or site located within a historic district, which exterior work will
be subject to public view. Said permit shall include but not be limited
to a building permit, a demolition permit or a permit to move, convert,
relocate or remodel or to change the use or occupancy of any landmark
or any building, structure, object or site located within an historic district.
"Permit" shall also include all exterior work to be performed on windows,
doors, roofing, fences, signs, awnings, porches, railings, steps, lighting and
sidewalks and any other work subject to public view which would alter the
exterior appearance of historic landmarks or properties located within a
historic district or their sites.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, firms, companies,
corporations, entities or unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents,
employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives of any
thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person,
under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary to
sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historic landmark.
Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property,
generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic
materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new
construction.
PROTECTION — The act or process of applying measures designed to
affect the physical condition of a property by defending or guarding it from
deterioration, loss or attack, or to cover or shield the property from danger
or injury.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing, by means of new
construction, the form, features and detailing of a non-surviving building,
structure, site, object, improvement or landscape for the purpose of
replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic
location when documentary and physical evidence is available.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a property to a state
of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient
§ DRZ-802 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-802
AO:632
contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the
property which are significant to its historic values.
REPLACEMENT — The act or process of replicating any exterior
architectural feature that is used to substitute for an existing deteriorated
or extensively damaged architectural feature.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the form and
details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of
time. It may sometimes mean the removal of later work or the replacement
of missing earlier work.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS — The publication issued
by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, entitled:
"The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties," 36 CFR 68, revised and supplemented from time to time.
SITE — The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic
occupation or activity, a building or structure, or a burial ground or
cemetery, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself
possesses historical, cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value
of any existing structure.
STAFF — The Historic Preservation Consultant, the Zoning Officer and such
other consultants or officials as may from time to time be retained and/or
employed to provide application review services to the Commission.
STREETSCAPE — The visual character of the street including, but not
limited to, the architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
storefronts, signs, lighting, parking areas, materials, sidewalks, curbing and
landscaping.
STRUCTURE — Shall be used as a term to distinguish from buildings those
functional constructions made usually for purposes other than creating
human shelter, such as a bridge, a walkway, driveway and sometimes
referred to as a type of improvement, meaning a combination of materials
that becomes a part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
SURVEY — The inventory of buildings, structures, sites, objects,
improvements and districts located within the Township of Millburn which
is conducted by the Commission for the ascertainment of their historical
significance pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
SURVEY DATA — The raw data produced by the survey; that is, all the
information gathered on each property and area investigated.
VIEW, VISTA OR VIEWSHED — The view by the public of a building,
structure, site, object, improvement or landscape from any point on a street,
road or walkway which is used as a public thoroughfare, either vehicular
and/or pedestrian.
§ DRZ-803. Historic Preservation Commission. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
803.1. Establishment. The duly established Commission created pursuant to
Ordinances 10-87, 8-89 and 10-89 codified as Article 8 of the Township
§ DRZ-802 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-803
AO:633
of Millburn Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance is hereby
re-established confirmed and continued. The members shall serve
without compensation. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
803.2. Responsibilities. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have
the following duties and responsibilities: [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. To identify, record and maintain a survey of all buildings,
structures, sites, objects, improvements and districts of historical
significance within the Township.
b. To recommend to the Planning Board and Township Committee the
designation of buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements
as local historic landmarks, and to recommend the designation of
local historic districts.
c. To monitor and recommend to the Planning Board and Township
Committee any buildings, structures, sites, objects, improvements
or districts for inclusion in the New Jersey or National Register of
Historic Places.
d. To make recommendations to the Planning Board and Township
Committee on the historic preservation element of the master plan
and on the implications for preservation of historic landmarks and
historic districts of any other master plan elements. The
Commission may provide information to the Planning Board
indicating the location and significance of historic landmarks and
historic districts, and identify the standards used to assess
worthiness for historic landmark or historic district designation.
e. To make recommendations to the Planning Board and Township
Committee on the historic preservation implications of any
proposed or adopted zoning or development ordinance(s) or
proposed or adopted element(s) of the Township's Master Plan.
f. To draft and recommend to the Planning Board and Township
Committee ordinances or amendments to existing ordinances that
would resolve any conflicts which may exist between the design
standards of this Article and the building or zoning regulations of
the Township.
g. To advise and assist Township officers, employees, boards and
other bodies, including those at the County, State and Federal
levels, on all matters which have potential impact on the historic
buildings, structures, objects, sites or districts in the Township or
on the physical character and ambience of any portion of the
Township.
h. To advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
applications for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110.
§ DRZ-803 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-803
AO:634
i. To review and render determinations regarding applications for
Certificates of Appropriateness as set forth in this Article.
j. To advise the Planning Board and Township Committee on the
relative merits of proposals involving the use of public funds to
restore, preserve and protect historic buildings, structures, objects
and sites; to securing State, Federal and/or other grants or
assistance in support of such projects; and to monitor such projects
once underway.
k. To cooperate with local, County, State or national historical
societies, governmental bodies and organizations to maximize the
contributions of the Commission in accordance with the intent and
purposes of historic preservation.
l. To make information available to residents of historic buildings or
districts concerning guidelines for rehabilitation and design
criteria for new construction established under this Article.
m. To seek any benefits which may be granted under the National
Historic Preservation Act, as amended, or any other State or
Federal legislation, including but not limited to the benefits which
flow to communities under the certified local government program
with regard to training, grant funding and technical assistance;
and, in furtherance thereof, to take any steps necessary to assist
the Township of Millburn in the preparation and submission of any
documents needed for certification of the Township as a certified
local government under the National Historic Preservation Act.
n. To monitor and recommend to the Township Committee the
submission of any grants related to historic preservation.
o. To increase public awareness of the value of historic, architectural
and cultural preservation by developing and participating in public
information programs.
p. To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Township.
803.3. Membership; Appointment. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
§ DRZ-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-803
AO:635
The Commission consists of seven regular members and two alternate
members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee. All Commission members must
have a demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic
preservation. If available in the community, members of the HPC shall
be professionals that meet the Secretary of the Interior's Professional
Qualification Standards in the fields of architecture, history,
architectural history, prehistoric archaeology, and/or historic
archaeology. In making appointments to the Commission, the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Township Committee, shall
endeavor to seat at least one Commissioner from each of the two
historic districts.
At the time of appointment, members shall be designated by the
following classes:
a. Class A. A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality; and,
b. Class B. A person who is knowledgeable in, or who has
demonstrated an interest in, local history and who may reside
outside the municipality; and,
c. Class C. Citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except for membership on
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. Class C
members should still have a demonstrated interest in history,
historic preservation, construction or a related field.
Of the seven regular members, at least one member shall be
appointed from each class. No more than three members shall be
comprised of Classes A and B.
Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members. At the time of appointment, alternate members shall be
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2".
803.4. Terms. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. The members currently serving as of the date of adoption of this
ordinance58 shall continue in office for the duration of the term in
office applicable to each at the time of their appointment.
b. The term of a regular member shall be four years; the term of an
alternate member shall be two years.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Article, the
term of any member who is also a member of the Planning Board or
58.Editor's Note: Article 8 was readopted December 20, 2016 by Ord. No. 2470-16.
§ DRZ-803 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-803
AO:636
Board of Adjustment shall be coterminous with membership on
such Board.
d. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled within 60 days for the unexpired term only.
803.5. Role of Alternates. The alternate members may participate in all
Commission discussions during proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
803.6. Officers. Annually, the Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair
from its members and select a Recording Secretary who may or may not
be a member of the Commission or a municipal employee. See current
HPC Bylaws for further information. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
803.7. Budget. The Township Committee shall make provision in its budget
and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Commission may employ, contract for and fix the
compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the
Township Attorney at the rate of compensation determined by the
Township Committee, unless the Township Committee by appropriation
provides for separate legal counsel for the Commission. The
Commission shall obtain the services of an Historic Preservation
Consultant and such other experts and other staff as it deems
necessary. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by Township
Committee for the Commission's use. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
803.8. Finances. The Township Committee shall establish by ordinance
reasonable fees necessary to cover the expenses of administration and
professional services to aid the Commission in its review of applications
and development reviews. These fees are in addition to any other
required under any portion of this or any other applicable Township
ordinance. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
803.9. Rules of Commission. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. The Commission shall adopt written Bylaws, Guidelines and rules
for the transaction of its business, for the consideration of
applications for certificates of appropriateness and for the
designation of historic landmarks and historic districts. Such rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Article and shall
include but not be limited to rules pertaining to all notices and
hearings required herein.
b. In order to make available to the public information useful to the
preservation and protection of historic landmarks and historic
§ DRZ-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-803
AO:637
districts and to provide the basis for consistency of policy, the
Commission Secretary shall maintain complete files and records.
The Commission's files shall include but are not limited to data
used in the classification of buildings, structures, sites, objects,
improvements and districts, minutes of Commission meetings,
applications for certificates of appropriateness along with
collateral data, decisions and appeals associated therewith and
information, materials and references submitted to the public
related to historic preservation. A record of Commission
proceedings shall be kept and made available but a formal verbatim
record shall not be required.
c. The Commission Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, reports, findings, determinations, decisions and
applications, which shall be public documents. All meetings shall
be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, et seq. Copies of all minutes shall be
maintained in the Municipal Building and shall be delivered to the
Township Clerk.
d. Copies of records shall be made available to municipal bodies,
agencies, and officials for their use. Records will also be available
to the public in accordance with the Open Public Records Act
(OPRA) and all requests will be handled administratively by the
Commission Secretary.
e. When the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment refers
an application to the Historic Preservation Commission, then the
referring Board shall receive a copy of the Commission's report.
f. The building and engineering offices shall maintain and display an
up-to-date map showing the boundaries of all areas designated as
historic districts, as well as the locations of all historic landmarks.
g. No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
h. The Commission shall prepare an annual report. Copies will be
delivered to the Township Clerk and the New Jersey HPO. The
annual report will also be available to the public upon request.
803.10. Removal. A member of the Commission may, after a public hearing,
if requested, be removed by the Township Committee for cause
including, but not limited to, failure to attend Commission Meetings
and/or violation of the Local Government Ethics Law. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
803.11. Meetings; Quorum. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
§ DRZ-803 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-803
AO:638
§ DRZ-804. Designation of Historic Landmarks and Historic
Districts. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish and post in
the Millburn Town Hall a regular schedule of meetings, which shall
include a minimum of one meeting per month. Regular meetings
shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of a quorum,
lack of applications to process or for other good reason(s), which
shall be noted in the minutes. Additional special meetings may be
called by the Chair or Vice-Chair, or on the request of any two of its
members, when the regular meetings are inadequate to meet the
needs of its business, to handle emergencies or to meet time
constraints imposed by law.
b. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold public hearings to
review all applications for certificates of appropriateness, referrals
of development applications and other business which comes
before the Commission.
c. The presence of four members, which may include alternate
members filling the vacancies of regular members, shall constitute
a quorum. A majority vote of those present and voting shall prevail,
and shall be sufficient to grant or deny a Certificate of
Appropriateness. Not less than a majority of the appointed
membership shall be required to grant or change an historic
landmark or historic district designation or to grant approval for
demolition.
804.1. Survey. The Commission shall maintain and expand, when
appropriate, a comprehensive survey of the Township of Millburn to
identify historic landmarks and historic districts that are worthy of
protection and preservation. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
804.2. Criteria for Designation. The criteria for evaluating and designating
historic landmarks and historic districts shall be guided by the National
Register Criteria as currently published and amended from time to
time. The Commission or any person may recommend designation of
historic landmarks or historic districts that are in accordance with the
National Register Criteria or that possess one or more of the following
attributes: [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the Township, State or Nation; or
b. Association with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history; or
c. Association with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
d. Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture, or engineering; or
§ DRZ-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-804
AO:639
e. Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the Township, State or Nation; or
f. Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or
craftsmanship that render an improvement architecturally
significant or structurally innovative; or
g. Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a
district or landmark an established or familiar visual feature; or
h. Ability or potential ability to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
804.3. Procedures for Designation. Proposals to designate a property as
historic pursuant to this Article may be made by the Township
Committee, the Commission, or the Planning Board, in accordance with
the following procedures: [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Nomination Report for Historic Landmark. A nomination to propose
an historic landmark shall include the following information which
addresses the criteria for designation as set forth herein:
1. A photograph of the proposed landmark; and
2. A copy of the municipal tax map showing the property on which
the proposed landmark is located; and
3. A physical description of the proposed landmark; and
4. A statement of significance.
b. Nomination Report for Historic District. A nomination to propose
an historic district shall include the following information which
addresses the criteria for designation as set forth herein:
1. A building-by-building inventory of all properties within the
district identifying key, contributing, harmonizing, noncontributing,
or intrusions; and
2. A photograph of each property and building within the district;
and
3. A copy of the municipal tax map of the district showing
boundaries; and
4. A physical description of the proposed district; and
5. A statement of significance.
c. Schedule a Hearing. Following receipt of a nomination to propose
an historic landmark or historic district, the Commission shall
schedule a public hearing on the proposed designation.
§ DRZ-804 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-804
AO:640
d. Notification Requirements. At least 20 days prior to the public
hearing, the Commission shall, by personal service or certified
mail, perform the following:
1. Notify the owner(s) of record of a property that has been
proposed for historic landmark designation, or the owner(s) of
record all properties located within a district that has been
proposed for historic district designation, that the property or
district, as applicable, is being considered for such designation
and the reasons therefor;
2. Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance and
consequences of such designation, and of the rights of the
owner(s) of record to contest such designation under the
provisions of this Article;
3. Notify the owner(s) of record of the date, time and location of
the hearing concerning the proposed designation of the
property or district; and
4. Serve any further notices as may be required under the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law.
e. Public Notice of Hearing. At least 20 days prior to the public
hearing, the Commission shall also cause public notice of the
hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the Township.
f. Public Report. At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, a copy of
the nomination report shall also be made available for public
inspection in the municipal offices of the Township.
g. Public Hearing. At the public hearing scheduled in accordance with
this Article, the Commission shall review the nomination report and
accompanying documents. Interested persons shall be given the
opportunity to be heard and to comment on the proposed
nomination for designation.
h. Commission Report. If the proposed nomination is approved by the
Commission, then the Commission shall forward a report to the
Township Committee, which shall contain a statement of the
Commission's recommendations and the reasons therefor with
regard to proposed designations considered at the hearing,
including a list and map of properties approved for designation.
i. Referral to Planning Board. The Township Committee shall refer
the report to the Planning Board, which in turn shall report to the
Township Committee as soon as possible, but within 60 days.
Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the sixtyday
period provided herein shall relieve the Township Committee of
its obligations relating to the referral of such a report to the
Planning Board. The Township Committee action on historic
landmark or historic district designations shall be otherwise
§ DRZ-804 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-804
AO:641
subject to those procedures and statutes which apply to a change
of a zoning designation and the adoption, revision or amendment of
any development regulation.
j. Final Designation. As soon as possible after its receipt of the report
of the Planning Board or the expiration of the period allowed for
Planning Board comment on designations pursuant to Section
804.3i of this section, the Township Committee shall act upon the
proposed designation list and map and may approve, reject or
modify by ordinance the designation recommendations made by
the Planning Board. In the event that the Township Committee
votes to reject or modify any Planning Board recommendations for
a proposed designation, the Township Committee shall record in its
minutes the reasons for not following such recommendation. All
action taken by the Township Committee on proposed designations
shall become effective upon a favorable vote of a majority of its full
authorized membership, except, in cases in which a protest has
been filed in accordance with Section 804.3h of this section. A
proposed designation shall then require a favorable majority vote
of a majority of the full authorized membership of the Township
Committee.
k. Public Notice of Designation. Notice of designation shall be made
public by publication in the official newspaper of the Township and
by distribution to all municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and permits. A certificate or letter of designation shall
be sent to the owner(s) of record.
l. Incorporation of Designated Landmarks into Township Records.
Upon adoption of an article by the Township Committee
designating an historic landmark or an historic district, the said
designation shall supplement, rather than supersede, the existing
zoning district in which the affected historic landmark or historic
district is located. At that time, the designation list and map shall
be incorporated into the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance of the
Township as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. Designated properties shall also be noted as such
on the records for those properties as maintained by the
engineering and zoning offices, as well as the offices of the
Construction Official, the Township Tax Assessor and the Township
Clerk. In addition to the requirement for notation in the foregoing
Township records upon the designation of a landmark or historic
district by the Township Committee as above in this paragraph I set
forth, within 90 days of the adoption of this ordinance, there shall
be entered upon the property records in the offices of the Tax
Assessor, the Construction Code Official, the Township Engineer,
the Zoning Officer and the Township Clerk a notation which
identifies each property located within or historic district as
constituted on the date of adoption hereof.
§ DRZ-804 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-804
AO:642
Each tax/assessment search requested for a property located
within an historic district shall note thereon the subject property
is so located. Similarly, all forms maintained and issued by the
Construction Code Official, Township Engineer, Zoning Officer and
Township Clerk responsive to requests for information, permits,
and like documents, shall contain a notation which identifies, as
applicable, the presence of a property within an historic district
as constituted on the date of the adoption hereof and as new
landmarks as historic district designations occur hereafter.
m. Amendments. Amendments to historic landmark or historic district
designations may be made in the same manner as they were
adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
804.4. Historic Landmarks Designated. The following historic landmarks as
delineated and described in the Township Master Plan are hereby
designated historic landmarks for the purposes of this Article: None.
[Ord. No. 2470-16]
804.5. Historic Districts Designated. The following historic districts as
previously and by this ordinance created, reestablished and as
delineated and described in the Township Master Plan are hereby
designated historic districts for the purposes of this Article: [Ord. No.
2470-16]
a. The "Short Hills Park Historic District" is designated as an historic
district and shall consist of those properties, or parts thereof, listed
in Ordinance No. 10-89.
b. The "Wyoming Historic District" is designated as an historic district
and shall consist of those properties, or parts thereof, listed in
Ordinance No. 10-89.
Those lots, and all structures thereon, located within the above
designated historic districts on which are located structures
identified in the "Historic Structures Survey, Township of Millburn"
(Millburn-Short Hills Historical Society and David Gibson
Associates. 1979; funding assistance from the National Park
Service, through the Office of NJ Heritage) as being of outstanding,
notable, or other historic or architectural importance, are hereby
reclassified for the purposes of this ordinance as contributing or
noncontributing, respectively. See definitions in Section 802 above.
See Schedules59 for all properties listed by block and lot. Lots and
all structures thereon which are classified as key shall be listed
subsequently in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
804.6. Underlying Zoning District Regulations. All properties within the
Historic Landmark and Historic District Overlay Zones shall remain
subject to all underlying zoning district regulations. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
59.Editor's Note: Said Schedules are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ DRZ-804 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-805
AO:643
§ DRZ-805. Certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
805.1. When Required. A Certificate of Appropriateness (or "CA") issued by
the Commission shall be required before any work is commenced on
any historic landmark or within any historic district, whether or not a
construction permit is required for such work, including but not limited
to the following activities listed below. Work associated with a
development application requiring ultimate approval by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment is not exempt from this
requirement. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Changing the exterior appearance of any building, structure, site,
object or improvement by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
replacement, including, but not limited to, the addition or
alteration of windows, doors, roofing, fences, signs, awnings,
porches, railings, steps, materials, finishes, exterior lighting, solar
panels, communication devices, sidewalks, paving, or streetscape
work except for the activities described in Section 805.2 below.
b. Demolition of any building, structure, site, object or improvement.
c. Relocation of a principal or accessory building, structure, site,
object or improvement.
d. Any addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory
building, structure, site, object or improvement.
805.2. When Not Required. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required before a
permit is issued by the administrative officer for changes to the
interior of a structure.
b. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for exterior
repainting or interior painting of existing structures. If an exterior
material, finish or surface is to be painted which was not previously
painted, a Certificate of Appropriateness will be required.
c. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required if, in the
opinion of the Minor Work Review Committee or the Historic
Preservation Consultant, the work contemplated constitutes
"ordinary maintenance and repair" as defined by this Article. In
such cases, and if a permit is required for the proposed work, the
Commission shall promptly notify the administrative officer that a
Certificate of Appropriateness is not required as a prerequisite to
the issuance of the permit.
d. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for structural
repairs which do not alter the exterior appearance.
e. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for any
changes, additions or alterations not visible from a public right-ofway
other than relocation or demolition.
§ DRZ-805 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-805
AO:644
805.3. Procedures. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Except for the circumstances described in Section 805.2, no work
shall be performed on any historic landmark or on any building,
structure, site, object or improvement located within an historic
district until either a Certificate of Appropriateness has been
issued by the Commission for such work or until a determination
has been made by the Commission, the Minor Work Review
Committee, or Commission Staff that no Certificate of
Appropriateness is necessary pursuant to Section 805.2 above.
b. Applications shall be made on forms available in the office of the
Construction Official in the Millburn Town Hall. Completed
applications shall be delivered or mailed to the administrative
officer. All such applications shall include payment of a filing fee
and an escrow fee in the amounts established, and amended from
time to time, by ordinance. There shall be no fee for conceptual
reviews under Section 805.4. The fee for an application to the
Historic Preservation Commission shall be $200. In addition to the
application fee, an escrow deposit in the amount of $750 shall be
paid as authorized in Section 410.7 and shall be administered in
accordance with the requirements of Section 410.9 of this
ordinance. In the event an application is approved, the applicant
may be required to pay an escrow charge in accordance with
Section 410.8 for inspection during construction.
c. Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness,
Commission staff will review and notify the applicant in writing that
the application is deemed complete and may proceed with legal and
noticing requirements. If complete, the Commission shall schedule
a hearing within a forty-five-day period for the purpose of
reviewing said complete application and shall advise the
applicant(s), in writing, of the time, date and place of said hearing.
If incomplete, the Commission shall return the application with a
written description of the requirements not met pursuant to this
ordinance and the HPC Checklist. For applications, 15 copies of the
complete application must be submitted to the administrative
officer. For minor applications, five copies of the complete
application must be submitted to the administrative officer.
d. A complete application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall
include the items enumerated in the HPC Checklist (Schedule H):
805.4. Conceptual Review and Informational Meetings. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
a. Persons proposing or considering an action that requires a
Certificate of Appropriateness may present a proposal for informal
concept review and comment by the Commission and shall first
hold an informal informational meeting with the Commission staff
to review any design proposals or related issues.
§ DRZ-805 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-805
AO:645
b. Persons proposing to make application to the Commission in
connection with any action that requires a Certificate of
Appropriateness are encouraged to first hold an informal
informational meeting with Commission staff to review any design
proposals or related issues before making application.
c. The Commission staff shall hold meetings pursuant to Section
805.4a or 805.4b within 20 days of such request. Neither the
applicant nor the Commission shall be bound by any such review.
Informal concept or informational review shall not relieve the
necessity for Commission review for a Certificate of
Appropriateness pursuant to this ordinance.
805.5. Minor Work Application Review. Minor Work applications, as defined
in this ordinance, may be reviewed and approved by the Minor Work
Review Committee without holding a public hearing. A minor work
application shall require submittal of information consisting of the
standard application cover pages and, where applicable, a drawing in
sufficient detail to accurately depict the work proposed and adequate to
provide the information required for issuance of a permit by the
Construction Code Official. If the Minor Work Review Committee finds
the application appropriate, the Committee may act in place of the full
Commission without the necessity of a public hearing and is authorized
to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness to the Construction Official for
said minor work. The Construction Official shall then authorize the
applicant to proceed and issue any required permit associated
therewith. If the Minor Work Review Committee does not find the
application appropriate, the application shall be scheduled for a public
hearing before the full Commission/upon filing of a full application
meeting the submittal requirements of the HPC Checklist. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
805.6. Application Review. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
Certificates of Appropriateness following the referral of a complete
application to the Commission by the administrative officer. The
applicant shall have the burden of proof and obligation to establish
entitlement to a Certificate of Appropriateness by satisfaction of
the applicable standards and criteria in accordance with this
ordinance, upon the failure of which, the Commission shall be
entitled to deny the application. The Commission shall issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness within a forty-five-day period that
begins when applications are deemed complete by designated
Commission staff and distributed to Commissioners in the monthly
packet. No public hearing shall be required in order for the MWRC
to render a Minor Application determination of exemption pursuant
to Section 805.2.
b. Prior to holding a public hearing on a complete application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission or its staff shall, in
§ DRZ-805 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-805
AO:646
addition to complying with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, et seq., notify the applicant in writing
at least 10 days prior to the hearing setting forth the time, date and
place of the hearing. Applicant shall provide written notice to those
entitled to notice in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
c. At the hearing, the Commission shall allow all persons the
opportunity to be heard concerning the issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness for the proposed work.
d. After conducting the public hearing, the Commission shall return to
the administrative officer within 30 days, its written determination
on the application, which may be stated in resolution form. The
Commission shall grant or deny a Certificate of Appropriateness to
the applicant based on the standards and criteria set forth in
Section 807 of this Article. The Commission may issue a Certificate
of Appropriateness subject to certain condition(s), which shall be
set forth in detail in the Commission's written decision. The
Commission's denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
deemed to prohibit the applicant from undertaking the work
applied for, and shall preclude the issuance of any required permit
for the said work by the administrative officer. Upon receipt of the
Commission's written determination, the administrative officer
shall notify the applicant of said determination in writing within
five business days thereof. The granting or denial of an historic
preservation permit may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in
the same manner as an appeal is taken pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a). Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the right of
judicial review of the Board of Adjustment action after an appeal is
concluded.
e. Failure of the Commission to render its written determination to
the administrative officer within the forty-five-day period shall be
deemed to constitute a determination in favor of the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness for the proposed work and without
conditions.
f. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Commission. The request for an
extension of time by the applicant must be made in writing prior to
a regularly scheduled public hearing or verbally requested during a
public meeting and recorded in the minutes. In circumstances
where the Commission determines that the applicant has failed or
declined to provide the Commission with information reasonably
required by it in order to make an informed decision, the
Commission shall have the right to adjourn the proceedings until
such time as the requested information is supplied to it. If the
requested information is not received by the Commission within 60
days, it shall have the right to dismiss the application without
prejudice for lack of prosecution.
§ DRZ-805 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-805
AO:647
g. When a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued, the
administrative officer or his appointee shall, from time to time,
inspect the work approved by such certificate and shall regularly
report to the Commission the results of such inspections, listing all
work inspected and reporting any work not in accordance with
such certificate.
h. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be valid for a period of two
years from date of issue unless reasonable extensions are
requested by the applicant or the Commission.
i. Appeals from determinations of the administrative officer pursuant
to the Historic Preservation Commission's decisions may be made
by the applicant to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
j. The performance of unauthorized activities and/or the performance
of any work not in accordance with a previously issued Certificate
of Appropriateness, shall be deemed to be a violation of this Article
and may subject the responsible parties to sanctions imposed
hereunder. The Construction Code Official or Municipal Prosecutor,
as applicable, shall prosecute any such violation in the Municipal
Court and the Commission shall also have the right to file an action
in the Superior Court of New Jersey for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief, subject to the prior approval of the Township
Committee.
805.7. Emergency Repair Procedures. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. When an historic landmark or a historic district resource requires
immediate repair to preserve its continued habitability and/or the
health and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs
may be performed in accordance with applicable construction
codes immediately upon approval of the Construction Official, who
shall certify that a bona fide emergency of the type referenced
herein exists, without first obtaining a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the Commission. Under such circumstances,
the repairs performed shall be only such as are necessary to
preserve the continued habitability of the building or structure and/
or the health and safety of its occupants or others. Where feasible,
temporary measures to prevent further damage shall be employed,
provided these measures are reversible without causing damage to
the building or structure.
b. Simultaneously with the commencement of the emergency work,
the property owner shall make a request for a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the Commission memorializing the approval
for said emergency work. This request shall be made through the
administrative officer pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section 805.6 above.
§ DRZ-805 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-805
AO:648
§ DRZ-806. Referral of development involving historic landmarks or
historic districts. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
c. It should be noted that the procedures outlined in this section
should be strictly limited to those circumstances which, in the
opinion of the Construction Code Official, rise to the level of a bona
fide emergency of the type referenced above. No work in addition
to the emergency repairs shall be performed until an appropriate
request for approval has been granted by the administrative officer
and Historic Preservation Commission pursuant to the procedures
set forth in Section 805.6 above.
805.8. Obtaining certificates of appropriateness for government actions.
[Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. The Township of Millburn, when it plans to undertake any work on
any municipally owned historic landmark or on any municipally
owned property in an historic district, shall submit such plans to
the Historic Preservation Commission and shall receive an advisory
report with recommendations on the appropriateness of those
plans before undertaking the work.
b. In those circumstances where the Township cannot require
compliance, as in certain cases involving the County, State and
Federal governments, the Township strongly urges the voluntary
cooperation of such agencies in seeking a Certificate of
Appropriateness and hereby authorizes the Commission to
consider such requests and applications. This does not relieve the
property owner from complying with applicable State and Federal
regulations regarding historic preservation.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110, the Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment of the Township of Millburn shall refer to the Historic
Preservation Commission every application for development submitted
to either Board for development involving historic landmarks or
properties located within historic districts identified in the Township's
historic preservation element of the Master Plan. This referral shall be
made when the application for development is deemed complete or is
scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure to refer an
application as required shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
The Historic Preservation Commission may provide its advice on said
application, through oral testimony at the hearing, and/or through
written report(s) that the Commission may have provided to the Board
concerning the proposed application.
b. On all matters referred to the Historic Preservation Commission which
require approval by the Township's Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the decision of the Commission shall be advisory only. In
reviewing applications for development, the Commission may comment
and make recommendations on any of the zoning and land use
considerations which are relevant to the application. The Planning
§ DRZ-805 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-806
AO:649
§ DRZ-807. Standards and criteria. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, shall consider the
testimony and/or written report(s) presented and may disapprove or
change any of the recommendations made by the Commission by a vote
of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its
minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations.
c. Yard Variances. Due to the fact that structures in historic districts may
have been built close to the lot lines, it is in the public interest to retain
a neighborhood's historic appearance by approving variances to normal
yard requirements. Where it is deemed that such variance will not
adversely affect neighboring properties, the appropriate Board may
grant such variance to standard requirements if so recommended by
the Historic Preservation Commission.
d. An approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, does not relieve the applicant of the requirement of
obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission (see
Section 805) for those historic aspects of the work not addressed as
part of the application for development.
a. The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards and criteria
for the regulation of historic landmarks and historic districts for use by
the Historic Preservation Commission. All projects requiring a
Certificate of Appropriateness and all applications for development on
historic landmarks or in historic districts shall, in interpreting and
applying the standards and criteria set forth herein, be guided by the
principles contained in the most current versions of the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation (as contained within the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties), by the Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines for Preserving,
Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing Historic Buildings, and by
the Millburn Township Design Guidelines for Historic Districts and
Sites, incorporated herein by reference, as the same may be applicable
and appropriate, and as amended and revised from time to time. In
utilizing the Secretary of Interior's Standards, the Commission shall be
guided by the provisions thereof including, but not limited to, the
following:
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
§ DRZ-806 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-807
AO:650
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained
and preserved.
5. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be
preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement
of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be
substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property.
The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features
to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
These standards are adopted as the Commission's design criteria
and guidelines pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.1.
b. In reviewing applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the siting,
arrangement, exterior design, design quality, bulk, arrangement,
density, texture, details, style, scale, setbacks, stepbacks, shape, height,
massing, lot coverage, rhythm, directional emphasis, proportions,
building elements, materials, finishes and relationships to the
streetscape and/or landscape views of the proposed work and the
relationship of those characteristics to the historical significance of the
historic landmark or historic district.
§ DRZ-807 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-807
AO:651
c. In reviewing applications for Certificates of Appropriateness and
notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall not consider 1) use, zoning
requirements for setbacks, density, height limitations or lot coverage as
these matters fall within the purview of the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment, and 2) the removal of trees as these matters fall
within the purview of the Township Forester in accordance with the
standards and requirements of Chapter 11 of the Millburn Township
Code entitled "Tree Preservation". Nothing herein shall prevent the
Commission from making a recommendation to the Township Forester
with respect to tree removal by the incorporation of any such
recommendation in a Resolution adopted pursuant to an application
determined by it.
d. In recognition of the lesser importance of applications for a Certificate
of Appropriateness related to non-contributing structures/sites, only
the criteria set forth in Section 807d4 shall be applied by the
Commission.
Criteria for Review. In its review of historic landmarks or properties
located with historic districts, the Commission shall give consideration
to certain criteria, including but not limited to the following:
1. The historical value of the landscape or streetscape.
2. The historical value of a building, structure, site, object,
improvement or district and its relationship to property of the
surrounding area.
3. The general compatibility of the proposed use to the historical
value of the surrounding historic district. In regard to an
application for new construction, alterations, additions or
replacements affecting a historic site or an improvement within a
historic district, and in addition to the criteria set forth in Section
807b, the following factors shall be considered in relation to its
setting and context, including:
(a) Height.
(b) Massing.
(c) Proportion of the width and height of the building's facades.
(d) Proportion of openings within the building.
(e) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets.
(f) Rhythm of solids to voids on facades fronting on public places.
(g) Relationship of materials and texture.
(h) Construction in a range of design and style options which are
consistent with neighboring buildings in the historic district.
§ DRZ-807 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-807
AO:652
§ DRZ-808. Demolitions and relocations. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
4. The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used with the historical value
of the surrounding area. In carrying out its design review under
these guidelines, the following criteria shall be utilized:
(a) All exterior elevations, including the roof, must be maintained
and new construction must be compatible with existing
structures, districts and surrounding areas.
(b) In-kind or similarly compatible building materials must be
utilized.
808.1. Criteria. In regard to an application to demolish or relocate an
historic landmark or an historic district resource, the following matters
shall be considered: [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Its current and potential use for those purposes currently
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance or for the use proposed.
b. The probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the
historic landmark or historic district.
c. The structural soundness and integrity of the building, structure,
site, object or improvement and the economic feasibility of
restoring or rehabilitating same so as to comply with the
requirements of the applicable construction codes.
d. The compelling reasons for not retaining the building, structure,
site, object or improvement at its present location, the proximity of
the proposed new location and its accessibility to residents of the
municipality, and the probability of significant damage to the
building, structure, site, object or improvement as a result of the
relocation.
e. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this Article and whether the proposed new location is
visually compatible in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
808.2. Procedure. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. Where Demolition Disapproved. In the event that the Historic
Preservation Commission disapproves an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness to demolish an historic landmark or
a building, structure, site, object or improvement located in an
historic district, the owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter of right,
be entitled to raze or demolish same provided that all of the
following requirements have been fully met:
§ DRZ-807 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-808
AO:653
1. Appeal to Zoning Board of Adjustment. The owner has applied
for the necessary Certificate of Appropriateness and has
received notice of the Commission's denial of same from the
administrative officer and has appealed to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, which has affirmed such denial.
2. Sale for Fair Market Value. Following affirmance of the
Commission's determination by the Board of Adjustment, an
owner who desires to further pursue demolition approval has
for a period of at least 180 days (the "offer period"), and at a
price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona
fide offer to sell such building, structure, site, object or
improvement and the land pertaining thereto to any person,
entity, organization, government or political subdivision
thereof which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to
preserve the building, structure, site, object or improvement
and the land pertaining thereto.
3. Demolition Notice Posted and Publication.
(a) Notice of any proposed demolition shall be posted on the
exterior premises of the building, structure, site, object or
improvement throughout the Notice Period in a location
such that it is clearly readable. In addition, the applicant
shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the
Township a notice setting forth the following:
(1) The applicant's intent to demolish, including a
description of the subject property (by block and lot as
well as by physical location) and a description of the
building, structure, site, object or improvement to be
demolished; and
(2) The applicant's proposed use of the property following
demolition; and
(3) The anticipated time frame(s) associated with the
demolition; and
(4) A statement indicating that the applicant shall
consider any and all bona fide offers to sell the
property to any person who wishes to preserve the
building, structure, site, object or improvement; and
(5) The applicant's name and address, along with a
telephone number where the applicant may be
reached during normal business hours by any
interested person who wishes to discuss the proposed
demolition and/or to make an offer to purchase the
property as set forth above.
(b) The notice shall be published as follows:
§ DRZ-808 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-808
AO:654
(1) At least once within the first 10 days of the Notice
Period; and
(2) At least once within the period of time that is not less
than 10 nor more than 15 days prior to the expiration
of the Notice Period; and
(3) At least once each 20 days between the above first and
last notifications.
(c) At the conclusion of the Notice Period, if the applicant still
wishes to demolish the subject building structure, site,
object or improvement, it shall, prior to performing the
demolition, perform the following:
(1) Advise the Commission in writing of its intention to
proceed with the demolition; and
(2) Certify in writing to its compliance with the provisions
of the 180-day offer period; and
(3) Provide the Commission with a copy of the notice that
appeared in the official newspaper of the Township
and a listing of all dates on which the said notice
appeared in the newspaper; and
(4) Advise the Commission in writing as to whether any
interested persons submitted an offer or offers to
purchase the property, whether during the 180-day
"offer period" or following the newspaper noticing
referenced above, and set forth the terms and
conditions relating to said offer(s) and the results of
any negotiations pertaining thereto; and
(5) File copies of the affidavits of publication relating to
the newspaper noticing with the Commission.
4. Notice Period. The period of time during which notice must be
given in the manner hereinbefore set forth shall be known as
the "Notice Period" which shall commence on the tenth day
following the date of the notice of denial of the appeal from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and such Notice Period shall run
for a period of time of 180 days.
b. Assignment. No assignment of the rights granted by a Certificate of
Appropriateness to demolish shall be permitted.
c. Expiration of Approval.
1. In cases where demolition is permitted, the Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be valid for one year from the date of
Historic Preservation Commission approval of the application.
The one-year period shall not be extended.
§ DRZ-808 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-808
AO:655
§ DRZ-809. Violations: penalties and injunctive relief. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether
such application involves any activity which should also be the subject
of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, and, if it should
be, to inform the administrative officer, the applicant, and the Historic
Preservation Commission of the same.
2. At the time of issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness to
demolish, the administrative officer shall designate the period
of time (within the one year approval period) within which
demolition must be completed.
d. Approval after Change of Circumstances. The Commission may at
any time during such Notice Period, if a significant change in
circumstances occurs, approve a Certificate of Appropriateness to
demolish, in which event, a permit from the administrative officer
shall be issued within 10 days thereafter.
809.1. Violations. [Ord. No. 2470-16]
a. If any person shall undertake any construction activity on an
historic landmark or property located within an historic district
without first having obtained a Certificate of Appropriateness as
provided in this Article, or where such construction activity is not
in compliance with a Certificate of Appropriateness previously
issued, such person shall be deemed to be in violation of this
Article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation of
this ordinance in circumstances where the Construction Official
has issued a construction permit, but has not advised the recipient
of the construction permit to have first made application to the
Commission.
b. After learning of the violation, the administrative officer shall
personally serve a notice describing the violation in detail upon the
owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring.
c. If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality
with said notice, a copy thereof shall be posted on the site in
question and a copy shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner at his or her last known address as it
appears on the municipal tax rolls.
d. Within 10 days of receipt of the notice of violation, the violator shall
be required to file an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness in the same manner as prescribed pursuant to
section 806 of this Article, and the notice shall advise the violator of
such.
§ DRZ-808 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-809
AO:656
e. Upon receipt of the violator's application, the Commission shall
conduct a review of the said application and hold a public hearing
in the same manner as prescribed for regular applications pursuant
to Section 805 of this Article.
f. Upon the violator's filing of an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the imposition of all enforcement action on behalf
of the Township shall be stayed until such time as:
1. The Commission has rendered a decision on the violator's
application and the administrative officer has served notice
thereof upon the applicant; and
2. The violation is still deemed to be in existence; and
3. No further appeal of the decision of the Commission and
administrative officer relating to the said application is
pending before the Zoning Board of Adjustment or any court;
and
4. All appeal periods relating to the said application have expired.
g. If the Commission grants a Certificate of Appropriateness to the
violator for the unauthorized work, then the violator shall no longer
be deemed to be in violation of this Article. If the Commission
grants a Certificate of Appropriateness to the violator subject to
certain conditions, then the violator shall be deemed to have cured
the violation only upon its timely satisfaction of the said conditions
in accordance with the requirements of the Commission. If the
Commission denies a Certificate of Appropriateness to the violator
for the unauthorized work, then the violation shall still exist and the
violator shall be subject to appropriate enforcement action as
prescribed by this Article.
h. In the event that the violator fails to file a timely application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness after having been served with a
notice of violation as set forth above, or in the event that there is no
longer any stay of enforcement activity in effect as set forth above
and the violation is still deemed to be in existence, then the
administrative officer shall cause to be issued a summons and
complaint, returnable in the Millburn Municipal Court, charging
violation of this Article. Each separate day that the violation exists
shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation of this Article.
i. If a violation involves ongoing unauthorized construction or
demolition work, the administrative officer shall immediately issue
a stop construction order in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
809.2. Penalties. Any person who commits a violation of this Article shall, in
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, be subject to penalties as
follows: [Ord. No. 2470-16]
§ DRZ-809 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-809
AO:657
§ DRZ-810. Preventive maintenance; notice of violations. [Ord. No.
2470-16]
a. For each day up to 10 days: a fine of up to $1,000;
b. For each day between 11 and 25 days: a fine of up to $1,200 per
violation or in the maximum amount then in effect pursuant to
State Statute; and
c. For each day beyond 25 days: imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, a fine pursuant to Section 809.2b above, or both,
and/or be required to immediately correct, abate and/or restore the
premises or property to its previous condition.
809.3. Injunctive relief. In the event that the violation is not abated within
10 days of service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the
administrative officer shall cause to be instituted any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful activity, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or site or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises as follows: [Ord. No.
2470-16]
a. If any person shall undertake any activity requiring a permit, report
or Certificate of Appropriateness of the Commission without first
having obtained approval, he or she shall be required to
immediately stop the activity, apply for approval and be required to
immediately correct, abate and/or restore the premises or property
to its previous condition pending such approval. If the work is
denied, he or she shall immediately restore the building, structure,
object or site to its condition prior to any such activity. The
administrative officer is hereby authorized to seek injunctive relief
regarding a stop action or restoration in the Superior Court not less
than 10 days after the delivery of notice pursuant to paragraph b
hereof.
b. In the event of the threat of imminent action or demolition for
which the necessary approvals have not been granted and which
action would permanently and adversely change a landmark or any
building, structure, object or site located within a landmark
district, the administrative officer is empowered to apply to the
Superior Court of New Jersey for injunctive relief as is necessary to
prevent such actions.
a. Priority. Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to ensure the
continued useful life of historic buildings, structures, objects and sites,
the Township Committee hereby declares that code enforcement for
such designated properties is a high municipal priority.
b. Notice of Violation. In the event that any historic landmark or any
building, structure, object or site located within a historic district
§ DRZ-809 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-810
AO:658
deteriorates to the point that, in the best estimate of the administrative
officer, the cost of correcting the outstanding code violations equals
more than 25% of the cost of replacing the entire building, structure,
object or site on which the violation occurs, the administrative officer
shall serve personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
notice on the owner of the property listing the violations, the estimate
for their abatement and the replacement cost of the improvements and
stating that, if the owner does not take all necessary remedial action
within 60 days or such extensions as the administrative officer shall
grant for good cause, the Township of Millburn's designated official
may, at the expiration of said 60 days, enter upon the property and
abate such violations and cause the cost thereof to become a lien on the
property.
c. Hearing. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner may, within 20 days
after such receipt, notify the administrative officer of his or her
intentions to have a hearing as to the allegations and estimates set forth
in the notice. Such hearing shall be conducted by the Commission and
shall, so far as possible, be a formal adversary proceeding in which the
administrative officer shall establish the matters alleged in the notice
by a preponderance of the evidence. If a hearing is requested, the
administrative officer will, within 10 days following the hearing, serve
on the owner an opinion, in writing, setting forth his or her conclusions
and the reasons therefor.
d. Action Without a Hearing. If the owner does not request a hearing, the
findings of the administrative officer set forth in the notice issued in
Section 809.3 shall be binding, and the administrative officer may take
such necessary action as granted by the provisions of this Article.
e. Right of Abatement. If the owner does not comply with the findings of
the administrative officer, the administrative officer may enter onto the
premises and, by use of municipal labor or outside contractors, or both,
perform such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
f. Costs. The administrative officer shall then certify to the Township
Committee the cost of such work performed, plus all administrative,
clerical, architectural, engineering and legal costs and overhead
attributable thereto, and shall present the same to the Township
Committee.
g. Lien. The Township Committee may by resolution vote to cause the sum
so certified to become a lien upon the property, payable with the next
quarter's property taxes and, if not then paid, bearing interest at the
same rate as delinquent taxes, and/or become subject to tax foreclosure
in accordance with the State Statutes governing the same.
§ DRZ-810 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-810
AO:659

ARTICLE 9
Well Head Protection
[Ord. No. 2214-03]
§ DRZ-901. Statement of findings.
The Township Committee finds that:
§ DRZ-902. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article 9 is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the protection of the ground water resources underlying
the Township to ensure a supply of safe and healthful drinking water
for present and future generations of local residents, employees and the
general public in the Township, as well as users of these water supplies
outside the Township. Areas of land surrounding each public community
well, known as Well Head Protection Areas (WHPAs), from which
contaminants may move through the ground to be withdrawn in water
taken from the well, have been delineated. Through regulation of land use,
physical facilities and other activities within these areas, the potential for
ground water contamination can be reduced. The purpose of the regulations
contained in this Article 9 is to prevent the migration of potential pollutants
from areas within a WHPA into ground water that is withdrawn from a
public community well.
a. The ground water underlying the Township is a major source of existing
and future water supplies, including drinking water. The ground water
underlying the Township lies within the Buried Valley Aquifer Systems
of the Central Passaic River Basin, designated as a "sole source" aquifer
under Section 1424(e) of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.
b. The ground water aquifers are integrally connected with, are recharged
by, and flow into the surface waters, lakes and streams, which also
constitute a major source of water for drinking, commercial and
industrial needs.
c. Accidental spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials may
threaten the quality of these ground water supplies and related water
sources.
d. Contaminated water from any source is a detriment to the health,
welfare and comfort of the residents of the Township, and other users of
these water resources.
e. Spills or discharges of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes may
contaminate or pollute water. As a preventive measure, the proximity of
such materials to sources of water supplies, such as public community
wells, should be restricted so that there will be sufficient time to find
and clean up such spills or discharges before water supplies become
contaminated.
§ DRZ-901 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-903
AO:661
§ DRZ-903. Definitions.
903.1. ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment and the Board of Health, acting jointly and in consultation,
with all of the powers delegated, assigned, or assumed by them
according to statute or ordinance.
903.2. APPLICANT — Person applying to the Board of Health, Planning
Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction Office proposing to
engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this Article 9,
and that would be located within a regulated Well Head Protection
Area.
903.3. AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation
that contains sufficient saturated permeable rock, sand, or gravel which
is capable of storing and transmitting usable quantities of water to
wells and springs.
903.4. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — These are performance
or design standards established to minimize the risk of contaminating
ground water or surface waters while managing the use, manufacture,
handling or storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.
903.5.CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
903.6.DEVELOPMENT — The carrying out of any construction,
reconstruction, alteration of surface or structure or change of land use
or intensity of use.
903.7. DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission,
unless pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid and
effective Federal or State permit, resulting in the releasing, spilling,
pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous
substance into the waters or lands of the State or into waters outside
the jurisdiction of the State when damage may result to the lands,
waters or natural resources within the jurisdiction of the State.
903.8.GROUND WATER — Water contained in interconnected pores of a
saturated zone in the ground, also known as well water. A saturated
zone is a volume of ground in which the voids in the rock or soil are
filled with water at a pressure greater than atmospheric.
903.9.HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 42
U.S.C. § 9601 et seq. (CERCLA) or 40 CFR 116 et seq., or the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq. Substances
listed include petroleum, petroleum products, pesticides, solvents and
other substances.
903.10.HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified
as a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:1E et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
§ DRZ-903 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-903
AO:662
903.11.MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL — Maximum permissible level
of a contaminant in water which is delivered to any user of a Public
Community Water System.
903.12. NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
903.13.PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, owner or operator, political subdivision
of this State, and any state, Federal or interstate agency or an agent or
employee thereof.
903.14. POLLUTED WATER — In the content of drinking water, water is
polluted when a pollutant is present in excess of a maximum
contaminant level or bacteriological limit established by law or
regulation.
903.15. POTENTIAL POLLUTANT SOURCE (PPS) — Activity or land use
which may be a source of a pollutant that has the potential to move into
ground water withdrawn from a well. For the purposes of this ordinance
Potential Pollutant Sources are defined in Section 906.
903.16. PPS — Potential Pollutant Source.
903.17. PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A public water supply well which
serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or
regularly serves at least twenty-five-year-round residents.
903.18. SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
903.19. SOLE SOURCE AQUIFER — Any drinking water aquifer upon which
more than 50% of a population group depends and for which there is no
practicable or affordable alternate water supply, as certified by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
903.20. TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT) — The average time that a volume of water
will take to travel in the saturated zone from a given point to a pumping
well.
903.21. TIER 1 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within
a WHPA from which groundwater may enter the well within two years.
(See maps referenced under Section 904).
903.22. TIER 2 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within
a WHPA from which groundwater may enter the well within five years.
(See maps referenced under Section 904)
903.23. TIER 3 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — That area of land within
a WHPA from which ground water may enter the well within 12 years.
(See maps referenced under Section 904).
903.24. WELL HEAD — The well borehole and appurtenant equipment.
903.25.WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA) — An area described in
plan view around a well, from which ground water flows to the well and
§ DRZ-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-903
AO:663
§ DRZ-904. Establishment of Well Head Protection Areas and maps.
§ DRZ-905. Regulation of well head protection areas for public
community wells.
ground water pollution, if it occurs, may pose a significant threat to the
quality of water withdrawn from the well.
903.26.WHPA — Well Head Protection Area.
a. Well Head Protection Area Maps.
1. The delineations of Well Head Protection Areas for public
community wells, which were published by the New Jersey
Geological Survey of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, are incorporated herein and made a part of this Article
9. They are designated as follows: New Jersey Well Head Protection
Areas, Edition 2, Geospatial Data Presentation, New Jersey Digital
Data Series, DGS02-2, dated 18 June 2002. A description of these
data and the terms and conditions of the use of these data may be
found at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/whpaguide.pdf and
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/geodata/dgs97-1.htm. A map of the
Well Head Protection Areas located within the Township of
Millburn is included as part of this Article 9 by reference. Maps of
the municipality on which these delineations have been overlain
shall be on file and maintained by the offices of the Township Clerk
and of the Board of Health of the Township of Millburn.
2. Well Head Protection Areas, as shown on the maps described in
Section 904, shall be considered to be superimposed over any other
established zoning district. Land in a Well Head Protection Area
may be used for any purpose permitted in the underlying district,
subject to additional restriction set forth in this Article 9.
b. Assignment of Restriction within Well Head Protection Areas Properties
located wholly or partially within a Well Head Protection Area shall be
governed by the restrictions applicable to the Well Head Protection
Area.
a. The Administrative Authority for administering the provisions of this
Article 9 shall be the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Board
of Health of the Township of Millburn.
b. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
which is subject to review under the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law and other pertinent regulations of the Township of Millburn,
and which is located within a delineated WHPA, as defined in Section
904, that involves a Potential Pollutant Source (PPS), as defined in
Section 906, shall comply with the requirements of this Article 9.
c. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
which is subject to the requirements of this Article 9, shall file an
§ DRZ-903 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-905
AO:664
§ DRZ-906. Potential Pollutant Sources listed.
The following are Major and Minor Potential Pollutant Sources (PPS)
subject to the requirements of this Article 9. This listing is consistent with
the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.7 through 12.12.
Operations and Contingency Plan, as required by Section 908, with the
Administrative Authority. No permit that allows a change in land use or
activity, which is subject to the requirements of this Article 9, shall be
granted unless an Operations and Contingency Plan for the proposed
change has been approved by the Administrative Authority. Any plan
approved by the Administrative Authority shall be kept on file in the
office of the Township Clerk, and shall be available to the public for
inspection.
d. Any change in land use or activity that introduces a Major or Minor
Potential Pollutant Source (PPS), as defined in Section 906, shall be
prohibited within a Tier 1 WHPA.
e. Any change in land use or activity that introduces a Major PPS, as
defined in Section 906, shall be prohibited within a Tier 2 WHPA.
f. Any change in land use or activity that involves any PPS, as defined in
Section 906, within any WHPA, that is not prohibited pursuant to
Sections 905d or 905e, shall comply with the Best Management
Practice Standards, as defined in Section 907.
g. This Article 9 is supplementary to other laws and ordinances in the
Township. Where this Article 9 or any portion thereof imposes a greater
restriction than is imposed by other regulations, the provisions of this
Article 9 shall supersede. These Rules and Regulations shall in no way
affect the limitations or requirements applicable in the underlying
zoning districts of the Township of Millburn.
a. Major PPSs include:
1. Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial or
municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid waste
landfills.
2. Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid wastes
that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive materials.
3. Any use or activity requiring the underground storage of a
hazardous substance or waste in excess of an aggregate total of 50
gallons.
4. Underground fuel and chemical storage and oil tanks regulated by
NJDEP under provisions of the Underground Storage of Hazardous
Substances Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-21 et seq.).
5. Above-ground storage facility for a hazardous substance or waste
with a cumulative capacity greater than 2,000 gallons.
§ DRZ-905 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-906
AO:665
6. Any industrial treatment facility lagoon.
7. Any facility with a SIC Code number included under the New Jersey
Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations at N.J.A.C. 7:10A-1.14, Table
II(N), with a toxicity number of II or greater.
8. Automotive service center (repair and maintenance).
9. Landfill.
10. Dry cleaning facility.
11. Road salt storage facility.
12. Cemetery.
13. Highway maintenance yard.
14. Truck, bus, locomotive maintenance yard.
15. Site for storage and maintenance of heavy construction equipment
and materials.
16. Site for storage and maintenance of equipment and materials for
landscaping.
17. Livestock operation.
18. Quarrying and/or mining facility.
19. Asphalt and/or concrete manufacturing facility.
20. Junkyard/auto recycling and scrap metal facility.
21. Residential or agricultural motor fuel in NJDEP exempted
underground storage tanks (i.e. under 1,000 gallons).
b. Minor PPSs include:
1. Underground storage of hazardous substance or waste of less than
50 gallons.
2. Underground heating oil storage tank with a capacity of less than
2,000 gallons.
3. Sewage treatment facility.
4. Sanitary sewer system, including sewer line, manhole, or pump
station. (See conditions in Section 906c.)
5. Industrial waste line. (See conditions in Section 906c.)
6. Septic leaching field.
7. Facility requiring a ground water discharge permit issued by the
NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:14A et seq.
§ DRZ-906 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-906
AO:666
§ DRZ-907. Best Management Practice performance standard.
Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves
any PPS, as defined in Section 906, that would be located either wholly
or partially within any WHPA shall comply with and operate in a manner
consistent with the following Best Management Practices:
8. Stormwater retention-recharge basin.
9. Dry well. (See conditions in Section 906c.)
10. Storm water line. (See conditions in Section 906c.)
11. Waste oil collection, storage and recycling facility.
12. Agricultural chemical bulk storage and mixing or loading facility
including crop dusting facilities.
13. Above-ground storage of hazardous substance or waste in
quantities of less than 2,000 gallons.
c. Conditions:
1. Sanitary sewer lines, industrial waste lines and storm water lines
may be located no closer than 100 feet to a regulated well, and only
if they are constructed of watertight construction (that is steel,
reinforced concrete, cast iron, PVC or other suitable material).
2. Manhole and/or connections to a sanitary sewer system are
prohibited within 100 feet of a regulated well.
3. Dry wells dedicated to roof runoff and serving residential
properties or commercial or industrial properties with SIC codes
not listed in N.J.A.C. 7:10A-1.14, Table II(N), may be located no
closer than 100 feet to a regulated well.
a. All portions or areas of a facility in which hazardous substances or
hazardous wastes are stored, processed, manufactured or transferred
outdoors, shall be designed so that the discharges of hazardous
substances will be prevented from overflowing, draining, or leaching
into the ground water or surface waters.
b. Outdoor storage, dispensing, loading, manufacturing or processing
areas of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes must be protected
from precipitation, stormwater flows or flooding.
c. Wherever hazardous substances are stored, processed, manufactured
or transferred outdoors, the design features shall include secondary
containment and/or diversionary structures which may include but not
be limited to:
1. Containers, dikes, berms or retaining walls sufficiently
impermeable to contain spilled hazardous substances, for the
duration of a spill event.
§ DRZ-906 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-907
AO:667
§ DRZ-908. Operations and Contingency Plan.
2. Curbing.
3. Gutter, culverts and other drainage systems.
4. Weirs, booms and other barriers.
5. Lined diversion ponds, lined lagoons and lined retention basins,
holding tanks, sumps, slop tanks and other collecting systems.
6. Drip pans.
d. Secondary containment and/or diversionary systems, structure or
equipment must meet the following standards:
1. The system must block all routes by which spilled hazardous
substances could be expected to flow, migrate, or escape into the
ground water or surface waters.
2. The system must have sufficient capacity to contain or divert the
largest probable single discharge that could occur within the
containment area, plus an additional capacity to compensate for
any anticipated normal accumulation of rainwater.
3. In order to prevent the discharge of hazardous substances into
ground water, all components of the system shall be made of or
lined with impermeable materials sufficient to contain the
substance for the duration of a spill event. Such material or liner
must be maintained in an impermeable condition.
4. No manufacturing area, processing area, transfer area, dike
storage area, or other storage area, or secondary containment/
diversion system appurtenant thereto shall drain into a
watercourse, or into a ditch, sewer, pipe or storm drain that leads
directly or indirectly into a surface or subsurface disposal area,
unless provision has been made to intercept and treat any spilled
hazardous substances in an NJDEP approved industrial wastewater
treatment or pre-treatment facility, or other NJDEP approved
facility.
5. Catchment basins, lagoons and other containment areas that may
contain hazardous substances should not be located in a manner
that would subject them to flooding by natural waterways.
e. Stormwater shall be managed so as to prevent contamination of ground
water, and so as to be in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations of the State of New Jersey, and of the Township of Millburn.
a. Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves
any PPS, as defined in Section 906, that would be located either wholly
or partially within any WHPA shall submit an Operations and
Contingency Plan to the Administrative Authority. This Operations and
§ DRZ-907 MILLBURN CODE § DRZ-908
AO:668
§ DRZ-909. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Township of Millburn of any person or entity believed to be in violation of
this Article 9. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this
Article 9 is discovered, a civil action may be commenced in the Special Part
of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought
is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special
Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this
Article 9 shall be construed to preclude the Township's right, pursuant to
any applicable statute, to initiate legal proceedings under this Article 9 in
Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this Article 9
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this
Article 9. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
Contingency Plan shall inform the Administrative Authority about the
following aspects of the proposal:
1. Types of PPS proposed for the site;
2. Types and quantities of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes
that may be used or stored on site;
3. Means to be employed to contain or restrict the spillage or
migration of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes from the
site into ground water;
4. Means to be used to contain or remediate accidental spillage of
such materials;
5. Means to notify administrative authority about any accidental
spillage of such materials;
6. Demonstration that the proposed use and/or activity would employ,
to the maximum extent possible, best management practices as set
forth in Section 907, to protect ground water quality in the WHPA
and minimize the risk of potential ground water contamination.
b. The Administrative Authority shall review, and shall approve or reject
any Operations and Contingency Plan prior to approving or denying the
application for a land use change or activity.
c. Any Operations and Contingency Plan submitted shall be available for
public review and comment.
§ DRZ-908 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DRZ-909
AO:669